RIB MOUNTAIN, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
GENERAL CODE 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Town Board 
____________ 

CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT 
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO OFFICIALS 1.01 Elected Officials 1.02 Appointed Officials 1.03 Oaths and Bonds 1.04 Removals 1.05 Vacancies 1.06 Compensation 1.07 Receipt of Gifts and Gratuities 1.08 Destruction of Obsolete Records 1.09 Tobacco Use Prohibited OFFICIALS 1.10 Town Chairman and Supervisors 1.101 Town Administrator 1.11 Assessor 1.12 Town Attorney 1.13 Clerk/Treasurer 1.14 (Rep. #96-10) 1.15 Building Inspector 1.16 Fire Chief 1.17 Code Enforcement Officer BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 1.20 Park Commission 1.21 Board of Review 1.22 Town Planning Commission  
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO OFFICIALS 

1.01 - ELECTED OFFICIALS . 
(1)  SUPERVISORS. 
(a)  The Town Board shall have 5 supervisors. The Chairperson and 2 supervisors shall be elected at the regular spring election in odd-numbered years to serve a 2 year term. So that the terms of the Town supervisors are staggered, the other 2 supervisors shall be elected at the regular spring election in even-numbered years. The provisions for staggered terms shall take effect as provided in par. (b) below. 
(b)  The staggered terms provided in par. (a) shall be implemented and applied to the regular spring election of 1989. The Chairperson and 2 supervisors receiving the highest number of votes in that election shall serve 2 year terms and the other 2 supervisors shall serve one year terms, with each subsequent election to be for 2 year terms so that elections occur in both odd-numbered and even-numbered years. 
(2)  (Rep. #96-10) 
1.02 - APPOINTED OFFICIALS . (Am. #96-10; #98-2) 
The following Town officials shall be appointed in the manner and for the term indicated, all terms to commence on the third Tuesday of April, unless otherwise stipulated by the Town Board: 
Official How Appointed Term Assessor Town Board 1 year Attorney Town Board 1 year Building Inspector Town Board 1 year Clerk/Treasurer Town Board 1 year Fire Chief/Fire 
Inspector Town Board 1 year Constable(s) Town Board 1 year  
1.03 - OATHS AND BONDS . 
Elected and appointed officials shall take and file the official oath within 5 days after notice of their election or appointment and shall execute and file the official bond as required by State Statutes and this General Code. 
1.04 - REMOVALS . 
(1)  ELECTED OFFICIALS. Elected officials may be removed by the Town Board as provided in § 17.13(2), Wis. Stats., or by the judge of the Circuit Court for cause pursuant to § 17.13(1), Wis. Stats., or as provided by § 17.16, Wis. Stats. 
(2)  APPOINTED OFFICIALS. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in §§ 17.13(1), and (3) and 17.16, Wis. Stats. 
1.05 - VACANCIES . 
(1)  HOW OCCURRING. Vacancies in elective and appointive positions are caused as provided in §§ 17.03 and 17.035, Wis. Stats. 
(2)  HOW FILLED. Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as provided in § 17.25, Wis. Stats. 
1.06 - COMPENSATION . (Am. MSC 91) 
The compensation of all elected and appointed officials, including members of boards and commissions, shall be as determined by the annual Town meeting or the Town Board, where applicable when authorized under § 60.10(2)(k), Wis. Stats., provided salaries and compensation rates of elected officials shall not be increased or reduced during their terms of office. (See § 60.32, Wis. Stats.) 
1.07 - RECEIPT OF GIFTS AND GRATUITIES . 
(1)  RESTRICTED. No Town employee or official shall receive or offer to receive, either directly or indirectly, any gift, gratuity or other thing of value which he is not authorized to receive from any person who: 
(a)  Has or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the Town or Town Board; or 
(b)  Conducts operations or activities which are regulated by the Town or Town Board; or 
(c)  Has interests which may be substantially affected by the Town or Town Board. 
(2)  PENALTY. The receipt of any gift, gratuity or other thing of value as denoted above is contrary to the public policy of the Town and is punishable as provided under § 946.12, Wis. Stats. Such conduct shall also be punishable under § 25.04 of this General Code. 
1.08 - DESTRUCTION OF OBSOLETE RECORDS . (Cr. #95-04) 
(1)  TYPES OF RECORDS DESTROYED. The Town Board, any office, any special office, any committee, any commission, any agency, any authority, any board or any other special government units of the Town and their officers, their employees, and their agents of the aforesaid shall destroy the following public records of the Town only upon the conditions and at the times noted below: 
(a)  Financial Records . All financial records, that are not utility records, if these financial records are considered obsolete, may be destroyed by the legal custodian at any time 7 years after the record was effective, unless a shorter time period has been fixed by the State Public Records and Forms Board pursuant to § 16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats., and then only after the shorter period of time. By way of illustration and not limitation, financial records include bank statements, deposit books, slips and stubs; bonds and coupons after maturity; license and permit applications, stubs and duplicates; pay rolls and other time and employment records of personnel; receipt forms; vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all other supporting documents pertaining thereto; special assessment records. 
(b)  Other Obsolete Records . All other public records of the Town that are not utility or financial records, if these records are considered obsolete, may be destroyed by the legal custodian at any time 7 years after the record was effective unless another period has been set by statute and then only after such a period, or unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State Public Records and Forms Board pursuant to § 16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats., and then only after the shorter time period. 
(2)  SPECIFIC DATE OF DESTRUCTION FOR SPECIFIC PUBLIC RECORDS. The following public records of the Town shall not be destroyed until after the years listed below: 
(a)  Contracts and Insurance Policies issued to the Town-30 years. 
(b)  Personal Property Tax Roll -15 years. 
(c)  Minutes and supporting documents of the Town Board, Town Meeting, Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Commission-Permanent. 
(d)  Annual reports -Permanent. 
(3)  REQUIRED NOTICES. No assessment roll containing forest crop acreage may be destroyed without approval of the Department of Revenue. Unless notice is waived by the State Historical Society, notice shall be given the State Historical Society at least 60 days prior to the destruction of any record as provided by § 19.21(4)(a), Wis. Stats. 
(4)  TAPED RECORDS OF MEETINGS. Any tape recordings of governmental meetings of the Town may be destroyed, erased or reused no sooner than 90 days after minutes of the meeting have been approved and published, if the purpose of the recording was to make minutes of the meeting. 
(5)  PRESERVATION THROUGH MICRO-FILM, OPTICAL DISK, OR OTHER TECHNOLOGIES. The Town may keep and preserve public records in its possession by means of micro-film or other photographic reproduction methods or optical disk, or any other technology as may be approved by State statutes. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic reproduction set forth in § 16.61(7)(a)(b), Wis. Stats., or for optical disk format set out in § 16.61(5), Wis. Stats., or administrative rules promulgated thereunder, or by any other means approved by the State after the date of enacting this ordinance. Such records that meet these standards shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the Town and open to public inspection and copying through the provisions of State law. 
1.09 - TOBACCO USE PROHIBITED . (Cr. #95-07) 
(1)  DEFINITIONS. 
Smokeless tobacco means any tobacco which is used by means other than smoking. 
Smoking means carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted smoking equipment. 
Tobacco products means cigars; cherroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, readyrubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking; but "tobacco products" does include cigarettes, as defined under § 139.30(1), Wis. Stats. 
Town-owned facility means a town-owned structure and any and all stairways and approaches to that structure, and specifically includes all park shelters located in town parks. 
Town-owned vehicle means any motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle as those words are defined in § 340.01, Wis. Stats., which has on the title the Town as owner of that vehicle. 
(2)  SMOKING PROHIBITED. No person may smoke or use smokeless tobacco or tobacco products within any town-owned facility. No person may smoke or use smokeless tobacco within any town-owned vehicle. 
(3)  PENALTY. The penalty for violation of any provision of this section shall be a forfeiture of not more than $200 for each separate incident, and the municipal bail bond forfeiture shall be $25 plus all assessments and costs. 
OFFICIALS 
1.10 - TOWN CHAIRMAN AND SUPERVISORS . 
(1)  ELECTION AND TERM. See § 1.01. 
(2)  AUTHORITY. The Town Board shall have all powers of the Town not specifically given to some other body or officer. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Town Board has power over property, finances, highways, streets, utilities and the public service; may act for the government and good order of the Town, for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public; and may carry its powers into effect by license, regulations, suppression, borrowing, taxation, special assessment, appropriation, imposition of forfeitures and other necessary or convenient means. The Town Board may appoint such officials from time to time as may be deemed necessary for the benefit of the community. In addition, the Board shall have the powers enumerated in § 60.22, Wis. Stats., and may exercise the powers enumerated in § 60.23, Wis. Stats. The powers hereby conferred shall be in addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by express language. See also Ch. 2 of this General Code. 
(3)  VILLAGE POWERS ADOPTED. By resolution adopted April 3, 1962, the electors of the Town directed the Town Board to exercise all powers relating to villages and conferred on village boards by Ch. 61, Wis. Stats., except such powers the exercise of which would conflict with the statutes relating to towns and town boards. 
1.101 - TOWN ADMINISTRATOR . (Cr. #99-5) 
(1)  PURPOSE. The Town of Rib Mountain desires to run it government in an effective, responsible and efficient manner. To that purpose the office of "Rib Mountain Town Administrator" is hereby created pursuant to § 60.3 7(3), Wis Stats. 
(2)  TERM, APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES. The Town Administrator shall be selected and appointed by the Town Board, and paid such salary and benefits as established by the Town Board. The Town Administrator shall have such powers and duties as established by the Town Board and which do not conflict with powers and duties conferred by law on other town officers, commissions or boards. The Town Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Board, and may be terminated at anytime without cause by a majority vote of the Town Board. 
1.11 - ASSESSOR . 
(1)  APPOINTMENT AND TERM. See § 1.02. 
(2)  POWERS AND DUTIES. 
(a)  Applicable Statute . See § 60.307, Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Other Duties Prescribed by Law . The Town Assessor shall perform such other duties as shall be prescribed by State law, supervisory personnel of the State Department of Revenue and the Town Board, including attendance at all meetings of the Board of Review. 
1.12 - TOWN ATTORNEY . 
(1)  APPOINTMENT AND TERM. See § 1.02 of this chapter. 
(2)  POWERS AND DUTIES. The Town Attorney shall perform such duties as directed by the Town Board. 
1.13 - CLERK/TREASURER . (Rep. & recr. #96-10) 
(1)  APPOINTMENT AND TERM. Pursuant to § 60.30(1e) Wis. Stat. The offices of Town Clerk and Town Treasurer are combined and shall be filled by appointment. 
(2)  TERM. The Term of Office for the combined Town Clerk and Town Treasurer shall be for 1 years. 
(3)  POWERS AND DUTIES. The Clerk/Treasurer shall have such powers and perform such duties as prescribed by State Law and directed by the Town Board. See §§ 60.33 and 60.34 Wis. Stat. 
1.14 - (Rep. #96-10) 
1.15 - BUILDING INSPECTOR . 
(1)  APPOINTMENT AND TERM. See § 1.02 of this chapter. 
(2)  POWERS AND DUTIES. See Ch. 14 of this General Code. 
1.16 - FIRE CHIEF . 
(1)  APPOINTMENT. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by a majority vote of the members of the Town Board. The Chief shall hold office as appointed, unless removed for cause, after a hearing, by a majority vote of the Town Board, unless his services are sooner terminated by resignation, death or change of residence to outside the Town limits. Upon occurrence of a vacancy in the office of Chief, the ranking officer of the Department shall perform the duties of the Fire Chief until such vacancy is filled. The Fire Chief shall, by virtue of his office, hold the office of Fire Inspector. 
(2)  QUALIFICATIONS. The Fire Chief shall be a member of the Fire Department in good standing whose entire time, both day and night, is ordinarily spent within the Town limits and who has had training and experience in fire department operations. 
(3)  POWERS AND DUTIES. See Ch. 5 of this General Code. 
1.17 - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER . (Rep. & recr. #08-13) 
(1)  OFFICE OF CONSTABLE ABOLISHED. The office of Town Constable is hereby abolished. 
(2)  CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The position(s) of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code Enforcement Officer or any additional Code Enforcement Officers shall be appointed by the Town Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Board. 
(3)  POWER AND DUTIES. The Town Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall act on the behalf of the Town to: 
(a)  Investigate, respond to complaints, cause prosecution of violations of the Town ordinances as set forth in the ordinances, or as assigned or directed by the Town Board or the Town Administrator; 
(b)  Any and such other responsibilities as assigned by the Town Board or Town Administrator relating to the health, welfare, and safety of the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(4)  Any reference in any other ordinances of the Town of Rib Mountain Municipal Code to "Constable", shall be interpreted to refer to the duties of the Code Enforcement Officer. 
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
1.20 - PARK COMMISSION . (Am. MSC 92) 
(1)  HOW CONSTITUTED. The Town Park Commission shall be appointed and shall serve in accordance with § 27.08, Wis. Stats. 
(2)  VACANCIES. All vacancies on the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as appointment for the full term. 
(3)  ORGANIZATION. The Commission shall organize in accordance with § 27.08, Wis. Stats., and shall elect a president, vice-president and secretary. 
(4)  POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have the powers and duties prescribed by § 27.08, Wis. Stats. 
(5)  BUDGET. 
(a)  The Town Park Commission shall prepare an annual budget which shall be approved as a part of the annual Town budget. 
(b)  The Commission shall administer and expend Rib Mountain Fest funds as a part of its annual budget. 
(6)  REPORTS. The Commission shall make an annual report to the annual Town meeting and to the Town Board from time to time as requested. 
1.21 - BOARD OF REVIEW . (Cr. #00-07, Rep. & recr. #00-09) 
(1)  The Board of Review shall be the supervisors of the town, which shall proceed as provided in §§ 70.46 and 70.47, Wis. Stats. A majority shall constitute a quorum. 
(2)  Valuations made by the assessor or the objector using the income method shall comply with § 70.47, Wis. Stats. and the manual under § 73.02(2)(a), Wis. Stats. Information provided the assessor about income and expenses are provided in using the income method shall be confidential and only released to persons using said information in discharging duties imposed by law or the duties of their office or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
1.22 - TOWN PLANNING COMMISSION . (Rep. & recr. #96-06) 
(1)  ORGANIZATION. The Town Planning Commission shall consist of a chairman and 6 other members appointed by the Town Chairman, subject to confirmation by the Town Board, who shall serve for a period of 5 years. The appointment and terms of those presently serving on the Commission are hereby confirmed and shall remain as originally established. 
(2)  DUTIES. The Town Planning Commission shall discharge the following duties under Chapters 17 and 18 of this General Code: 
(a)  Hear all applications for conditional uses and amendments to Chapter 17 and report such findings and recommendations to the town Board in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17. 
(b)  Receive from the Building Inspector his recommendations as related to the effectiveness of the Zoning Code and report its conclusions and recommendations to the Town Board not less frequently than once a year. 
(c)  Hear and decide all matter upon which it is required to pass under Chapter 17 of this General Code and under the Wisconsin Statutes. 
Chapter 2 - THE GOVERNING BODY 
2.01 Meetings 2.02 Order of Business 2.03 Presiding Officer 2.04 Quorum 2.05 Ordinances, Resolutions and Committee Reports 2.06 General Rules 2.07 Amendment of Rules 2.08 Suspension of Rules 2.09 Standing Committees 2.10 Adoption of Comprehensive Plan  

2.01 - MEETINGS . 
(1)  REGULAR MEETINGS. Regular meetings of the Town Board shall be held on the 1st and 3rd Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. All meetings of the Board, including special and adjourned meetings, shall be held in the Town Hall, or any other place designated by the Town Board upon sufficient notice to the public. 
(2)  RESERVED. 
(3)  OPEN MEETING LAW. All meetings of the Town Board, its committees, boards and commissions shall be open to the public and preceded by public notice as provided in § 19.84, Wis. Stats. 
(4)  ADJOURNMENTS. The Board may, by a majority vote of those present, but not less than 3 affirmative votes, adjourn from time to time to a specific date and hour. 
2.02 - ORDER OF BUSINESS . 
The business of the Board shall be conducted in the following order: 
(1)  Call to order by presiding officer. 
(2)  Roll call. If a quorum is not present, the meeting may thereupon adjourn, which may be to a specific date and hour pursuant to § 2.01(4). 
(3)  Reading, correction and approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
(4)  Reports of Town officers. 
(5)  Committee reports. 
(6)  Unfinished business from previous meetings. 
(7)  New business, including the introduction of ordinances and resolutions. 
(8)  Communications and miscellaneous business. 
2.03 - PRESIDING OFFICER . 
(1)  DESIGNATED. The Chairman, at the stated hour, shall call the meeting to order. In his or her absence, the Clerk or, in his or her absence, the senior supervisor present based on date of original election, shall call the meeting to order and the supervisors present shall select one of their number to preside for that meeting. 
(2)  DUTIES. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the meeting. 
(3)  DECISIONS, APPEALS FROM. Any member may appeal from a decision of the presiding officer. An appeal shall be sustained by a majority of the members present, excluding the presiding officer. 
2.04 - QUORUM . 
A majority of the members of the Town Board shall constitute a quorum. 
2.05 - ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS . 
All ordinances, resolutions, communications and other matters submitted to the Town Board shall be read by title and author and referred to the appropriate committee by the Chairman. No ordinance or resolution shall be considered unless presented in writing by a Board member. Unless requested by a Board member before final vote is taken, no ordinance, resolution or bylaw need be read in full. 
2.06 - GENERAL RULES . 
The deliberations of the Board shall be conducted in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order , current edition, which is hereby incorporated in this section by reference. No ordinance, resolution or other motion shall be discussed or acted upon unless it has been seconded. No motion shall be withdrawn without the consent of the person making the same and the person seconding it. 
2.07 - AMENDMENT OF RULES . 
These rules shall not be rescinded or amended unless the proposed amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting, and then it shall require a majority vote of all the members of the Board. 
2.08 - SUSPENSION OF RULES . 
These rules, or any part thereof, may be temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of a majority of the members present. 
2.09 - STANDING COMMITTEES . 
(1)  APPOINTMENTS. At the first regular Board meeting in May the Chairman shall appoint members to each of the following standing committees: 
(a)  Finance (including licenses and permits, employee relations, etc.). 
(b)  Public Safety (including police, fire, building, zoning, etc.). 
(c)  Public Works (including streets, sewers, water, lighting, etc.). 
(2)  REPORTS. Each committee shall, as necessary, submit a written report on all matters referred to it. Such report shall recommend a definite action on each item and shall be signed by a majority of the committee. 
2.10 - ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN . (Cr. #05-04) 
(1)  AUTHORITY. Pursuant to §62.23(2) and (3), Wis. Stats., the Town of Rib Mountain is authorized to prepare and adopt a comprehensive plan as defined in §66.1001(1)(a) and (2), Wis. Stats. 
(2)  POLICY. The Town Board of the Town of Rib Mountain, Marathon County, Wisconsin, has adopted written procedures designed to foster public participation in every stage of the preparation of a comprehensive plan as required by §66.1001(4)(a), Wis. Stats. 
(3)  PLAN COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION. The plan commission of the Town of Rib Mountain, by a majority vote of the entire commission recorded in its official minutes, has adopted a resolution recommending to the Town Board the adoption of the document entitled "Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Rib Mountain," containing all of the elements specified in §66.1001(2), Wis. Stats. 
(4)  HEARING. The Town has held at least one public hearing on this ordinance, in compliance with the requirements of §66.1001(4)(d), Wis. Stats. 
(5)  PLAN ADOPTION. The Town Board of the Town of Rib Mountain, Marathon County, Wisconsin, does, by enactment of this ordinance, formally adopt the document entitled, "Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Rib Mountain," pursuant to §66.1001(4), Wis. Stats. 
Chapter 3 - FINANCE AND TAXATION 
3.01 Preparation of Tax Roll and Tax Receipts 3.02 Fiscal Year 3.03 Budget 3.04 Changes in Budget 3.05 Town Funds to be Spent in Accordance With Appropriations 3.06 Claims Procedure 3.07 Mileage and Per Diem 3.08 Temporary Investment of Funds Not Immediately Needed 3.09 Remittance of Funds 3.10 Special Assessments 3.11 Room Tax 3.12 Duplicate Treasurer's Bond Eliminated 3.13 Payment of Taxes, Claims, Forfeitures, Judgments Prior to Issuance of License or Permit  

3.01 - PREPARATION OF TAX ROLL AND TAX RECEIPTS . 
(1)  AGGREGATE TAX STATED ON ROLL. Pursuant to § 70.65 (2), Wis. Stats., the Clerk shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount of State, county, local, school and other general property taxes minus credits applied under § 79.10(9), Wis. Stats., except credits determined under § 79.10(7m), Wis. Stats., in a single column in the roll opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied, or, in the case of personal property, in a single column opposite the name of the person against whom the tax is levied. Each tax bill or receipt shall show the purpose for which the taxes are to be used, giving the breakdown for State, county, local, school and other general property taxes. The tax roll shall indicate all corrections made under §§ 70.43 and 70.44, Wis. Stats. 
(2)  TAX RECEIPTS. Pursuant to § 74.08, Wis. Stats., the Town Treasurer shall enter in each tax receipt given by the county clerk for the payment of taxes the name of the person paying the taxes, if that person is not the owner of the property taxed, the date of payment and the aggregate amount of taxes paid. Tax receipts shall be signed, and a duplicate kept, by the Treasurer after noting the payment of taxes upon the tax roll. The Treasurer shall then deliver the receipt to the appropriate person. 
3.02 - FISCAL YEAR . 
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year. 
3.03 - BUDGET . 
(1)  PREPARATION. 
(a)  Town Board to Prepare . The Town Board shall annually prepare and submit a proposed budget presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the Town for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(b)  Information Required . The budget shall include the following information: 
1.  The expense of conducting each department and activity of the Town for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increase and decrease recommended as compared with appropriations for the current year. 
2.  An itemization of all anticipated income of the Town from sources other than general property taxes and bonds issued, with a statement comparing the amounts received by the Town from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year. 
3.  An itemization of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes which, with income from other sources, shall be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
4.  Such other information as may be required by the Board and State law. 
(c)  Copies Required . The Town shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens. 
(2)  HEARING. The Board shall hold a public hearing on the budget as required by law. 
(3)  ACTION BY BOARD. Following the public hearing, the proposed budget may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the Board as ordinances. 
3.04 - CHANGES IN BUDGET . 
The amount of the tax to be levied or certified and the amounts of the various appropriations, and the purposes thereof, shall not be changed after approval of the budget except by a 2/3 vote of all the Supervisors of the Town Board. Notice of such change shall be given by publication within 15 days thereafter in the official Town newspaper. 
3.05 - TOWN FUNDS TO BE SPENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPROPRIATIONS . 
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Town, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as authorized by § 3.04. At the close of each fiscal year, any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the Board, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned. 
3.06 - CLAIMS PROCEDURE . 
(1)  TOWN BOARD TO AUDIT ACCOUNTS. Except as provided in sub. (3), no account or demand against the Town shall be paid until it has been audited by the Town Clerk and/or Town Chairman. After the audit, the Town Clerk will prepare a voucher for payment. Each payment shall be allocated to the proper account for bookkeeping purposes. 
(2)  CLAIMS TO BE VERIFIED. All accounts, demands or claims against the Town shall be verified by the claimant or proper official. 
(3)  PAYMENT OF REGULAR WAGES AND SALARIES. Regular wages or salaries of Town officers and employees shall be paid by payroll, verified by the proper Town official and filed with the Town Clerk. 
(4)  ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE BILLING PROCEDURE. (Cr. #96-04) Billings by the Town shall be paid within 30 days of the invoice date. Thereafter, interest shall be charged at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction thereof. Those not paid on or before the 1st day of November shall be entered on the Tax Roll as a special charge pursuant to § 66.60(16), Wis. Stats. and become a lien upon real estate and a late fee of $10.00 added thereon. 
3.07 - MILEAGE AND PER DIEM . 
Travel expenses incurred by an elected official of the Town necessary in the discharge of lawful business for such Town by means of private transportation shall be reimbursed at the current rate set by the Town Board. If public means of transportation is used, the actual expense incurred shall be reimbursed. 
3.08 - TEMPORARY INVESTMENT OF FUNDS NOT IMMEDIATELY NEEDED . 
The Treasurer may invest any Town funds not immediately needed, pursuant to § 66.04(2), Wis. Stats. 
3.09 - REMITTANCE OF FUNDS . 
(1)  ITEMIZED STATEMENT. Each officer of the Town, excluding the Treasurer, who in his official capacity shall collect or to whom shall be paid any sum or sums of money belonging to the Town for fees, costs, fines, taxes, bail or for any other purpose whatsoever, shall on or before the 10th day of each month make an itemized statement in duplicate of all sums received in any way by him during the preceding calendar month and shall on or before such day deliver such statement and remit such sum or sums to the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall execute receipts in triplicate for such sums and shall retain one copy, deliver one copy to the Clerk and deliver one copy to the officer so remitting. 
(2)  FORM. Such itemized statement so required to be filed by such officer shall specifically set forth clearly and in detail the date of receipt of such money by such officer, the name and address of the person from whom received, the amount thereof and the consideration therefor or the reasons for or account upon which the same was paid to him. 
3.10 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS . (Rep. & recr. #94-04) 
(1)  PROCEDURE. Under § 66.62, Wis. Stats., the Town adopts and makes a part of this chapter by reference and incorporates the procedures for levying special assessments in § 66.60, Wis. Stats., with the exception that pars. (8)(c), (d) and (e) of § 66.60 are modified as follows: 
(8)(c) When the Town Board finally determines to proceed with the work or improvement, it shall approve the plans and specifications therefore and adopt a resolution directing that such work or improvement be carried out in accordance with the report as finally approved. 
(8)(d) The Town may adopt the final resolution to levy the special assessments either: 
1.  before the work is carried out or 
2.  after the work is completed and/or actual project costs have been determined. 
The final resolution shall list cost of the special assessment levied against each property benefited by the improvement. The Town Clerk shall publish the final resolution as a Class I notice, under Ch. 985, in the assessment district and a copy of such resolution shall be mailed to every interested person whose post office address is known, or can be ascertained with reasonable diligence. 
(8)(e) When the final resolution is published, all awards, compensations and assessments arising therefrom are deemed legally authorized and made, subject to the right to appeal under § 66.62, Wis. Stats. 
(2)  LIMITED SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE. Under § 66.62, Wis. Stats., for public improvements benefiting 4 or less parcels, the Town in lieu of a special charge under § 66.60(16) and as an alternative to the procedure under sub. (1) above, may assess improvements such as, but not limited to, culverts and ditches as a "Limited Special Assessment." Such assessment shall be levied in the same manner as provided in sub. (1), except notices and hearing shall be by waiver of the property owner benefited or to be benefited as provided in § 66.60(18) and a preliminary resolution under § 66.60(2) shall not be required and publication of the final resolution under § 66.60 (8)(d) is not required. Assessments under this provision shall be an exercise of the police power of the Town. 
(3)  ANNUAL INSTALLMENTS. 
(a)  How Paid . Whenever special assessments are levied to defray the cost of any public improvement, except sprinkling or oiling of streets, they may be paid in no more than 5 annual installments. 
(b)  First Installment . The first installment shall include a proportionate part of the principal of the special assessment, determined by the number of installments, together with the interest on the whole assessment at a rate not to exceed 1% over the then prevailing municipal borrowing rate. The first installment shall be due on a date established by the Town Board. Each subsequent annual installment shall include a like proportion of the principal and one year's interest on the unpaid portion of such assessment. 
(c)  Entered in the First Tax Roll . The first installment shall be entered in the first tax roll prepared after such installment shall have been determined as a special tax on the property upon which the special assessment was levied and thereafter such tax shall be treated in all respects as any other municipal tax, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law. One of the subsequent installments shall be entered in a like manner and with each of the annual tax rolls thereafter until all are levied. 
(d)  If Not Paid . Any installment so entered in the tax roll not paid to the Town Treasurer with the other taxes shall be returned to the county as delinquent and accepted and collected by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes or real estate, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(e)  Notice for Local Improvements . Whenever provision shall be made for local improvements, the cost of which is to be defrayed by levying special assessments upon the land and premises benefited thereby, the Clerk shall cause a notice to be published in the official paper, such notice to be substantially in the following form: 
INSTALLMENT ASSESSMENT NOTICE 
Notice is hereby given that a contract has been (or is about to be) let for (describe improvement) and that the amount of special assessment therefore has been determined as to each parcel of real estate affected thereby, and a statement of the same is on file with the Town Clerk; it is proposed to collect the same in 5 installments as provided for in § 66.054, Wis. Stats., with interest thereon at the rate of 5% per annum; that all assessments will be collected in installments as above provided, except such assessments on property where the owner of the same shall file with the Town Clerk within 30 days from the date of this notice, a written notice that he elects to pay the special assessments on his property, describing the same to the Treasurer on or before the next succeeding December 1, if after making such election said property owner shall fail to make the payment to the Town Treasurer, the Clerk shall place the entire assessment on the next succeeding tax roll. 
Dated _______ 
_____
Clerk of the Town of Rib Mountain 
(f)  Time Having Expired . After the time for making such election shall have expired, any assessment may be paid in full before due upon payment of such portion of the interest which shall have accrued to the date of payment. 
3.11 - ROOM TAX . (Am. #16-04) 
(1)  DEFINITIONS. 
Gross Receipts. The meaning as defined in § 77.51(11)(a), (b) and (c), Wis. Stats., insofar as applicable. 
Hotel or Motel. A building or group of buildings in which the public may obtain accommodations for a consideration including, without limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any other building or group of buildings in which accommodations are available to the public, except accommodations rented for a continuous period of more than one month and accommodations furnished by any hospital, sanitariums or nursing homes or by corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
Transient. Any person residing for the continuous period of less than one month in a hotel, motel or other furnished accommodations available to the public. 
(2)  IMPOSITION OF TAX. (Rep. & recr. #00-02; Am. #06-05; #08-16; #2015-2) Pursuant to § 66.0615, Wis. Stats., a tax is hereby imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing at retail rooms or lodging to transients by hotelkeepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Such tax shall be at the rate of 8 percent of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by § 77.52(2)(a)1, Wis. Stats. 
(a)  Exemptions . (Cr. #95-01) Sales of rooms to the federal government and the State of Wisconsin shall be exempt from the imposition of the room tax imposed under this chapter. The exemption shall be granted only if the following conditions have been met for any sale of a room: 
1.  The hotel or motel shall bill the lodging in the name of the exempt entity; and 
2.  The hotel or motel must be provided with a tax-exempt status number and a letter of authorization or purchase order from the governmental unit. 
(3)  TAX MONEYS. 
(a)  Collection of tax . This section shall be administered by the Town Treasurer. The tax imposed for each calendar quarter or the first partial quarter is due and payable on the last day of the month next succeeding the calendar quarter for which imposed. A return shall be filed with the Town Treasurer by those furnishing at retail such rooms and lodging on or before the same date on which such tax is due and payable. Such return shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes imposed for such period and such other information as the Town Treasurer deems necessary. Every person required to file such quarterly return shall with his first return elect to file an annual calendar year or fiscal year return. Such annual return shall be filed within 90 days of the close of each such calendar or fiscal year. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly returns and shall contain certain such additional information as the Town Treasurer requires. Such annual returns shall be made on forms as prescribed by the Town Treasurer. All such returns shall be signed by the person required to file a return or his authorized agent, but need not be verified by oath. The Town Treasurer may for good cause extend the time for filing any return, but in no event longer than one month from the filing date. 
(b)  Distribution of Tax . The room tax collection shall be allocated to the general fund of the Town. 
(4)  PERMIT. 
(a)  Every person furnishing rooms or lodging under subsection (2) shall file with the Town Treasurer an application for a permit to operate a hotel or motel for each place of business. Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the Town Treasurer and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information as the Town Treasurer requires. The application shall be signed by the owner if a sole proprietor and if not a sole proprietor, by the person authorized to act on behalf of such sellers. At the time of making an application, the applicant shall pay to the Town Treasurer a fee for each permit. The applicable fee can be found in the Annual Fee Schedule which is available through the Town Treasurer. (Am. #12-01) 
(b)  In order to protect the revenue of the Town, the Town Treasurer may require any person liable for the tax imposed by this section to place with him before or after a permit is issued such security not in excess of $1,000.00 as the Town Treasurer determines. If any taxpayer fails or refuses to place such security, the Town Treasurer may refuse or revoke such permit. If any taxpayer is delinquent in the payment of the taxes imposed by this section, the Town Treasurer may upon 10 days' notice recover the taxes, interest and penalties from the security placed with the Town Treasurer by such taxpayer. No interest shall be paid or allowed by the Town to any person for the deposit of such security. 
(c)  After compliance with paragraph (a) by the applicant, the Town Treasurer shall grant and issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business with the Town. Such permit is not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place for which issued. 
(5)  REVOCATION OF PERMIT. (Am. #12-01) Whenever any person fails to comply with this section, the Town Treasurer may, upon 10 days notification and after affording such person the opportunity to show cause why his permit should not be revoked, revoke or suspend any or all of the permits held by such person. The Town Treasurer shall give to such person written notice of the suspension or revocation of any of his permits. The Town Treasurer shall not issue a new permit after the revocation of a permit unless he is satisfied that the former holder of the permit will comply with the provisions of this section. A fee shall be imposed for the renewal or issuance of a permit which has been previously suspended or revoked. The applicable fee can be found in the Annual Fee Schedule which is available through the Town Treasurer. 
(6)  SALE OF BUSINESS. If any person liable for any amount of tax under this section sells out his business or stock of goods or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the Town Treasurer that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person subject to the tax imposed by this section fails to withhold such amount of tax from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the price of the accommodations valued in money. 
(7)  AUDIT. The Town Treasurer may by office audit determine the tax required to be paid to the Town or the refund due to any person under this section. This determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any other information within the Town Treasurer's possession. One or more such office audit determinations may be made of the amount due for any one or for more than one period. 
(8)  FAILURE TO FILE. If any person fails to file a return as required by this section, the Town Treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts under subsection (2). Such estimate shall be made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is in the Town Treasurer's possession or may come into his possession. On the basis of this estimate, the Town Treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the Town, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 10 percent thereof. One or more such determinations may be made for one or more than one period. 
(9)  INTEREST. All unpaid taxes under this section shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month following the month in which the tax is paid or deposited with the Town Treasurer. All refunded taxes shall bear interest at 10% per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month in which such taxes are refunded. An extension of time within which to file a return shall not operate to extend the due date of the return for purposes of interest computation. If the Town Treasurer determines that any overpayment of tax has been made intentionally or by reason of carelessness or neglect or if the tax which was overpaid was not accompanied by a complete return, it shall not allow any interest thereon. 
(10)  PENALTY ASSESSMENT. If due to negligence no return is filed, a return is filed late or an incorrect return is filed, the entire tax finally determined shall be subject to a penalty of 25% of the tax, exclusive of interest or other penalties. If a person fails to file a return when due or files a false or fraudulent return with the intent in either case to defeat or evade the tax imposed by this section, a penalty of 50% shall be added to the tax required to be paid, exclusive of interest and other penalties. 
(11)  RECORDS AND TAXATION. 
(a)  Every person liable for the tax imposed by this section shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the Town Treasurer requires. 
(b)  All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to such returns on file with the Town Treasurer are deemed to be confidential, except the Town Treasurer may divulge their contents to the following and no others: 
1.  The person who filed the return. 
2.  Officers, agents or employees of the Federal Internal Revenue Service or the State Department of Revenue. 
3.  The Assessor, Town Attorney, Chairman and Town Board. 
4.  Such other public officials of the Town, when deemed necessary. 
(c)  No person having an administrative duty under this section shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records of any person of whom a tax is imposed by this section or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided in par. (b). 
(12)  PENALTY. Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this section who fails to obtain a permit as required in sub. (4), fails or refuses to permit the inspection of his records by the Town Treasurer after such inspection has been requested by the Town Treasurer, fails to file a return as provided in this section or who violates any other provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 25.04 of this General Code. 
(13)  TOURISM COMMISSION. 
(a)  How constituted. The Town Tourism Commission shall consist of six members appointed by the Town Chairman and confirmed by a majority of the Town Board in accordance with § 66.0615, Wis. Stats. One member shall be a representative of the hotel and lodging industry. 
(b)  Vacancies. All vacancies on the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as appointment for the full term. 
(c)  Organization. The Commission shall organize in accordance with § 66.0615, Wis. Stats, and shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The Commission shall meet regularly and have the powers and duties prescribed by § 66.0615, Wis. Stats: 
1.  Contract with a tourism entity to obtain staff, support services and assistance in developing and implementing programs to promote the Town to visitors. 
2.  Report any delinquencies or inaccurate reporting to the Town. 
3.  Utilize the room tax revenue it receives from the Town for tourism promotion and tourism development in the Town. 
4.  Report annually, or when requested by the Town, the purposes for which the room tax revenue were spent. 
3.12 - DUPLICATE TREASURER'S BOND ELIMINATED . 
(1)  The Town Board hereby elects not to give the bond on the Town Treasurer as required by § 70.67(1), Wis. Stats. 
(2)  Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wis. Stats., the Town Board hereby obligates the Town to pay, in case the Treasurer shall fail to do so, all State and county taxes required by law to be paid by such Treasurer to the county treasurer. 
3.13 - PAYMENT OF TAXES, CLAIMS, FORFEITURES, JUDGMENTS PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT . (Cr. #03-06) 
(1)  The payment of all personal property taxes, special assessments, and room taxes imposed pursuant this Code, all forfeitures or judgments resulting from conviction for violation of any ordinance codified in the Rib Mountain Municipal Code, except moving traffic violations, and all other judgments, special charges, utility, emergency medical service bills due and owing from any applicant to the Town at the time of the application for any license or permit provided for in these ordinances, and any of the same relating to the property or business previously licensed if the new license is granted consequent or conditionally upon the sale or transfer of the business or stock in trade or furnishings or equipment of the premises or of the ownership or control of a corporation is a condition precedent to the granting of such license or permit. If the personal property tax bill has not been issued, the Treasurer shall require advance payment based on the previous year's mill rate multiplied by the premises' or property's or business' current year's valuation. No license or permit application shall be granted until the Clerk or his/her designee has investigated the applicant so that all required payments have been made. 
(2)  Alleged errors in amounts claimed to be due the Town may be appealed to a committee comprised of the Treasurer, the Finance Committee Chairman, and Chairman, or their designees. The committee shall have no authority to review any matter for which a review or appeal procedure has been provided by statute or other ordinance. Within 5 days of being informed of an amount claimed due, the person seeking review shall pay the amount claimed and file a written notice of appeal with the Clerk stating the basis for the appeal and specifying the alleged error. Upon payment, the applicant may file the application for the license or permit if otherwise qualified. As soon as practicable, the committee shall hold a hearing at which the person shall present evidence to substantiate the claimed error, call witnesses in his/her own behalf, may cross-examine witnesses and may be represented by legal counsel. After holding the hearing, the committee shall by majority vote make findings of fact and conclusions and shall correct any established errors. Any amount improperly required paid shall be refunded promptly, together with interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date the amount was paid to the Town to the date of refund. 
Chapter 5 - FIRE PROTECTION 
5.01 Fire Department Organization 5.02 Fire Chief 5.03 (Rep. #93-4) 5.04 Equipment and Apparatus 5.05 Police Power of Department 5.06 False Report of Fire 5.07 (Rep. #90-03) 5.08 Fire Prevention Code 5.09 Ambulance Service 5.10 Reciprocal Ambulance Charges and Agreements  

5.01 - FIRE DEPARTMENT ORGANIZATION . (Rep. & recr. #01-03) 
The Town Board shall appoint the Fire Chief pursuant to § 1.02 of the Rib Mountain Municipal Code, and hire firefighters, EMTs, and other departmental personnel, establish rules, regulations concerning employment of personnel, and adopt or approve standards for employment, and policies and procedures, approve departmental purchases and expenditures and fix compensation for department personnel, and exercise any authority necessary and proper to operate a municipal fire department. 
5.02 - FIRE CHIEF . 
(1)  APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS. See § 1.02 of this General Code. 
(2)  POWERS AND DUTIES. (Am. #93-4) The Chief shall have general supervision of the Fire Department personnel, apparatus and equipment, subject to the ordinances of the Town and the policies and procedures of the Department. He or his designee shall be present at all fires and command all fire fighting operations. He shall enforce or cause to be enforced all fire prevention ordinances, laws and regulations of the Town and State. 
(3)  TO ACT AS FIRE INSPECTOR. The Fire Chief as Fire Inspector of the Town shall have the power to appoint one or more deputy fire inspectors and shall perform all duties required of fire inspectors by laws of the State and rules of the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations, particularly §101.14(2), Wis. Stats. 
5.03 - RESERVED . (Rep. #93-4) 
5.04 - EQUIPMENT AND APPARATUS . 
No apparatus shall be used for any purpose except for fire fighting within the Town limits or in training therefor, except pursuant to an agreement approved by the Town Board after the Chief has given his recommendations on such use. With the approval of the Chief, such apparatus may be used for emergency purposes other than fire fighting within the Town. A written report of such uses shall be made quarterly to the Town Board. 
5.05 - POLICE POWER OF DEPARTMENT . 
(1)  AUTHORITY AT FIRES. The Chief and his assistants or officers in command are hereby vested with full and complete police authority at fires and may cause the arrest of any person failing to give the right-of-way to the Fire Department responding to a fire call. 
(2)  REMOVAL OF PROPERTY. The Chief shall have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire, to prevent the spread of fire or protect adjoining property and during the progress of any fire, he shall have the power to order the destruction of any property necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire. He shall also have the power to cause the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the same impede the work of the Department during the progress of a fire. 
(3)  FIREMEN MAY ENTER ADJACENT PROPERTY. Any fireman acting under the direction of the Fire Chief or any officer in command may enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire and no person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any fireman in the discharge of his duty as hereinbefore provided. 
(4)  DUTY OF BYSTANDERS TO ASSIST. Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the Fire Chief or officer in command and may be required to render assistance in fighting the fire or in removing or guarding property. Such officer shall have the power to cause the arrest of any person refusing to obey such orders. 
5.06 - FALSE REPORT OF FIRE . (Rep. & recr. #95-2) 
(1)  FALSE ALARMS PROHIBITED. No person shall, within the Town of Rib Mountain, singly or in combination or conspiracy of others, make any false report of fire in said Town, nor falsely report a fire to any official of said Town or to any fire department maintained in said Town or to any official or agent thereof, or to any person or persons in charge of giving any fire alarm in said Town; nor shall any person participate in any such act by knowingly aiding, counseling, advising or consenting to the same to be done by another or others. False reports shall include, but are not limited to, reports by direct communication or by means of an electronic alarm. Receipt of any such false report within said Town shall constitute commission of said offense within the Town for the purposes of this ordinance. 
(2)  FEES FOR UNNECESSARY FIRE CALLS. Any persons, partnership, corporation or other such entity to whom the Fire Department maintained by the Town has responded to a call for fire protection services on 2 or more occasions within 60 days, and said calls were false or there was no need for fire protection service, said person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall pay a fee of $200.00 to the Town for the second call, and an additional fee of $200.00 for each call after the second. The fee shall apply whether the call was received telephonically, directly, or through an alarm system. The fee is due within 15 days of written notice from the Town, and shall be collected by the Town Clerk. Fees delinquent over 30 days shall accrue interest at the rate of 5 percent per annum. 
(3)  PENALTIES. Any person violating Subsection (1) of this ordinance shall pay a forfeiture of not less than $50.00, nor more than $200.00, in addition to costs, including attorney fees and the cost of prosecution, 
5.07 - RESERVED . (Rep. #90-03) 
5.08 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE . (Rep. & recr. #05-03) 
(A)  PURPOSE AND SCOPE. 
(1)  Title: Section 5.08 of the Town of Rib Mountain Code of Ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to herein as "The Town of Rib Mountain Fire Prevention Code," except as referred to herein as this "ordinance." 
(2)  Purpose: The purpose of this ordinance is to prescribe regulations consistent with the recognized good practice for the safeguarding of life, health, safety and welfare of the public as well as establishing minimum standards for design and construction of buildings and the prevention of fire and explosion from hazardous conditions that potentially exist in buildings or on premises and to the occupants thereof. 
(3)  Scope: The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all public buildings and places of employment to include all buildings or structures located on such properties with the following exceptions: 
(a)  Exempt Buildings: The following buildings and uses are not public buildings or places of employment and are not subject to the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  One-family and 2-family dwellings except where specified. 
2.  Temporary buildings used for construction proposes only, not to exceed 2 stories in height and not used as living quarters. 
3.  Buildings owned by the Federal Government. 
(B)  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. 
(1)  Authorized Deputy or Agent: It is recognized that the Fire Chief of the Fire Department and the Fire Inspector are duly authorized as a deputy of the Department of Commerce of the State of Wisconsin. The Fire Chief of the Fire Department and the Fire Inspector are duly authorized agents of the Town of Rib Mountain for the enforcement of all the provisions of this chapter and all other standards adopted by the reference herein. 
(2)  Fire Prevention Inspections: The Fire Chief, the Fire Inspector and any other officer appointed by the Fire Chief, shall be responsible for having all public buildings and places of employment to include any building or structure located on such property, to be inspected for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of any law or ordinance relating to the fire hazards or to the prevention of fires. 
(3)  Frequency of Inspections: The Fire Chief shall inspect or cause to be inspected by the Fire Inspector, or any other officer appointed by the Fire Chief, at least once per nonoverlapping 6-month period each calendar year, or as often as may be necessary, all buildings and premises described in this chapter. 
(4)  Inspection Warrants: The Fire Chief or Fire Inspector may obtain a special inspection warrant as granted under §66.0119, Wis. Stats., when necessary in his opinion for the purpose of making an inspection or investigation of any building or premises where the owner has either failed to respond to previous orders for entry or has refused entry. 
(5)  Written Orders: Whenever any inspector shall find in any building or on any premises any condition liable to cause fire, or any violations of any law or ordinance relating to fire hazards or to the prevention of fires, or any condition which interferes with the life, health or safety of any individual or occupant, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied. 
(6)  Service of Orders: The services orders under this chapter may be made upon either the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, the owner of the premises or both. Any such order may be given verbally, hand written on an approved inspection form or typed and delivered to such occupant personally or by placing such order in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve an order upon the owner of the premises, such an order may be served by either hand delivering to, and leaving a copy with such a person, or if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the inspector making the order, by mailing a copy to the owner's last known address. 
(7)  Compliance to orders: Any such order given shall forthwith be complied with by the owner and occupant of such building, structure or premises. The owner or occupant may, within 72 hours of the receipt of such order, appeal to the Fire Chief in writing for a review of such order, who shall thereafter as soon as possible, file his decision. Unless such order is revoked or modified by the Fire Chief, it shall remain in full force and shall be complied with in the time fixed in said order. Appeals of orders in conflict with orders of the Department of Commerce may be pursuant to COMM §14.007, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(8)  Penalties: 
(a)  Failure to comply with any orders issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by the Chief of the Fire Department, the Fire Inspector, or any duly authorized representative, shall constitute an ordinance violation, and any person, firm or corporation found guilty of such violation shall, upon the conviction thereof, forfeit a sum not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of the prosecution and any other court fees, and in default of but not to exceed 15 days. Each and every 24 hours, such violation shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any section of this chapter for which a specific penalty is not herein provided shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit the sum of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of the prosecution and any other court fees, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed 30 days. Each and every 24 [hours], such violation shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Fire Chief may commence a legal proceeding for a forfeiture for violation of any provision of this chapter as provided in §25.09 of this General Code. 
Subsection 
Number Violation Forfeiture 5.08(C) No Fire Extinguisher $150.00 5.08(C) Fire Extinguisher Maintenance Past Due 100.00 5.08(C) Fire Extinguisher Obstructed 100.00 5.08(C) Improper Fire Extinguisher Installation 100.00 5.08(C) Blocked Exit 200.00 5.08(C) Blocked Exit Pathway/Isle 200.00 5.08(C) No Exit Light Fixture 150.00 5.08(C) No Directional Exit Light Fixture 100.00 5.08(C) Exit Light Burnt Out 100.00 5.08 Fire Doors Blocked Open 100.00 5.08(5) Access to Hydrant Obstructed 150.00 5.08(5) Fire Lane Parking Violation 150.00 5.08(1) Obstructed Electrical Panels 100.00 5.08(1) Access to Gas Shut-Off Obstructed 100.00 5.08(1) Sprinkler Maintenance Past Due 200.00 5.08(1) Access to Sprinkler Connection Obstructed 150.00 5.08(2) Hood Exhaust Cleaning Past Due 150.00 5.08(2) Hood Suppression Maintenance Past Due 150.00 5.08(3) Improper Smoke/Heat Detection Maintenance 200.00 5.08(3) Missing Smoke/Heat Detector 200.00 5.08(3) Smoke/Heat Detection System Not Tested 200.00 5.08(3) Improper Fire Alarm Maintenance 200.00 5.08(3) Missing Fire Alarm Device 200.00 5.08(3) Fire Alarm System Not Tested 200.00 5.08(6) Illegal Storage of Flammable Liquids 100.00 5.08(1) Illegal Use of Electrical Extension Cords 100.00 5.08(2) No Change in Occupancy Certificate 100.00 5.08(1) Department of Commerce Violation 150.00 5.08(1) National Fire Protection Association Violation 150.00 (When applicable, reference incorporated code provision.)  
(9)  Validity: Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter be declared for any reason to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(C)  FALSE ALARMS. 
(1)  Definitions . 
(a)  Alarm system means any device designated for the detection of an unauthorized entry or other unlawful act on a premises, or for the detection of a fire, or both, which when activated produces a signal, which signal is caused to be transmitted by the system to the County Dispatch Center or the Fire Department, and/or which signal, if produced by a device designed solely to detect fire, is caused to be transmitted in an audible manner to the general area surrounding the premises. 
(b)  Alarm system operator means any person or business who operates a receiving device designed for the detection of an unlawful act or for detection of a fire, or both, who in turn by telephone or other means transmits such information to the Police or Fire Department. 
(c)  Town means the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(d)  False alarm means any of the following: 
1.  The unintentional activation of an alarm system by the owner or lessee of an alarm system or by an employee or agent of either; 
2.  The activation of an alarm system by mechanical failure or malfunction because of improper maintenance of the alarm system; 
3.  The activation of an alarm system because of improper installation and/or use of the equipment; 
4.  The intentional activation of an alarm system where no unauthorized entry, commission of an unlawful act or fire exists; 
5.  The above subsections do not include false alarms caused by abnormal weather conditions, acts of God or by prior arrangements made for the testing of the alarm system. 
(e)  Person includes all partnerships, companies, associations and corporate bodies. 
(2)  Exception to Chapter . None of the provisions of this chapter shall prevent the Town from providing special alarm monitoring services as may be required because of medical reasons or communicative disorders. 
(3)  False Alarm Fee . 
(a)  Any signal, message or other communication transmitted by an alarm system, person or other device which causes Fire Department response and which is determined by the Town not to be of an existing emergency or unlawful situation shall pay a fee in accordance with the schedule in subsection (3)(b). Any fees payable to the Town which are delinquent may be assessed against the property involved as a special charge for current service, without notice, pursuant to §66.0627, Wis. Stats. 
(b)  The user of any private alarm system shall pay the Town a fee according to the following schedule of fees for any false alarm occurring in a moving 12-month period: 
1.  First 2 false alarms ..... No Charge 
2.  Third and fourth false alarms ..... $ 50.00 
3.  Fifth through eighth false alarms ..... 400.00 
4.  Ninth and subsequent false alarms ..... 800.00 
5.  There shall be no false alarm fee charged during the 30-day period immediately following the installation of the new alarm system. 
(D)  STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. 
(1)  Wisconsin Department of Commerce: The Town of Rib Mountain hereby adopts the following sections from the Department of Commerce, formerly known as the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations or DILHR. These regulations are adopted by reference and incorporated into the Town of Rib Mountain Fire Prevention Code with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. 
COMM 7 Explosive Materials COMM 8 Mines, Pits and Quarries COMM 9 Manufacture of Fireworks COMM 10 Flammable and Combustible Liquids COMM 14 Fire Prevention COMM 16 Electrical COMM 18 Elevator COMM 20-25 Uniform Dwelling COMM 28 Smoke Detectors COMM 35 Infectious Agents COMM 40 Gas Systems COMM 41 Boiler and Pressure Code COMM 43 Anhydrous Ammonia COMM 50-64 Building and Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning COMM 61-65 Wisconsin Enrolled Commercial Building Code COMM 69 Barrier-Free Design COMM 70 Historic Buildings COMM 75-79 Existing Buildings  
(2)  National Fire Protection Association: The Town of Rib Mountain hereby adopts the following sections of the National Fire Prevention Association or NFPA. These regulations are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into the Town of Rib Mountain Fire Prevention Code with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. Any future amendments, modifications, revisions, renumbering, recodification, additions or deletions of the codes so adopted shall be incorporated herein and made a part of this ordinance. 
NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code NFPA 10 Portable Fire Extinguishers NFPA 11 Low Expansion Foam Extinguishing Systems NFPA 11A Medium and High Expansion Foam Systems NFPA 12 Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems NFPA 12A Halon 1301 Fire Extinguishing Systems NFPA 13 Installation of Sprinkler Systems NFPA 13D Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One and Two Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes NFPA 13R Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and including Four Stories NFPA 14 Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems NFPA 15 Water Spray Fixed Systems for Fire Protection NFPA 16 Installation of Deluge Foam-Water Sprinkler Systems Foam-Water Spray Systems NFPA 16A Installation of Closed-Head Foam-Water Sprinkler Systems NFPA 17 Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems NFPA 17A Wet Chemical Extinguishing Systems NFPA 20 Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection NFPA 22 Water Tanks for Private Fire Protection NFPA 24 Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and their Appurtenances NFPA 25 Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection Systems NFPA 30 Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code NFPA 30A Automotive and Marine Service Station Code NFPA 30B Manufacture and Storage of Aerosol Products NFPA 31 Installation of Oil Burning Equipment NFPA 33 Spray Application Using Flammable or Combustible Liquids NFPA 34 Dipping and coating Processing for Flammable or Combustible Liquids NFPA 37 Installation and use of Stationary Combustion Engines and Gas Turbines NFPA 43A Storage of Liquid and Solid Oxidizers NFPA 43C Storage of Gaseous Oxidizers NFPA 43D Storage of Pesticides NFPA 51 Design and Installation of Oxygen Fueled Gas Systems for Welding, Cutting NFPA 51B Fire Prevention in use of Cutting and Welding Processes NFPA 54 Nation Fuel Gas Code NFPA 55 Storage, Use and Handling of Compressed and Liquefied Gases in Portable Cylinders NFPA 58 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code NFPA 69 Explosion Prevention Systems NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code NFPA 80 Fire Doors and Fire Windows NFPA 88A Parking Structures NFPA 88B Repair Garages NFPA 92A Smoke Control Systems to Four Stories in Height NFPA 96 Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations NFPA 101 National Life Safety Code NFPA 101B Code for Means of Egress for Buildings and Structures NFPA 204 Smoke and Heat Venting NFPA 221 Fire Walls and Fire Barrier Walls NFPA 230 Fire Protection of Storage NFPA 231D Storage of Rubber Tires NFPA 409 Aircraft Hangers NFPA 410 Aircraft Maintenance NFPA 434 Storage of Pesticides NFPA 490 Storage of Ammonium Nitrate NFPA 704 Identification of Hazardous Materials for Emergency Response NFPA 1123 Fireworks Display NFPA 1124 Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles NFPA 1126 Use of Pyrotechnics before a Proximate Audience  
(3)  Violations: Any violation of these provisions constitutes a violation of this Code. 
(4)  National Fire Prevention Codes Copies Available: Copies of the National Fire Prevention Association Codes are available from: 
National Fire Protection Association 
11 Tracy Drive 
Avon, MA 02322-9908 
1-800-344-3555 
(5)  Department of Commerce Codes Copies Available: Copies of the Wisconsin Department of Commerce Codes are available from: 
Wisconsin Department of Administration 
Document Sales and Distribution Section 
P.O. Box 7840 
Madison, WI 53707 
1-608-266-3358 
(6)  Conflict with Other Laws: Whenever regulations in this section or the codes adopted herein are in conflict with each other or more or less restrictive with other regulation or restrictions imposed by other provisions of the statutes or other ordinances, the regulations which are more restrictive or impose a higher standard or requirements shall govern. 
(E)  GENERAL FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS. 
(1)  Rapid Entry Key Boxes: The Town of Rib Mountain Fire Department elects to use rapid entry lock box devices and material lock boxes such as those provided by The Knox Box Company. 
Where Required: Rapid entry key boxes shall be encouraged on all multifamily dwellings of 4 families or more that have a common entrance or share a common area accessible by all occupants. Key boxes shall be encouraged on all assisted senior housing and community based residential facilities as designated by this department and any location where entry to the property is secured in whole or in part by a fence, gate, and wall, connected buildings or otherwise directed by this department. Entry key override switches shall be required on any exit door at any location which uses a card reader entry system and/or a magnetic door lock security system. The only exception to this requirement is if the Chief of the Department elects to keep a key in a key box inside the fire engine. 
(a)  Location: The Fire Inspector shall approve the location prior to installation of any rapid entry key box. Key boxes shall be located on the front of a building near the main entrance at grade level, unless otherwise directed. 
(b)  Contents: The owner, agent or on site manager shall provide the appropriate keys to the building to be placed in the key box. New keys shall be provided at such times when any locks are changed. Examples of keys to be provided are: 
1.  A master key or keys to locked points of egress, whether interior or exterior. 
2.  Keys to locked mechanical rooms. 
3.  Keys to locked elevator rooms. 
4.  Keys to elevator controls. 
5.  Keys to fire alarm panels or equipment. 
(c)  Compliance: All newly constructed buildings, not yet occupied buildings currently under construction and all buildings or businesses applying for a certificate of occupancy, that are subject to this section, shall comply immediately. 
(d)  Ordering: Property owners shall be responsible for all costs of purchasing and installation of any key box or material lock box. The property owner shall be responsible for ordering any key box, key override switch or material lock box required by this Code. Order forms will be supplied by the Town of Rib Mountain Fire Department 
(2)  Commercial Change in Occupancy: Any owner, agent or occupant making a change in occupancy of an existing commercial building, or occupying a previously vacant space, to exclude any private dwelling portion thereof, shall be required to obtain a safety inspection by this department prior to the new tenant taking occupancy of any building or structure that was previously vacated or any change in occupancy of any existing building or structure portion thereof. 
(a)  Inspection: The owner, agent or occupant of a commercial building shall schedule an appointment with the Fire Inspector for an inspection of the building and occupied space(s). Any violations of this chapter or any other portion of the Town of Rib Mountain Municipal Code observed at the time of inspection shall be corrected prior to the new tenant taking occupancy. 
(b)  Fees: There shall be no fee for this inspection. 
(3)  Fire Lanes: The Fire Chief or Fire Inspector shall establish fire lanes at any shopping center, school or business which present a potentially hazardous situation because of restricted access by department vehicles or parked cars. 
(a)  Access Defined: Fire lanes shall provide access to at least 2 sides of all buildings 200 feet in length. For buildings over 200 feet in length, fire lanes shall be provided for access to all 4 sides of the building or group of buildings. Fire lanes shall be at least 30 feet in width with the road edge closest to the building. Any dead end fire lane more than 300 feet long, shall be provided with a turnaround area of at least 90 feet in diameter. 
(b)  Markings and Signs: Fire lanes shall be marked with freestanding signs, marked curbs, sidewalks and traffic surfaces with the words "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" painted in contrasting colors at a size and spacing approved by this department. The owner/occupant shall be responsible for markings. 
(c)  Violations: In any area designated as a fire lane, parking shall be prohibited and shall result in the issuance of citations pursuant to the Town of Rib Mountain Ordinances. Any vehicle parked in a fire lane shall be towed at the owner's expense. Exception: Any commercially licensed vehicle actively engaged in delivery or pick up shall be excluded from this section. 
(4)  Tavern Licensing: All licensed taverns within the Town of Rib Mountain shall be inspected for compliance with this Code at least 4 months prior to the renewal of their license. Any violations at the time of this inspection shall be corrected within the time stated on such order. A final copy of all orders shall be submitted for review at the time of renewal. Failure to comply with any written order may result in the suspension of, or nonissuance of their license by the Town Board or any other Municipal authority. 
(5)  Barbecue Grills, Kettles and Outdoor Hibachis: It shall be considered unlawful to ignite or burn inside any residential occupancy, any type of barbecue grill. A minimum distance of 24 inches shall be maintained from any combustible material outside. These devices shall be prohibited from use on any balcony within 5 feet of any opening into a dwelling or apartment. 
(6)  Storage of Flammable Liquids: When used in this section, the words "Flammable Liquids" shall include any volatile flammable liquid with a flash point at or below 100 degrees F. No person shall use, keep, store or permit to be used, kept or stored, gasoline in containers greater than 6 gallons. Six gallons or less of gasoline shall be stored in approved safety cans. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as applying to gasoline contained with the motor engine they supply. 
(7)  Storage of Combustible Materials and Equipment: The following items shall be prohibited from being stored in basements or storage bins of apartments or other multifamily dwellings within the Town of Rib Mountain: 
(a)  Charcoal, except in a metal container with a metal lid. 
(b)  Oily rags or dust mops. 
(c)  Flammable liquids of any nature other than new motor oils in original manufacturer's containers. 
(d)  Bottled gases, propane, acetylene, oxygen, or other substances of similar nature. 
(e)  Gasoline motors and gasoline powered equipment, such as outboard motors, power lawn equipment, snow blowers, motorcycles etc. 
(8)  Hazardous Materials: This section shall apply to all hazardous materials or infectious agents, which shall mean any material or combination of materials which may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or which may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics. This term includes, but is not limited to products that are explosive, toxic, corrosive, flammable, irritants, strong sensitizers, pesticides or a biological hazard. 
(a)  Reporting: All persons, firms or organizations using, researching, storing or producing hazardous materials and/or infectious agents shall notify the Fire Department in writing as prescribed by this section (see Table 20.05 reporting limits). 
(b)  Standards: The manufacturing, storage, handling and use of hazardous materials and/or infectious agents shall be safeguarded in accordance with the applicable NFPA and Industry standards and with the manufacturer recommendations. 
1.  The Fire Inspector may require the separated storage or isolated storage of any hazardous or infectious material that in combination with other substances may bring about a fire, health hazard or explosion or may liberate a flammable, nonflammable or poisonous gas. 
2.  The Fire Inspector may require separation of hazardous or infectious materials from other storage facilities, when the quantity to be stored increases the fire, health or explosive hazard to any occupancy. 
3.  Limitation on storage quantities shall be considered with regard to proximity of these exposures and to congested commercial and industrial areas. 
4.  The Fire Inspector may require fire suppression, fire detection, on-site containment, smoke venting or control and/or other fire protection, life safety or environmental safe systems as deemed necessary. 
(c)  Identification Markings: Buildings, storage trailers, stationary tanks, areas and rooms of all buildings that contain a hazardous or infectious material shall be identified with signs in accordance with this section and NFPA 704, Identification of the Fire Hazards of Materials. Signs shall be maintained at all times and shall be located as directed by the Fire Inspector. Signs shall be durable, weather resistant and unobstructed (see Table 20.05 for reporting limits). 
1.  A sign at least 71/2 inches square with the required identification numbers indicating the highest number of the most hazardous material for each hazard shall be conspicuously placed on or near the exterior door closest to the hazardous material. 
2.  A sign with no numbers, at least 71/2 inches square shall be conspicuously placed on the front of the building as directed. 
3.  Doors that directly access a room or area that contains a hazardous or infectious material shall be identified with a numbered sign at least 71/2 inches square. In any room that has more than one hazardous material, the sign shall list the highest number for each hazard classification. 
4.  Special hazards shall be identified in the lower quadrant of the sign as follows: 
a.  Radiation hazard: Standard radiation symbol 
b.  Water reactive hazard: W 
c.  Oxidizer: OX 
d.  Biological hazard: BIO 
e.  Corrosive: COR 
(d)  Material Safety Data Sheets: Material safety data sheets (MSDS), shall be required for all materials which are stored used or handled and shall be available on-site in a location approved by the Fire Inspector. 
(F)  FIRE PREVENTION, DETECTION AND PROTECTION. 
(1)  Sprinkler System Plan Approval: Prior to any modification to, or installation of a new sprinkler system, or the alteration of an existing sprinkler system, (to include one-family and 2-family dwellings), plans shall be submitted to this department or its designee for review as a Department of Commerce certified municipality. 
(a)  Standards: All sprinkler systems must meet the standards of NFPA 13, "Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes"; NFPA 13R, "Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and include Four Stories in Height"; NFPA 25, "Standard for the Inspection, Testing, Maintenance for Water-Based Fire Protection Systems"; and any other standards adopted by reference in this Code. 
(b)  Fire Pumps and Water Tanks: If water supply is limited or static pressure drop provides inadequate water supply or pressure to any sprinkler system, a fire pump and/or a water tank may be required. The Fire Inspector may require the installation of such at a cost to the owner. Installation shall be according to NFPA 20 and 22 with plans submitted for approval. 
(c)  Signaling: Each sprinkler riser shall have both an internal alarm bell located at the riser, and an external alarm bell located on the nearest outside wall to signal the flow of water. For any system which uses a fire pump as a part of the sprinkler system, a red strobe light shall be mounted on the outside wall of the pump house to signal pump operation. Location is to be approved by the Fire Inspector. 
(2)  Other Fire Suppression Plan Approval: Prior to any modification to, or installation of any new fire suppression system, or the alteration of an existing system, plans shall be submitted to this department and the Department of Building Inspection for review and approval. 
(a)  Standards: All fire suppression systems, other than water-based sprinkler systems, shall comply with this Code and all other NFPA standards adopted by reference in this chapter. 
(3)  Fire Alarm and Detection Systems Plan Approval: Prior to any modification to, or installation of a new fire alarm or detection system, or the alteration of an existing system (to include one-family and 2-family dwellings), plans shall be submitted to this department for review. 
(a)  Standards: All fire alarm or detection systems, shall comply with this Code and that of NFPA 72, "National Fire Alarm Code", as well as all other standards adopted by reference in this chapter. 
(b)  Submittals: One copy of the plan and specifications shall be submitted for review to this department. One copy shall be kept on file by the Fire Inspector. Full responsibility for the accuracy of any plans and specifications is the sole responsibility of the contractor. 
(c)  Additional Requirements: These additional requirements for fire alarm and smoke detection systems: 
1.  In buildings where duct type smoke detectors are required, they shall be tied into the main fire alarm control panel as either an alarm or trouble signal. 
2.  Smoke detectors installed during construction shall be temporary, and shall be replaced prior to occupancy. 
3.  Smoke detectors located in hallways and basement areas shall be placed at 30 feet on center. 
4.  Control panels or display pads shall be located in accessible areas for rapid Fire Department access. 
(4)  Portable Fire Extinguishers: Portable fire extinguishers shall be required in all public buildings and places of employment to include any building or structure located on such properties. 
(a)  Standards: All portable fire extinguishers shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and that of NFPA 1, "Fire Prevention Code"; NFPA 10, "Portable Fire Extinguishers"; and any other standards adopted by reference in this chapter. 
(b)  Occupancy Certificates: Prior to the granting of an occupancy certificate for new construction, or a change in occupancy certificate, the Fire Inspector shall approve the type, number and location of all portable fire extinguisher. 
(c)  Fees: No fees shall be charged by this department for the installation inspection of any portable fire extinguisher. 
(5)  Fire Doors and Fire Windows: All penetrations through fire walls or smoke barriers shall be protected by fire doors or fire windows. 
(a)  Standards: All exits, fire doors and fire windows shall comply with NFPA 80, "Fire Doors and Fire Windows"; NFPA 221, "Fire Walls and Fire Barrier Walls"; and NFPA 1, "Fire Prevention Code"; as well as all other standards adopted by reference in this chapter. 
(b)  Testing: Whether required by this Code or any other standard adopted by this chapter, all horizontal and vertical sliding and rolling doors or windows shall be tested annually to check for proper operation and full closure. Resetting of the release mechanism shall be done in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements. 
(c)  Records: A written record of all tests, inspections and maintenance shall be kept on site for 5 years and made available for review by the Fire Inspector. 
(6)  Private Hydrants and PIVs: Only approved fire hydrants and post indicator valves (PIVs), shall be allowed for use on private property for the sole purpose of fire protection. 
(a)  Inspection, Testing, Maintenance and Repair: 
1.  Annual flow tests are required on all approved fire hydrants. Manual operation of all PIVs to the closed position shall also be required annually. Written records shall be kept on site and available for inspection for a period of no less than 7 years. 
2.  Approved fire hydrants and PIVs shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all times. Upon the request of the Town of Rib Mountain Fire Department, the owner shall perform such tests (to include flow tests), in order to demonstrate proper operating conditions. Written records shall be maintained showing test results, dates, duration of tests, locations and who preformed the tests. Records shall be kept on site and available for inspection for a period of no less than 7 years. 
3.  At no time shall any fire hydrant or PIV be obstructed under any circumstance. Obstructions may include, but are not limited to, snow accumulation, vegetation and refuse, parked vehicles, material or equipment storage. 
4.  Property owners shall immediately notify the Town of Rib Mountain Fire Department and Water Department whenever a fire hydrant or PIV has been damaged or has become inoperable. Repairs to damaged or inoperable equipment shall be completed as soon as possible and tested before put back into service. 
5.  At anytime, when an owner is found not properly testing or maintaining their fire hydrants and/or PIVs, the Town of Rib Mountain Fire Department and Water Department shall perform such tests at the expense of the owner. 
6.  Private water mains serving private fire hydrants shall be the same size as the public mains supplying the private water system. In any case, mains do not have to exceed 10 inches, but shall be at least 6 inches in diameter. 
(7)  Existing Systems: Any fire prevention, detection or protection system already installed shall be considered an existing system and shall comply with the provisions of this chapter as previously set forth. 
(a)  Smoke Detection Systems: Whether battery operated or electrically interconnected, all smoke detectors shall be tested at least once every 6 months. Written records shall be maintained showing test results, dates, duration of tests, locations and who performed the tests. Records shall be kept on site and available for inspection for a period of no less than 7 years. At such times when records are found to be missing or outdated for a period of more than one year, and the smoke detectors have been found to be missing or inoperable, the Fire Inspector may order the installation or replacement of the existing system with new electrically interconnected smoke detectors to include the fire alarm control panel at a cost to the owner. 
(b)  Manual Fire Alarm Systems: Manual pull alarms shall be tested monthly by physically activating the device. Only one pull station needs to be tested each month if there are less than 12 locations in the protected building. Should there be more than 12 locations, additional stations must be tested at the same time with the intent of completing the entire system within one calendar year. Records shall be kept on site and available for inspection for a period of no less than 7 years. At such times when records are found to be missing or outdated for a period of more than one year, and the pull alarm stations have been found to be missing or inoperable, the Fire Inspector may order the installation or replacement of the existing system or device with a new system or device to include the fire alarm control panel at a cost to the owner. Manual fire alarms shall be tested in the presence of the Fire Inspector annually. 
(c)  Contracted Service Providers: Whenever inspection, testing and maintenance services are contracted by the owner or agent with an outside vendor, the vendor shall provide a written report of all work performed. This report shall be the same as provided in the appropriate NFPA section, describing all work performed and list any deficiencies or needed repairs. This report shall be left with the owner or agent and a copy shall be sent to the Fire Inspector by the service provider. 
(G)  OUTDOOR BURNING. 
(1)  Generally . Outdoor burning in the Town of Rib Mountain will be permitted only for unique reasons and when the conditions of this section are met. 
(2)  Approval . Prior approval for open burning via a permit shall be required. A permit may be obtained at the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) during business hours. Except as provide in subsection (c) of this section all persons shall obtain a permit from the DNR before kindling or maintaining any open burning or authorizing the kindling or maintaining of any open burning within the Town limits. The Town may also attach special rules or restriction relating to open burning. Such rules may govern conditions, including but not necessarily limited to the following: 
(a)  Hours when burning is allowed. 
(b)  Day when burning is allowed. 
(c)  Material which may or may not be burned. 
(d)  Whether open burning is allowed or whether burning is only allowed with an approved incinerator or burning device. 
(e)  What constitutes an approved burning device or incinerator. 
(f)  The size of the material pile burned by open burning. 
(g)  The distance to be maintained between the material being burned and other flammable material. 
(h)  Supervision required for burning, including the minimum age of supervisors and the type of fire extinguishing equipment which must be present at the burn site. 
(i)  The manner in which ashes created by the burning are to be disposed of. 
(3)  Exceptions . The following open burning shall be permitted without authorization from the Fire Department: 
(a)  Outdoor cooking over a fire contained in a device or structure designed for such use. 
(b)  Fire pits not more than 32 inches in diameter, encircled with nonflammable material, or commercially built and approved fire containers and located a minimum of 20 feet from any structure or 15 feet from a lot line. Fire pits shall be extinguished by 12:00 midnight or when left unattended. 
(c)  Burning related to training for the Fire Department. 
(4)  Restrictions . The following restrictions shall be applicable when an open burning permit has been issued: 
(a)  All open burning conducted pursuant to a permit shall be performed in a safe pollution-free manner, when wind and weather conditions minimize adverse affects, and in conformance with local and State fire protection regulations. Open burning permits shall not be used to covertly burn plastic, construction debris or other prohibited materials. 
(b)  The size of the pile of material to be burned shall not exceed 4 feet in any direction measured horizontally or 3 feet measured vertically. 
(c)  The pile of material being burned shall be at least 50 feet away from any structure, wood or lumber pile, wooden fence, trees or bushes. Provision shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet of such items, or the fire shall otherwise be contained in an approved incinerator or burner device which is located at least 20 feet from any structure, wood or lumber pile, wooden fence, trees or bushes. 
(d)  Any ashes created by burning such material as is lawful under this section are to be disposed of in a manner authorized by law. 
(e)  Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent person at least 16 years of age until such fire is extinguished. This person shall have readily available for use such fire extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for the total control of the fire while burning and/or extinguishing the fire. 
(f)  No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk. 
(g)  Fuel for open burning shall consist of dry material only, and it shall not be ignited with flammable or combustible liquids. 
(h)  Material for open burning may not include rubbish, garbage, trash or any material made of or coated with rubber, plastic, leather or petroleum based materials. The material may not contain any flammable or combustible liquids. 
(5)  Reserved . (Rpld. #06-02) 
(6)  Prohibition . Outdoor burning shall be prohibited when the wind velocity exceeds 9 miles per hour or circumstances make the fire potentially hazardous. Local circumstances include but are not limited to thermal inversions, ozone alerts, and very dry conditions. 
(7)  State Code Regulations . Other regulations not listed in this section prescribed in Wis. Adm. Code, COMM §§14.12, 14.13, 14.14, 14.15, 14.16, and 14.17, as well as all applicable statutes, shall also be followed. Other regulation listed in §5.08(2)(a) shall be followed. 
(8)  Order to Extinguish . If at any time smoke from a fire makes a neighbor uncomfortable, and one is so advised, the fire shall be extinguished immediately. 
5.09 - AMBULANCE SERVICE . 
(1)  DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this section: 
Advanced Life Support (ALS) Intervention. A procedure that is, in accordance with state and local law, beyond the scope of practice of an emergency medical technical-basic (EMT-Basic). (Cr. #06-03) 
Greater Rib Mountain Area. The Town of Rib Mountain, City of Wausau and the Towns of Weston and Stettin. 
Mileage. The actual number of miles traveled by the ambulance from and back to the Town fire station. Any fractional mile under 5/10 shall be disregarded and any fractional mile over 5/10 shall be charged to the next full mile. 
(2)  CHARGES. (Am. #94-08) 
(a)  Ambulance Call Charges . (Rep. & recr. #06-03) Charges for ambulance calls made by the Town ambulance shall be made to the persons served or persons responsible for payment therefore as follows: 
1.  Each call for transportation of a Town resident from and to any destination lying within the Greater Rib Mountain Area and the basic life support charge for each call for transportation of a Town resident other than from and to any destination within Greater Rib Mountain Area: $500.00. Each such call with Advanced Life Support Intervention for a Town resident: $525.00. (Am. #10-03) 
2.  The basic life support charge for each call for transportation of a non-resident of the Town: $600.00. Each such call with Advanced Life Support Intervention: $625.00. (Am. #10-03) 
3.  Interfacility transports between health care facilities, such as a nursing home, CBRF, or other hospitals the fee for the service shall be $800.00 for basic life support services and $850.00 for advanced life support services, together with the mileage rate under subsection (2)(b) of this section. (Cr. #08-03) 
(b)  Mileage Charge . (Rep. & recr. #98-01; Am. #01-11; #06-03; #09-09; #11-01) The mileage for all interfacility transports shall be $12.00 per loaded mile. Mileage charge in addition to basic or advanced life support charge for each person transported shall be $10.00 per mile. 
(c)  Supplies . (Rn. #97-01, Rep. & recr. #00-06) Charges for supplies used by patients shall be as the Town Board determines periodically by written resolution. 
(d)  Collection . (Cr. #98-5) Those ambulance charges remaining outstanding for 90 days, or more, as of November 1 of any year shall become a lien against the real estate owned by the person who received the ambulance service(s) and be placed on the tax roll as a delinquent special charge pursuant to § 66.60(16), Wis. Stats., or any subsequent revision or reenactment thereof. Nothing herein shall prohibit collection of ambulance charges by the Town by any other means in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin. 
(e)  Nontransport Charge . (Cr. #00-08; Am. #10-03) Each call for transportation and/or treatment of any person that refuses transportation or treatment after the ambulance crew has arrived, then said person shall pay a minimum fee of $100.00. 
(3)  ADMINISTRATION. The officers or employees of the Town in charge of operating the ambulance for each call shall prepare billings in accordance with the terms of this section. 
5.10 - RECIPROCAL AMBULANCE CHARGES AND AGREEMENTS . 
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 5.09, the Town Board is empowered to enter into reciprocal agreements with neighboring municipalities and governmental subdivisions to provide ambulance service to or by such neighboring municipalities or governmental subdivisions at uniform charges for such reciprocal services even though the charges so agreed upon shall not be in harmony with the provisions of § 5.09. 
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT 
The Marathon County Joint Action Emergency Government Ordinance #67 is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, as amended from time to time. 
Chapter 7 - TRAFFIC CODE 
7.01 State Traffic Laws Adopted 7.02 Speed Limits 7.03 Parking Regulations 7.04 Arterial Highways 7.05 Snowmobile Regulations 7.06 Minibikes and Self-Propelled Vehicles Regulated 7.07 Bicycles, Licensing and Regulation of 7.10 Penalty 7.11 (Rep. #99-7) 7.12 Stop Signs  

7.01 - STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED . 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provision in Chs. 340 to 348, Wis. Stats., describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, and Ch. 350, Snowmobiles, inclusive of any provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the State. 
7.02 - SPEED LIMITS . 
A traffic and engineering investigation having been made on the following described highways, the maximum permissible speed at which vehicles may be operated on such highways, which speed is herewith established as reasonable and safe pursuant to §§ 346.57 and 349.11, Wis. Stats., shall be as set forth herein, subject to the erection of standard signs giving notice thereof. 
(1)  25 MPH. (Am. #95-08; Am. #17-01) The speed limit for all vehicles on the following described Town roads shall be 25 mph: 
Arrowood Ct . From its intersection with Arrowood Ln., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.05 of a mile. 
Arrowood Ln . From its intersection with CTH "KK", westerly and southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.21 of a mile. 
Aster Rd . From its intersection with CTH "KK" to its terminus. (Am. #00-05) 
Azalea Ct . From its intersection with Azalea Rd., easterly, northerly and westerly to its intersection with Azalea Rd. 
Azalea Ln . From its intersection with Azalea Rd. to its intersection of Azalea Ct. 
Bay Park Ct . From its intersection with Bluegill Ave. to its terminus. 
Begonia St . From its west terminus to its east terminus, a distance of 0.25 of a mile. 
Bellflower St . From its intersection with Bittersweet Rd., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.25 of a mile. 
Bittersweet Rd . From its intersection with CTH "N", northerly to its intersection with Fern Ln. 
Blackberry Ct . From its intersection with Blackberry Dr., northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.07 of a mile. 
Blackberry Dr . From the Red Bud Rd. intersection easterly to the Woodsmoke Rd. intersection. (Cr. #08-04) 
Blackberry South . From its intersection with Blackberry Dr. to its terminus. 
Blazing Star St . From its intersection with Bellflower St., northerly to its intersection with Begonia St. 
Bleeding Heart St . From its intersection with Bellflower St., northerly to its intersection with Begonia St. 
Bluebells Rd . From its intersection with Golden Rod Rd., northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.17 of a mile. 
Blueberry Ct . From its intersection with Blueberry Ln. to its terminus. 
Bluebird Ln. 
1.  From its intersection with Robin Ln., northerly and easterly to its intersection with Martin Ave. 
2.  From its intersection with Eagle Ave., easterly to its south intersection with Dove Ave. 
3.  From its north intersection with Dove Ave., northeasterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.11 of a mile. 
Blue Gill Ave . From its intersection with Cloverland Ln., southerly to its intersection with Lakeshore Dr. 
Bluejay Ln. 
1.  From its intersection with Falcon Ave., easterly to its south intersection with Partridge Ave. 
2.  From its north intersection with Partridge Ave., easterly to its north intersection with Quail Ave. 
3.  From its south intersection with Quail Ave., easterly to its intersection with Pheasant Ave. 
Bob-O-Link Ave . From its intersection with Chick-A-Dee Ln., northerly to its intersection with Robin Ln. 
Bobwhite Rd . From its intersection with CTH "NN", northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.13 of a mile. 
Broadbill Ln . From its intersection with Rib Mountain Way, westerly to its intersection with Bufflehead Ave. 
Brookfield Ln . From its west terminus to its east terminus, a distance of 0.20 of a mile. 
Bufflehead Ave . From its intersection with Broadbill Ln., southerly to its intersection with Canvasback Ln. 
Buttercup Rd. 
1.  From its west intersection with Foxglove Rd., northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.48 of a mile. 
2.  From its east intersection with Foxglove Rd., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.26 of a mile. 
Butternut Rd . From its intersection with Thornapple Rd., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.28 of a mile. 
Camilia St . From its intersection with Bellflower St., northerly to its intersection with Begonia St. 
Canary Ave . From its intersection with Oriole Ln., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.08 of a mile. 
Canvasback Ln . From its intersection with Rib Mountain Way, westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.17 of a mile. 
Cardinal Ave . From its intersection with Robin Ln., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.33 of a mile. 
Carnation Ave . From its intersection with Sunrise Dr., northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.24 of a mile. 
Chick-A-Dee Ln . From its intersection with Martin Ave., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.25 of a mile. 
Clover Rd . From its intersection with CTH "N", southerly to its intersection with Golden Rod Rd. 
Cloverland Ln . From its intersection with Bluegill Ave., westerly to its terminus. 
Country Ln . From its intersection with Flax Ln. to its terminus. 
Crane Dr . From its intersection with Springbrook Dr., southerly to its intersection with CTH "NN". 
Crocus Rd . From its intersection with Thornapple Rd., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.28 of a mile. 
Daffodil Ln . From its intersection with Hummingbird Rd., westerly to its intersection with Tulip Ln. 
Dahlia Ln . From its intersection with Lilac Ave. to its intersection with Lakeshore Dr. 
Daisy Rd . From its intersection with Thornapple Rd., easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.75 of a mile. 
Dogwood Rd . From its intersection with CTH "N", northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.50 of a mile. 
Dove Ave . From its north intersection with Bluebird Ln., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.28 of a mile. 
Dusty Miller Rd . From its intersection with Sunrose Dr., easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.04 of a mile. 
Eagle Ave . From its intersection with CTH "NN", southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.46 of a mile. 
E. Lakeshore Dr . From its intersection with Lakeshore Dr., easterly and southerly to its intersection with Paramount Ln. 
E. Moonlight Ave . From its intersection with Liberty Ave., westerly to its intersection with Moonlight Ave. 
E. Rainbow Ln . From its east intersection with Lakeshore Dr., northerly, westerly and southerly to its east intersection with Lakeshore Dr. 
Elderberry Rd . From its intersection with Thornapple Rd., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.28 of a mile. 
Falcon Ave. 
1.  From its intersection with Robin Ln., northerly to its intersection with Sunbird Ln. 
2.  From its intersection with Thunderbird Ln., northerly to its east intersection with Skylark Ln. 
3.  From its west intersection with Skylark Ln., northerly to its intersection with Swallow Ln. 
Fern Ln. 
1.  From its intersection with Bittersweet Rd., easterly to its intersection with Rose Ave. 
2.  From its intersection with Lilac Ave., easterly to its intersection with Lakeshore Dr. 
Flamingo Ln . From its intersection with Raven Ave., easterly to its intersection with Bob-O-Link Ave. 
Flax Ln . From its intersection with CTH "N", easterly to its intersection with Rose Ave. 
Golden Rod Ct . From its intersection with Golden Rod Rd., northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.21 of a mile. 
Golden Rod Rd. 
1.  From its intersection with Blueberry Ln. to its intersection with Clover Rd. 
2.  From its intersection with CTH "KK", easterly to its intersection with Clover Rd. 
Grouse Ln . From its intersection with CTH "NN", southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.31 of a mile. 
Heron Ave . From its intersection with Bluebird Ln., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.34 of a mile. 
Hillcrest Ln . From its intersection with Springbrook Dr., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.10 of a mile. 
Hollibush Ln . From its intersection with Clover Rd., easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.34 of a mile. 
Indigo Ct . From its intersection with Indigo Rd., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.05 of a mile. 
Indigo Rd . From its intersection with Tulip Ln., northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.15 of a mile. 
Iris Ln. 
1.  From its intersection with Bittersweet Rd., easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.25 of a mile. 
2.  From its intersection with CTH "N", easterly to its intersection with Rose Ave. 
Ivy Ln . From its intersection with Rose Ave., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.25 of a mile. 
Jonquil Ln . From its intersection with Bittersweet Rd., easterly to its intersection with Rose Ave. 
Juniper Ln. From its intersection with CTH "KK", easterly to its intersection with Magnolia Ave. (Cr. #17-01) 
Kildeer Ln . From its intersection with Falcon Ave., easterly to its intersection with Quail Ave. 
Kingbird Ave . From its intersection with Chick-A-Dee Ln., southerly to its terminus. 
Kinglet Cir . From its intersection with Warbler Way, southerly and easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.31 of a mile. 
Lakeshore Dr . 
1.  From its intersection with Blue Gill Ave., northeasterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.35 of a mile. 
2.  From its intersection with Phlox Ln., southeasterly to its intersection with Lilac Ave. 
3.  From the Lilac Ave. termination to the East Lakeshore Dr. intersection. (Cr. #08-04) 
Larkspur Cir . From a point 0.09 of a mile east of its south intersection with Carnation Ave., westerly, northerly, easterly and southerly to a point 0.15 of a mile east of its north intersection with Carnation Ave. 
Larkspur Ct . From its intersection with Larkspur Cir., southwesterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.12 of a mile. 
Liberty Ave . From its intersection with Paramount Ln., northerly to its intersection with E. Lakeshore Dr. 
Lilac Ave . From its intersection with Lakeshore Dr., to the north to its intersection with Morning Glory Ln. (Cr. #08-04) 
Lily Ln . From its intersection with Bittersweet Rd., easterly to its intersection with Rose Ave. 
Loganberry Ct . From its intersection with Blackberry Dr. to its terminus. 
Lotus Ln . From its intersection with Lilac Ave., easterly to its intersection with Lakeshore Dr. 
Macaw Ave. 
1.  From its intersection with Thunderbird Ln., northerly to its east intersection with Skylark Ln. 
2.  From its west intersection with Skylark Ln., northerly to its intersection with Swallow Ln. 
Magnolia Ave. From its intersection with CTH "N", southerly to it terminus a distance of 0.48 of a mile. (Cr. #17-01) 
Mallard Ln . From its intersection with CTH "N", westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.45 of a mile. 
Marigold Rd . From its intersection with CTH "KK", easterly to its intersection with Primrose Ln. 
Martin Ave . From its intersection with Chick-A-Dee Ln., northerly to its intersection with CTH "NN". 
Meadow Cir . From its intersection with Country Ln. to its terminus. 
Meadowlark Ln . From its intersection with Raven Ave., easterly to its intersection with Bob-O-Link Ave. 
Merganser Ct . From its north intersection with Bufflehead Ave. to its south intersection with Bufflehead Ave. 
Mint Dr . From its intersection with Primrose Ave., southeasterly to its intersection with Fern Ln. 
Mockingbird Ln . From its intersection with Sandpiper Ave., easterly to its terminus. 
Moonlight Ave . From its intersection with E. Moonlight Ave., westerly and northerly to its intersection with Rainbow Ln. 
Morninglory Ln . From its intersection with CTH "N", easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.14 of a mile. 
Mountain Ct . From its intersection with Mountain Ln. to its terminus. 
Mountain Ln . From its intersection with Rib Mountain Way, southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.11 of a mile. 
Nightingale Ln . From its intersection with Bob-O-Link Ave., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.14 of a mile. 
Orchid Ct . From its intersection with Orchid Ln., southeasterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.09 of a mile. 
Orchid Ln . From its intersection with Clover Rd., southwesterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.21 of a mile. 
Oriole Ln. 
1.  From its intersection with Hummingbird Rd., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.39 of a mile. 
2.  From its intersection with Eagle Ave., easterly and southerly to its intersection with Parrot Ln. 
Osprey Dr . From its intersection with Falcon Ave. to its intersection with Owl Ln. 
Overhead Ave . From the East Lakeshore Dr. intersection, southerly for a distance of 0.14 miles. (Cr. #08-04) 
Owl Ln . From its intersection with Partridge Ave. to its intersection with Falcon Ave. 
Pansy Ln . From its intersection with CTH "N", easterly to its intersection with Rose Ave. 
Paramount Ln. 
1.  From its intersection with Liberty Ave., easterly to its intersection with Paradise Ave. 
2.  From its intersection with Starlite Ave., easterly to its intersection with E. Lakeshore Dr. 
Parrot Ln. 
1.  From its intersection with CTH "N", easterly for a distance of 0.16 of a mile. 
2.  From a point 0.13 of a mile of its intersection with Swan Ave., easterly to its intersection with Oriole Ln. 
Partridge Ave . From its intersection with Robin Ln., northerly to its intersection with Swallow Ln. 
Partridge Way . From its intersection with Robin Ln. to its intersection with Pheasant Ave. 
Peacock Ave . From its intersection with Thunderbird Ln., northerly to its intersection with Skylark Ln. 
Peppermint Ln . From its intersection with Laurel Rd. to its intersection with Raspberry Ln. 
Petunia Rd . From its intersection with CTH "KK", easterly to its intersection with Primrose Ln. 
Pheasant Ave . From its intersection with Robin Ln., northerly to its intersection with Bluejay Ln. 
Phlox Ln . From its intersection with Lilac Ave., easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.26 of a mile. 
Pine Sisken Ln . From its northwest intersection with Kinglet Cir. to its southeast intersection with Kinglet Cir. 
Pintail Ln . From its intersection with Oriole Ln., northwesterly to its intersection with Teal Ave. 
Plover Ln . From its intersection with Swan Ave., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.12 of a mile. 
Primrose Ave . From its intersection with Lily Ln. to its intersection with Mint Dr. 
Primrose Ln. 
1.  From its intersection with Lily Ln., northerly to its intersection with Mint Dr. 
2.  From its intersection with Marigold Rd., northerly to its intersection with Petunia Rd. 
Quail Ave . From its intersection with Robin Ln., northerly to its intersection with Bluejay Ln. 
Rainbow Ln . From its west intersection with Lakeshore Dr., easterly to its intersection with Moonlight Ave. 
Raspberry Ln . From its intersection with Spearmint Ln. to its intersection with Blueberry Ln. 
Raven Ave. 
1.  From its intersection with Oriole Ln., northerly to its intersection with Meadowlark Ln. 
2.  From its intersection with Robin Ln., northerly to its intersection with CTH "NN". 
Red Maple Rd . From its intersection with CTH "KK", easterly to its intersection with Primrose Ln. 
Rib Mountain Way . From its intersection with CTH "N", southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.27 of a mile. 
Roadrunner Ln . From its intersection with Starling Ln., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.06 of a mile. 
Robin Ln . From its intersection with Falcon Ave., easterly to its intersection with Teal Ave. 
Rose Ave . From its intersection with Brookfield Ln., northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.69 of a mile. 
Sage Ln. From its intersection with Magnolia Ave, westerly to it terminus. (Cr. #17-01) 
St. Francis Way . From its intersection with Springbrook Dr., southeasterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.12 of a mile. 
Sandpiper Ln . From its intersection with CTH "NN", northerly to its intersection with Mockingbird Ln. 
Skylark Ln . From a point 0.06 of a mile west of its intersection with Falcon Ave., easterly to its intersection with Partridge Ave. 
Snowbird Ave . From its intersection with Thunderbird Ln., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.58 of a mile. 
S. Mountain Rd . From its intersection with CTH "N", easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.43 of a mile. 
S. 13th Ave . From its intersection with S. 12th Ave., westerly and northerly to its intersection with Chellis St. 
Springbrook Dr. 
1.  From its east intersection with CTH "NN", northerly to its intersection with Crane Dr. 
2.  From its west intersection with CTH "NN", southerly, easterly and northerly to its east intersection with CTH "NN". 
Spring Cir . From its intersection with CTH "NN", southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.06 of a mile. 
Starling Ln . From its intersection with CTH "N", easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.16 of a mile. 
Starlite Ln . From its intersection with Paramount Dr., northerly to its intersection with E. Lakeshore Dr. 
Strawberry Ln . From its intersection with Bittersweet Rd., easterly and northerly to its intersection with Iris Ln. 
Strawflower Cir . From its intersection with CTH "KK" to its intersection with Bluebell Ln. 
Sunbird Ln . From its intersection with Falcon Ave., easterly to its intersection with Partridge Ave. 
Sunflower Ln . From its intersection with Mayflower Ave., easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.10 of a mile. 
Sunrise Ct . From its intersection with Overhead Ave., easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.06 of a mile. 
Sunrise Dr . From its intersection with Overhead Ave. to the point where the Wisconsin River Bridge Pedestrian Trail intersects Sunrise Dr. (Cr. #08-04) 
Swallow Ln. 
1.  From its intersection with Falcon Ave., easterly to its intersection with Macaw Ave. 
2.  From its intersection with Partridge Ave. to its terminus, a distance of 0.35 of a mile. 
Swan Ave . From its intersection with Cloverland Ln., northerly to its intersection with Oriole Ln. 
Teal Ave . From a point 0.05 of a mile south of its intersection with Pintail Ln., northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.38 of a mile. 
Thunderbird Ln . From a point 0.03 of a mile west of its intersection with Snowbird Ave., easterly to its intersection with Partridge Ave. 
Tulip Ave. 
1.  From its intersection with Daffodil Ln., southerly and easterly to its intersection with Hummingbird Rd. 
2.  From its intersection with Lilac Ave., easterly to its terminus, a distance of 0.29 of a mile. 
Tulip Ct . From its intersection with Tulip Ln. to its terminus. 
Violet Ave . From its intersection with Lily Ln., northerly to its intersection with Park Rd. 
Warbler Way . From its intersection with Swan Ave., easterly to its intersection with Kinglet Cir. 
Waxwing Rd . From its intersection with CTH "NN", southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.10 of a mile. 
Windflower Ln . From its intersection with CTH "KK", westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.19 of a mile. 
Wintergreen Rd. 
1.  From its west intersection with Foxglove Rd., northerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.20 of a mile. 
2.  From its east intersection with Foxglove Rd., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.17 of a mile. 
Woodsmoke Rd . From its north intersection with Laurel Rd. to its southern intersection with Laurel Rd. (Cr. #99-16) 
Wren St . From its intersection with Cardinal Ave., easterly to its intersection with CTH "N". 
(2)  35 MPH. (Am. #95-08; #00-05; #08-04) The speed limit for all vehicles on the following portion of Town roads shall be 35 mph: 
Azalea Rd . From its southern terminus to its intersection with Sunrise Dr. for a distance of 4,805 . 
Bluebell Dr . From its intersection with Goldenrod Rd. to its terminus. 
Bluebell Ln . From its intersection with Goldenrod Rd. to its terminus. 
Blueberry Ln . From its intersection with Laurel Rd. to its terminus. 
Chellis St . All that part located with[in] the Town. 
Cloveland Ln . From its intersection with Bluegill Ave., westerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.80 of a mile. 
Foxglove Rd . From its intersection with CTH "KK", easterly to its intersection with Sunrise Dr. 
Hummingbird Rd . From its intersection with Oriole Ln., southeasterly to its intersection with CTH "N". 
Laurel Rd . From its intersection with CTH "N", southerly to its terminus, a distance of one mile. 
Lupine Rd . From its intersection with Verbena Ave. to its intersection with Primrose Ln. 
Park Rd . From CTH "N" to the entrance of Rib Mountain State Park. 
Pepperbush Ln . From Red Bud Rd. to its terminus. 
Redwing Rd . From its intersection with CTH "NN" to its terminus. 
Spearmint Ln . From its intersection with Laurel Rd. to Raspberry Ln. 
Starflower Dr . From its intersection with Starflower Ln. to its intersection with Bluebell Ln. 
Trillium Ln . From its intersection with Clover Rd., southerly to its terminus, a distance of 0.97 of a mile. 
Verbena Ave . From its intersection with Foxglove Rd. to its intersection with Lupine Rd. 
Woodduck Ln . From its intersection with Cloverland Ln. to its intersection with Starling Ln. 
(3)  45 MPH. (Cr. #95-08) The speed limit for all vehicles on the following portion of Town roads shall be 45 mph: 
Red Bud Rd . From its intersection with CTH "N" to the entrance of the Nine Mile Swamp County Forest. 
Thornapple Rd . From its intersection with CTH "NN" to its terminus. 
7.03 - PARKING REGULATIONS . 
(1)  WINTER PARKING REGULATIONS. (Am. #04-01) No person shall park any vehicle on any public street or highway in the Town between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. from November 1 through March 31, inclusive, except under circumstances prescribed in §346.50, Wis. Stats. Official traffic signs in compliance with §349.13, Wis. Stats., shall be placed or erected at or reasonably near the corporate limits of the Town on all State and County trunk highways and connecting highways informing motorists of the parking regulations. 
(2)  PARKING PROHIBITED. No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle at any time on the following streets or parts of streets: 
(a)  South side of Mallard Ln. for its entire length. 
(b)  Both sides of Oriole Ln. from a point 806 feet easterly of its intersection with Swan Ave. to its intersection with Parrot Ln. 
(c)  Both sides of Parrot Ln. lying between Oriole Ln. and Swan Ave. 
(d)  Both sides of Red Bud Rd. from the south line of CTH "N", southerly to the south line of Pepperbush Rd. 
(e)  The west side of Eagle Ave., commencing at a point 180 south of its intersection with Robin Ln., thence south 573 feet. 
(f)  Both sides of Redwing Rd. from a point northerly of its intersection with CTH "NN" to its terminus, from 10:00 p.m. to sunrise. 
(g)  Both sides of Violet between Park Rd. and Fern Ln. (Cr. #04-11) 
(h)  South side of Robin Ln. from its intersection with CTH "R" to the intersection with Pheasant Ave., and the north side of Robin Ln. from 30 feet easterly from its northeast corner with Raven Ave. and westerly for 30 feet from the northwest corner of its intersection with Raven Ave. (Cr. #06-04) 
(i)  Parking on both sides of Kingbird Avenue is limited to no more than four hours during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., and there is no parking on Kingbird Avenue during the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. (Cr. #09-04) 
(j)  Thirty feet from the northerly and southerly intersection of CTH NN and Redwing Road. (Cr. #12-07) 
(k)  Both sides of Lilac Ln. between Morning Glory Ln. and Tulip Ln. (Cr. #16-08) 
(l)  Fifty feet from the easterly and westerly intersection of Violet Ln. and Fern Ln. (Cr. #16-08) 
(m)  Fifty feet from the westerly intersection of Hummingbird Ln. and Jonquil Ln. (Cr. #17-02) 
(n)  Fifty feet from the westerly intersection of Hummingbird Ln. and Lily Ln. (Cr. #17-02) 
(o)  On both sides of Oriole Ln., 350 feet westerly from the intersection of Hummingbird Ln. (Cr. #18-05) 
(3)  OTHER PARKING. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the period specified or between the hours specified. 
7.04 - ARTERIAL HIGHWAYS . 
The following are designated arterial highways in the Town: 
AZALEA RD. Entire length. 
BELLFLOWER ST. (Cr. #99-12) From the west beginning to the intersection with Bittersweet Road. 
BLUEBELL LN. (Cr. #99-12) From the north beginning to the south intersection with Bluebell Drive. 
BLUEBELL DR. (Cr. #99-12) From the northern beginning to the southern terminus at Bluebell Lane. 
CARDINAL AVE. From Robin Ln. to the intersection with E. Oriole Ln. 
CLOVER RD. From the intersection with CTH "N" south for the entire length. 
CLOVERLAND LN. From the intersection with CTH "N" east for the entire length. 
CTH "KK". From the south Town limits to the intersection with CTH "N". 
CTH "N". Entire length in the Town. 
CTN "NN". From the west beginning at the Town limits to the intersection with CTH "N". 
E. LAKESHORE DR. Entire length. 
E. ORIOLE LN. From the west beginning to the intersection with CTH "N". 
E. ORIOLE LN. From the intersection with CTH "N" east for the entire length. 
FOXGLOVE RD. From the intersection with CTH "KK" to the intersection with Azalea Rd. 
HUMMINGBIRD RD. From the intersection with Martin Ave. to the intersection with CTH "N". 
LILY LN. From the west beginning to the intersection with CTH "N". 
MARTIN AVE. From the intersection with CTH "N" to the intersection with Robin Ln. 
MARTIN AVE. From the intersection with Robin Ln. south for the entire length. 
OVERHEAD AVE. Entire length. PARTRIDGE AVE. From the north beginning to the intersection with CTH "NN". 
PARTRIDGE AVE. From the intersection with CTH "NN" to the intersection with Robin Ln. 
PINTAIL LN. From the north beginning to the intersection with E. Oriole Ln. 
ROBIN LN. (Cr. #99-12) From its west beginning to the intersection with Quail Avenue, thence from the intersection with Quail Avenue to the intersection with Rib Mountain Drive (a/k/a CTH "N"), thence from the intersection with Rib Mountain Drive to Pintail Lane. 
ROSE AVE. (Cr. #91-02) From the intersection with S. Mountain Rd. (a/k/a. CTH "N") north to the intersection with Fern Ln. 
SKYLARK LN. From the west beginning to the intersection with Partridge Ave. 
SUNRISE DR. Entire length. 
SWAN AVE. From the intersection with E. Oriole Ln. to the intersection with Cloverland Ln. 
THORNAPPLE RD. From the intersection with Whipoorwill Rd. to the intersection with CTH "N". 
THUNDERBIRD LN. From the west beginning to the intersection with Partridge Ave. 
TULIP LN. (Cr. #90-02) Entire length. 
W. LAKESHORE DR. Entire length. 
W. ORIOLE LN. From the west beginning to the intersection with Martin Ave. 
WHIPOORWILL RD. From the intersection with CTH "NN" south and west for the entire length in the Town. 
7.05 - SNOWMOBILE REGULATIONS . (Am. #91-08; #05-10) 
(1)  SNOWMOBILE ROUTES. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public street or other public way located in the Town, except as permitted by §350.02, Wis. Stats., and except those streets and alleys designated as snowmobile routes pursuant to §350.02(2)(a)5., Wis. Stats., as follows: 
(a)  BUTTERCUP RD. South 200' from trail to Foxglove Rd. 
(b)  FOXGLOVE RD. Short portion from N. Buttercup Rd. to S. Buttercup Rd. 
(c)  S. BUTTERCUP RD. That portion from N. Buttercup Rd. to the dead-end. 
(2)  ACCESS TO TRAILS OR ROUTES. (Cr. #08-02) Roadways and/or shoulders of Town roads may be used for snowmobile travel by persons residing in or lodging in the Town for the purpose of access to or from a snowmobile trail or route, provided that travel is by the shortest distance and route necessary for said access. Snowmobiles traveling on said roadways or shoulders shall observe the roadway's speed limits and any other applicable rules of the road. 
7.06 - MINIBIKES AND SELF-PROPELLED VEHICLES REGULATED . 
(1)  DEFINITIONS. 
Highway. All public ways, thoroughfares and bridges on the same. It includes the entire highway right-of-way, not limited to the actual traveled portion, but also includes the shoulders, ditches and other areas adjacent thereto. 
Minibike. Any motorized vehicle primarily used for transportation or sport including, but not limited to, motorcycles, off-the-road trail bikes and motorized bicycles. 
Motorized Vehicle. Any self-propelled device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported. 
Self-Propelled Vehicle. Any motorized vehicle primarily used for off-the-road use including, but not limited to, go-carts, all-terrain vehicles and all other vehicles not registered pursuant to Ch. 341, Wis. Stats. 
(2)  OPERATION OF. No person shall operate a minibike or self-propelled vehicle in the Town in the following manner: 
(a)  At a rate of speed that is unreasonable or imprudent under the circumstances. 
(b)  In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of another. 
(c)  While under the influence of intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverages, narcotics or other controlled substances. 
(d)  In such a way that the exhaust of the motor makes an excessive or unusual noise. 
(e)  Without a functioning muffler. 
(f)  Upon any public highway, street or alley or upon any sidewalk or parkway in the Town, unless such vehicle is licensed and registered as required by Ch. 341, Wis. Stats., and its operation and operator are specifically permitted to operate the vehicle by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(g)  Upon any slide, ski or skating area, except for the purpose of serving the area or crossing the places where marked. 
(h)  On any lands operated or leased by the Town. 
(i)  Upon the private property of another without the consent of the owner or lessee. Failure to post private property does not imply consent for use. Any motor driven craft, minibike or self-propelled device shall at all times have the consent of the owner before operation of such craft or vehicle on private lands. 
(j)  On or across a cemetery, burial ground, school or church property, without the express consent of the owner. 
(3)  LIABILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN. No parent or guardian of any child under the age of 18 years shall authorize or permit such child to violate any of the provisions of this section. Any child under the age of 18 years who shall operate a minibike or self-propelled device shall be presumed to be operating such vehicle under the authority of a parent or guardian. 
7.07 - BICYCLES, LICENSING AND REGULATION OF . 
(1)  DEFINITIONS. 
Bicycle. Every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals and having wheels, any 2 of which are not less than 14" in diameter. 
Bicycle Lane. That portion of a roadway set aside by the county board or Town Board for the exclusive use of bicycles or other modes of travel where permitted under § 349.23(2)(a), Wis. Stats., and so designated by appropriate signs and markings. 
Bicycle Way. Any path, sidewalk or portion thereof designated for the use of bicycles by the Town Board. 
Bike Route. Any bicycle lane, bicycle way or highway which has been designated by the county board or Town Board and which is identified by appropriate signs and markings. 
Highway. All public ways and thoroughfares and bridges on the same. It includes the entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular travel, but does not include private roads or driveways. 
Roadway. That portion of a highway between the regularly established curb lines or that portion which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, excluding the berm or shoulder. 
(2)  PERMITTED USES. 
(a)  The only modes of travel authorized on a bicycle lane or bicycle way are 2-way bicycle traffic and pedestrian traffic, except for maintenance or emergency purposes. 
(b)  No motor vehicle may be operated upon a bicycle lane or bicycle way, except at an intersection, entering or leaving a driveway or entering or leaving a parking space adjacent to a bicycle lane. 
(c)  No motor vehicle shall be parked on any bicycle lane or bicycle way. 
(3)  RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN. No parent or guardian of any child shall authorize or knowingly permit such child to violate any provisions of this section. 
(4)  ALL BICYCLES TO BE REGISTERED. No person shall ride or use a bicycle upon any highway or bike route in the Town, unless the bicycle shall have been licensed and registered as herein provided. Every resident owning a bicycle shall list and register with the Town Clerk his name and address and the name of the manufacturer of his bicycle, its serial number, style and general description. 
(a)  Identification Plate . The Town Clerk shall provide and keep at the Clerk's office in the Town a suitable book and duplicate record of applications and registrations under this section. On receipt of payment of the license charge herein provided for, he shall provide a suitable license plate, upon each of which shall be stamped a distinguishing Town number. The owner shall affix and keep affixed to the bicycle for which the license is issued the original plate and keep it clean and visible at all times. 
(b)  Safe Mechanical Condition . No bicycle shall be registered which is in unsafe mechanical condition. The Town Constable shall have authority to suspend the registration of and remove the license plate from any bicycle operated contrary to any State law or Town ordinance or operated while in unsafe mechanical condition, such suspension and removal to continue for a period not to exceed 10 days, provided that such registration shall not be reinstated nor such license plate replaced while such bicycle is in unsafe condition. Such suspension and removal shall be in addition to other penalties provided hereunder. 
(5)  FEE. The fee for such license will be fixed by the Town Board. The issuance of the plate and the record shall be the only evidence of the license and registration of the bicycle. Upon change of ownership, a new license plate shall be issued at the rate fixed by the Town Board. 
(6)  PLATES NOT TRANSFERRED. Plates shall not be transferred from one bicycle to another and no person shall attach to any bicycle any plate which was not issued for use on such bicycle. Upon the loss of any such plate and application to the Town Clerk with satisfactory evidence of such loss, an appropriate new plate shall be issued upon proper certificate thereof by the Town Clerk and payment of the fee fixed by the Town Board. 
(7)  YIELD THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
(a)  The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop prior to riding on or across a sidewalk or roadway. Such operator shall in all cases yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk and to all vehicles approaching upon such roadway. 
(b)  The operator of a motor vehicle crossing a bicycle lane as provided in par. (2)(b) of this section shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles within the bicycle lane. 
(8)  OPERATION OF BICYCLE. 
(a)  Wisconsin Statutes. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the operator of a motor vehicle in this State, including §§ 346.04, 346.06, 346.075, 346.080, 346.09, 346.10, 346.12, 346.13, 346.14(1), 346.15, 346.16, 346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.23, 346.24(1) and (2), 346.26(1) and (2), 346.27, 346.31, 346.32, 346.33, 346.34, 346.35, 346.37, 346.38, 346.39, 346.40, 346.42, 346.43, 346.46, 346.48, 346.52, 346.53, 346.57(2), 346.61, 346.62, 346.63(1)(a), (b), (2), (3) and (4), 346.66, 346.67, 346.68, 346.69 and 346.70, Wis. Stats. 
1.  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
2.  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
3.  No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the operator from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars. 
4.  No person riding a bicycle shall attach himself or his bicycle to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(b)  Riding Bicycle on Roadway . 
1.  Unless preparing to make a left turn, every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway carrying 2-way traffic shall ride within 3' of the right side of the unobstructed traveled roadway. On one-way roadways, the operator of the bicycle shall ride within 3' of the right side or left side of the unobstructed traveled roadway. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction, allowing a minimum of 3' between his bicycle and the vehicle. 
2.  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall ride single file. 
3.  Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to the roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
4.  No person may operate a bicycle upon a roadway where a sign is erected indicating that bicycle riding is prohibited. 
(c)  Riding Bicycle on Bicycle Lane . 
1.  Unless 2-way traffic is authorized, every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle lane shall ride in the same direction in which vehicle traffic on the lane of the roadway nearest the bicycle lane is traveling. 
2.  A person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle lane shall ride single file. 
3.  Unless otherwise provided herein, a person operating a bicycle may enter or leave a bicycle lane only at intersections or at driveways adjoining the bicycle lane. A person may leave a bicycle lane at any point by dismounting from the bicycle and walking it out of the lane. A person may enter a bicycle lane at any point by walking his bicycle into the lane and then mounting it. 
4.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle lane shall exercise due care and give an audible signal when passing a bicycle rider or pedestrian proceeding in the same direction. 
5.  Every operator of a bicycle upon a bicycle lane shall exercise due care when crossing all driveways and intersections along the bicycle lane and shall obey § 346.802 (2)(a) and (b), (3) and (4), Wis. Stats., and the rules of the road contained in Ch. 36, Wis. Stats. 
6.  Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle lane shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles and pedestrians in the bicycle lane. Upon leaving a bicycle lane, the operator of a bicycle shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians. 
(d)  Riding Bicycle on Bicycle Way . 
1.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way shall: 
a.  Exercise due care and give an audible signal when passing a bicycle rider or pedestrian proceeding in the same direction. 
b.  Obey each traffic signal or sign facing a roadway which runs parallel and adjacent to a bicycle way. 
2.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way open to 2-way traffic shall ride on the right side of the bicycle way. 
3.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way shall ride single file. 
4.  Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle way shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles and pedestrians in the bicycle way. 
(e)  Riding Bicycles on Sidewalks . Where the Town Board permits bicycles on the sidewalk, every person operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and exercise due care when passing a bicycle rider or pedestrian proceeding in the same direction. 
(9)  SIGNS AND MARKINGS. Appropriate traffic signs and markings shall be installed, designating bicycle lanes and bicycle ways by the Town or its designees. 
(10)  PLAY VEHICLES NOT TO BE USED ON ROADWAY. No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toboggan, skateboard or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway or go upon any roadway, except while crossing at a crosswalk. 
(11)  PARKING. No person shall park a bicycle in any manner which would obstruct pedestrians or vehicle traffic. 
(12)  SPEED. No bicycle shall be ridden on any highway or bike route at a speed faster than is reasonable and proper under existing traffic conditions. 
(13)  LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES. 
(a)  No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway or bike route during hours of darkness unless such bicycle is equipped with or the operator is displaying a lamp emitting a white light visible from a distance of at least 500' to the front of such bicycle. Such bicycle shall also be equipped with a red reflector that has a diameter of at least 2? of surface area on the rear, so mounted and maintained as to be visible from all distances from 50' to 500' to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500' to the rear may be used in addition to, but not in lieu of, the red reflector. 
(b)  No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway or bike route, unless all braking equipment with which the bicycle was originally provided is in good working order. No person may operate a bicycle equipped with a coaster brake upon a highway or bike route, unless such brakes will enable the operator to make the rear wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(14)  DESIGNATION OF BICYCLE LANES AND BICYCLE WAYS. The following are designated to be bicycle lanes in the Town: 
(a)  The south 6' of the paved roadway of Robin Ln., from its junction with CTH "N" west to Rib mountain Elementary School, excepting the U.S. 51 overpass. 
(b)  The sidewalk portion of the Robin Ln., U.S. 51 overpass. 
7.10 - PENALTY . (Am. MSC '90; Rep. & recr. #99-7) 
(1)  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE. This chapter shall be enforced according to §§ 345.11 to 345.61, 23.33, 66.12, 350.17 and Chapter 799, Wisconsin Statutes. 
(2)  PENALTY. 
(a)  GENERAL. 
1.  State Forfeiture Statutes . Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which there is a comparable state statute adopted by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for violation of the comparable state statute, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses, together with the assessments, costs, and fees imposed as provided in Sections 345.20 to 345.53 and Chapter 814, Wisconsin Statutes. 
2.  Town Ordinances . Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty consisting of the forfeiture, assessments, costs, and fees provided in this section. 
(b)  PARKING VIOLATIONS. 
1.  Forfeiture . Any person violating any of the parking provisions of this chapter shall, upon stipulation, be subject to a penalty consisting of a forfeiture according to the following schedule of cash deposits: 
346.505(2) Parking In Handicap Area $30.00 346.51(1) Improper Parking On/Off Roadway $10.00 346.52(1) Stopping/Standing In Prohibited Areas $10.00 346.52(2) Stopping/Standing on Highway by Grade School $10.00 346.53 Parking/Standing Where Prohibited $10.00 346.54 Improper Parking/Standing of Vehicle $10.00 346.55(1) Parking On Left Side of Highway $10.00 346.55(3) Parking On Posted Private Property $20.00 All other parking violations $ 5.00  
2.  Stipulation Deposit . The amount of the forfeiture for parking violations shall be paid at the office of the town clerk or by mailing it to the office of the town clerk. The forfeiture shall be paid in cash, money order, bank check, or by other means acceptable to the town clerk. No officer of the town shall be personally or officially responsible for payment of any dishonored check in payment of any forfeiture. 
3.  Failure to Pay Forfeiture . If the alleged violator fails to pay the amount of the parking violation forfeiture or to appear in court within 28 days after issuance of a parking citation, the town may take any or all of the actions authorized under Section 345.28, Wisconsin Statutes, the provisions of which are specifically incorporated here by reference. 
(3)  DEPOSIT. 
(a)  The deposit procedures and programs for moving violations set forth in Section 345.26, Wisconsin Statutes, and for parking violations set forth in Section 345.28, Wisconsin Statutes, are adopted and incorporated here by reference. 
(b)  The Uniform State Traffic Schedule as revised and amended from time to time is adopted and incorporated by reference. The cash deposit schedule to be used under this section shall be as follows: 
CASH DEPOSIT SCHEDULE FOR TRAFFIC/PARKING 
VIOLATIONS 
Ordinance 
Number Charge Forfeiture 
Amount Costs & 
Assessments Total 
Deposit Traffic Code 7.02 Failure to obey speed limits $30.00 $92.90 $122.90 Traffic Code 7.03 Failure to obey parking signs $10.00 None $ 10.00 Traffic Code 7.05 Unauthorized operation of snowmobile on public street or public way $50.00 $97.50 $147.50 Traffic Code 7.06 Failure to operate minibike or self-propelled vehicle safely $10.00 $88.30 $ 98.30 Operation of minibike or self-propelled vehicle in prohibited area/unauthorized location $10.00 $88.30 $ 98.30 Traffic Code 7.07 Failure to register bicycle $10.00 $88.30 $ 98.30 Failure to operate bicycle safely $10.00 $88.30 $ 98.30 Traffic Code Improper Parking On/Off Roadway 
  
346.51(1) Improper Parking On/Off Roadway $10.00 None $ 10.00 Traffic Code Stopping/Standing in Prohibited Areas 
  
346.52(1) Stopping/Standing in Prohibited Areas $10.00 None $ 10.00 Traffic Code Stopping/Standing on Highway by Grade School 
  
346.52(2) Stopping/Standing on Highway by Grade School $10.00 None $ 10.00 Traffic Code Parking/Standing Where Prohibited 
  
346.53 Parking/Standing Where Prohibited $10.00 None $ 10.00 Traffic Code Improper Parking/Standing of Vehicle 
  
346.54 Improper Parking/Standing of Vehicle $10.00 None $ 10.00 Traffic Code Parking on Left Side of Highway 
  
346.55(1) Parking on Left Side of Highway $10.00 None $ 10.00 Traffic Code Parking on Posted Private Property 
  
346.55(3) Parking on Posted Private Property $20.00 None $ 20.00 Traffic Code 7.10(3)(b) Parking in a Handicap Zone $30.00 None $ 30.00 Traffic Code 7.10(3)(c) All other parking violations $ 5.00 None $  5.00  
(4)  PAYMENT. 
(a)  Any person found guilty of any of the moving violations in this chapter shall pay the total of the forfeiture, assessments, costs and fees for the applicable violation as provided in subsection (2)(a) above. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of any of the parking violations in this chapter shall pay the forfeiture for the applicable violation as provided in subsection (2)(b) above, together with the assessments, costs and fees allowed under § 345.47, Wis. Stats. 
(5)  UNIFORM CITATION. The uniform traffic citation provided under § 345.11, Wis. Stats., shall be used for all moving traffic violations under this chapter, and may be used for parking violations under this chapter. 
(6)  PARKING CITATIONS. Citations for all parking violations under this chapter shall conform to § 345.28, Wis. Stats. 
7.11 - RESERVED . (Rep. #99-7) 
7.12 - STOP SIGNS . (Cr. #99-12) 
(1)  [ALL STOP STREETS.] All traffic entering the following intersections from any direction shall stop before entering the intersection, and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles that have entered the intersection and proceed in accordance with § 346.18, Wis. Stats. 
(a)  Intersection of Fern Lane and Primrose Avenue. 
(b)  Intersection of Fern Lane and Violet Lane. 
(c)  Intersection of Jonquil Avenue and Primrose Avenue. 
(d)  Intersection of Jonquil Avenue and Violet Avenue. 
[(e)  Reserved.] 
(f)  Intersection of Swan Avenue and Cloverland Lane. (Cr. #03-01) 
(g)  Intersection of Swan Avenue and Plover Lane. (Cr. #03-01) 
(h)  Intersection of Swan Avenue and Morning Glory Lane. (Cr. #03-01) 
(i)  Intersection of Robin Lane and Eagle Lane. (Cr. #03-01) 
(j)  Intersection of Eagle Avenue and Oriole Lane. (Cr. #06-01) 
(2)  [NORTH/SOUTH STOP STREETS.] (Cr. #99-15) All traffic entering the following intersections from north or south shall stop before entering the intersection, and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles that have entered the intersection and proceed in accordance with § 346.46, Wis. Stats. 
(a)  Intersection of Bittersweet Road and Lily Lane. 
(3)  ARTERIAL STREET DESIGNATION. (Cr. #03-01) The intersections designated in this section are not intended to repeal the arterial highway designations in § 7.04 of the Rib Mountain Ordinance Code, but the specific intersections designated for placement of stop signs herein supercede the arterial highway designations in § 7.04 to those named intersections. 
(4)  [WEST STOP STREETS.] (Cr. #03-05) All traffic entering the following intersections from the west shall stop before entering the intersection, and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles that have entered the intersection and proceed in accordance with § 346.18, Wis. Stats. 
(a)  Intersection of Cloverland Lane and Bluegill Avenue. 
(5)  [NORTH STOP STREETS.] (Cr. #04-09) All traffic entering the following intersections from the south shall stop before entering the intersection, and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles that have entered the intersection and proceed in accordance with §346.18, Wis. Stats.: 
(a)  Intersection of Lakeshore Drive and Phlox Lane. 
Chapter 8 - PUBLIC WORKS 
8.01 Driveways 8.02 Excavation of Public Rights-of-Way 8.03 Snow and Ice Removal 8.04 Assignment of Street Names 8.05 Receptacle Regulations 8.06 Street Privilege Permit 8.07 House Numbering Required 8.10 Penalty 8.11 Use of Town Roads for Civic Events  

8.01 - DRIVEWAYS . (Rep. & recr. #97-02) 
(1)  PERMIT. No person shall alter or construct any driveway over or across any Town right-of-way or any sidewalk or curbing in the Town without first securing approval from the Chairperson of the Town of Rib Mountain Public Works Committee. 
(2)  WIDTH AND DISTANCE. Driveways shall be no wider than 25 feet at property lines, except a duplex may have a driveway up to 40 feet wide serving multiple attached and adjoining garages, and the nearest boundary of any driveway shall be at least 30 feet from a corner crosswalk. Any person desiring 2 driveways into the same property shall have at least 15 feet between driveways. If driveways in excess of 2 into any one property are desired, permission from the Town Board is required. Property located on a corner may have driveways entering the property from each street. However, if 2 driveways are provided on one street, only one driveway will be allowed on the other street without special permission from the Town Board. Any driveway which presents a concern or threat to traffic flow or public safety shall be referred to the Town Board for further action. 
(3)  MATERIALS. (Am. #2014-03) Driveways on the property may be of any hard surface material but may only extend beyond the property line into the public right-of-way when constructed of asphalt. Concrete may only be used in the public right-of-way if the street is concrete with permanent curb and gutter installed. The Town will only replace driveway approaches in asphalt. Driveways on the property of all new commercial or residential construction shall be concrete or asphalt. Exceptions may be given to driveways located in recreational, agricultural, or rural residential zones, with the approval of the Superintendent of Streets and Zoning Administrator. Such exceptions shall be a well compacted granular material not subject to erosion, and so noted on the driveway permit approval. 
(4)  CULVERTS AND ENDWALLS. Culverts and endwalls are required where deemed necessary by the Town. 
(5)  VARIANCES. The Town Board may authorize construction or alteration of driveways not conforming to this chapter. 
(6)  NONCONFORMING DRIVEWAYS. Private driveways existing on Town streets may be continued in their present use but shall not be expanded in width nor use, and if their present use is discontinued for a period of 90 days or repairs or alterations exceed 50 percent of the original driveway area, such driveways shall conform to this section. 
8.02 - EXCAVATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY . (Rep. & recr. #97-02) 
(1)  PERMIT. 
(a)  Required . (Am. #04-08; #05-11; #13-02) An excavation permit shall be obtained from the Town Chairman or his designee before any person shall excavate, dig upon or in or remove any trees or material from any public right-of-way, including the traveled portion of any street, boulevard, sidewalk, alley or other public grounds within the Town. The permit shall be obtained by the excavating contractor. A separate permit shall be obtained for each separate excavation. A fee of $150.00 shall be charged for permits where the excavating is off pavement, and $500.00 shall be charged for excavations that involve opening pavement and $1,000.00 shall be charged for excavations that involve opening pavement of roads less than one (1) year old. All permits expire 30 days from date of issue. 
(b)  Exception . Contractors performing excavation work while under Town contract are not required to obtain a separate excavation permit for that work unless specifically required by the Town. 
(2)  FORM OF APPLICATION. 
(a)  The application shall provide such information as shall be required thereon including, but not limited to: 
1.  The purpose of the proposed excavation. 
2.  Location (legal description or street number) of the premises where the excavation is to be made. 
3.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises. 
4.  The type of surfacing on the street in which the excavation is proposed to be made. 
5.  The maximum depth of the proposed excavation. 
6.  The name, business, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(b)  Such application shall contain the following: The applicant covenants and agrees that in consideration of the issuance of the permit, the applicant agrees to and shall: 
1.  Comply with 8.02(7) of the General Code of Ordinances, concerning barricades, so long as the excavation remains a hazard; 
2.  Open the excavation by neat saw joints where the surface course is masonry, concrete or asphalt; 
3.  Close the excavation and replace the surface of such street in accordance with 8.02(8) of the General Code of Ordinances; 
4.  Indemnify the Town and save and hold the Town free and harmless from and against any and all damages, losses, costs, claims, expenses, suits, demands, actions and/or causes of action of any kind or of any nature which may be sustained, made and/or occasioned to the Town at any time by reason of damage or damages or injury to persons or property or death to any person or by reason of any other liability imposed by law upon the Town as the result of and/or due to the actions of the applicant and/or of anyone else relating to and/or pertaining to the excavation which is the subject of this permit and/or as the result of and/or due to anything whatsoever relating to and/or pertaining to the aforementioned excavation. The undersigned agrees that this indemnification and hold harmless specifically applies to, covers and includes within its purview any and all of the Town's officers, agents, employees and/or designees. Specifically included within this indemnification and hold harmless are attorneys' fees and other costs of defense which may be sustained and/or occasioned to the Town, the Town's officers, agents, employees and/or designees; 
5.  Hereby release the Town and its officers, agents, employees and/or designees from all damages, losses, costs, claims, expenses, suits, demands, actions and/or causes of action of any kind or of any nature, whatsoever, which may result from applicant's actions or anyone else's actions or from anything of any nature resulting from and/or pertaining to the excavation which is the subject of this permit. 
6.  At its own expense, keep in full force and effect during the term of the excavation work and pertinent work thereto and until all hazards and/or potential hazards to the public have been removed and/or alleviated, a policy of comprehensive and general liability insurance covering personal injury and property damages and such other insurance that may be necessary to protect the Town herein from any claims and/or actions, without limiting its liability. Applicant agrees to carry and keep in force a policy of insurance, the limits of which shall be at least $500,000.00 for each occurrence and $500,000.00 for property damage. Insurance coverage shall include a one million dollar excess limit umbrella policy. Insurance coverage shall be to the satisfaction of the Town. Any insurance policy obtained for the purpose of complying with this paragraph shall name the Town as an additional insured, and shall contain a provision waiving any subrogation right of the insurance company to recover damages against the Town by reason of sums paid by the insurance company under the policy. The applicant shall provide the Town at the time of application for a permit with sufficient proof that the contractor has in effect the required insurance. Applicant shall provide the Town with a certificate of insurance certifying that the insurance is in effect during the entire period of this agreement, and shall furnish additional certification of changes in such insurance, not less than ten days prior to any such change and providing that no cancellation of the insurance shall be effective until after not less than thirty days written notice of such cancellation has been given to the Town. 
(3)  NOTIFICATION. An applicant who has been issued a permit shall notify the Town of the date on which work will begin and the period of time required to complete the work. No excavation authorized under this section may be initiated until such notification has been made by the applicant. 
(4)  DIGGER'S HOTLINE. An applicant who has been issued a permit shall notify, obtain clearance from, and adhere to the requirements of Digger's Hotline. No excavation authorized under this section may be initiated until such notification has been made and clearance has been obtained. 
(5)  REPORT TO UTILITY. Any person who shall uncover, strike, disturb or discover any property line stakes or any pipe, conduit, casing or other object used to transmit gas, water, sewerage or electrical current shall immediately report that fact to the utility whose interests are affected and a Town official before progressing further with the excavation or removal. If a Town official cannot be located immediately, an inspector of the sanitary district shall be notified. Where there may be damage to life or property, the report shall also be made to the sheriff's department and Fire Department. 
(6)  SURETY BOND REQUIRED. The applicant shall execute and file with the Town Clerk and keep in effect a corporate surety bond or cash in a sum to be set by the Town Board but in any event not less than $5,000.00, conditioned upon the timely and faithful performance of all requirements and conditions of any permits issued to the applicant. The effective period of the bond shall be a minimum of two years. 
(7)  BARRICADES. All barricades shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Barricades and construction warning signs shall be constructed, marked and reflectorized in conformance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition and revisions. 
(b)  All barricades used at night shall be lighted with an average of one flasher per barricade. 
(c)  A construction warning sign, illuminated with at least one flasher, shall be placed adjacent to the roadway approximately 200 feet in advance of the barricaded area. 
(d)  Each barricade shall have the excavating contractor's name, address and telephone number marked prominently thereon or that of an authorized barricade rental agency. The telephone number shall be such that the contractor or an authorized representative can be reached 24 hours a day. 
(e)  Any open excavation left unattended shall be fenced or otherwise protected so as to restrict access and minimize the risk of injury or trespass. 
(8)  TRENCH BACKFILLING. The trench backfilling shall be accomplished as follows: 
(a)  The backfill from the bottom of the pipe to an elevation one foot above the pipe shall be fine granular material carefully placed by hand and well tamped to fill completely all the spaces under and adjacent to the pipe so as to form a bed that will preclude subsequent settlement. Compaction shall achieve at least 95 % of maximum dry density at optimum moisture as determined in accordance with the Method of Test for the Moisture-Density Relations of Soils, AASHTO Designation T 180-74. 
(b)  The remainder of the backfilling may consist of suitable native soils with proper moisture content for maximum compaction. The contractor shall have and use at the job site a vibratory type compactor before starting to backfill. The backfill shall be uniformly compact to at least 95 % maximum dry density at optimum moisture as determined by the Method of Test for Moisture-Density Relations of Soils, AASHTO Designation T 180-74. 
(c)  All roots, debris, rocks greater than 6" in diameter, frozen material or other unsuitable materials, which in the opinion of the designated Town inspector may cause interference with the compaction requirements, shall not be used in the backfill and shall be disposed of elsewhere by the contractor. Unsuitable materials shall be replaced with suitable granular materials approved by the designated Town inspector. 
(9)  STREET REPLACEMENT, PERMANENT AND TEMPORARY, PAVEMENT. In addition to the requirements set forth in this subsection, all work under this subsection shall be completed in accordance with the Town Board's Resolution regarding minimum standards for right-of-way construction. 
(a)  Required Repairs . Anyone who excavates in the public right-of-way shall be responsible for trench backfilling in accordance with subsection (8), permanent or temporary street repairs and the replacement of curb and gutter, sidewalk and driveway approaches and shall backfill, compact and replace road shoulders and place four inches of black dirt on top and reseed outside the shouldered area. 
(b)  Permanent Street Repair . Following trench backfilling, all excavators shall be responsible for the backfilling of the trench and permanent asphalt pavement repair. Saw cuts shall be made to neat lines to the outer limits of the excavation. The compacted trench backfill shall be completed to an elevation about eleven inches below the existing pavement surface followed by an eight inch thickness of base course, state gradation #2 and a minimum three inch thickness of bituminous concrete surface. The surface shall be placed and compacted in two lifts. 
(c)  Temporary Street Repair . All excavators shall be responsible for completing the trench backfilling in accordance with subsection (8) and, in addition, shall be responsible for placement of a minimum two inch thick bituminous concrete repair patch over the street excavation. Repairs shall be made as follows: 
1.  Gravel Surface. The contractor shall complete the compacted backfill to an elevation eight inches below the finished street grade and immediately place eight inches of base course equal in quality to that which is existing. 
2.  Asphalt Surface. 
a.  The contractor shall complete the compacted backfill to an elevation two inches below the finished street grade and immediately place a minimum of two inches of compacted bituminous concrete surface course thereon. 
b.  Immediately after placement of the surface course, the area shall be cleaned and left in a safe and satisfactory manner and the street opened to traffic. 
(d)  Payment for Permanent Street Repair . Where temporary repairs have been placed, the excavator shall construct the Permanent street repairs and be responsible for all other repairs to the sidewalk and curb and gutter. 
(10)  SETTLEMENT OF WORK PERFORMED. Settlement of the street surfacing, curb and gutter, driveway approaches (regardless of who installed same) within one year from the date of trench backfilling shall be construed as evidence of poor compaction and the contractor who backfilled the trench and the surety shall be responsible for the replacement of the street surfacing. Each successive replacement by the contractor shall be subject to satisfactory performance for a period of one year. 
(11)  COMPACTION CONTROL TEST. The Town may perform compaction control tests at such frequency and at such depths as it deems necessary to verify compliance with the compaction requirements of State highway construction Standards. 
(12)  HOURS OF WORK. The contractor shall not begin any excavation in travel lanes of any arterial street within the Town before 7 a.m. and shall have such excavation backfilled and barricades removed before 6 p.m., except where the nature and scope of the project make such limitations impractical and unless specific permission is granted by the Town Board designee. 
(13)  NO EXCAVATION DURING WINTER MONTHS. Except as necessary for utility repair or in unusual circumstances, no excavation permits will be issued for Town streets during the period of time when frost depth exceeds approximately 30", generally the period between December 15 and April 1. Excavations permitted during this period shall be backfilled with unfrozen material and shall have a temporary asphalt patch. 
(14)  DAMAGE TO ROAD SURFACE. The excavator shall be responsible for the repair of any damage to the surface of an area of road which is not subject to excavation. 
(15)  VIOLATIONS AND COSTS. If any person violates or otherwise fails to fulfill the requirements of this section, the Town shall notify the person of such violation or failure and provide a reasonable period of time within which to achieve compliance, except when such a violation or failure may endanger public safety. If the person fails to so comply, the Town plus liquidated damages of $500.00 and a reasonable amount for attorneys' fees and costs, and shall be entitled to recover the amount jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond. 
Failure to pay any amount billed within 60 days shall result in a suspension of further excavation permits until remittance is made in full. 
If any person violates or otherwise fails to fulfill the requirements of this section, that person's performance shall be considered by the Town Board before further excavation permits are granted. If the person's record indicates substantial disregard of the provisions of this section, willful or otherwise, excavation permits may be denied. 
8.03 - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL . (Am. 95-03) 
(1)  DEPOSITING SNOW. No person shall throw, pile or place any snow or ice upon any street, alley or other public way in the Town. 
(2)  The owner, occupant or person in charge of any building fronting upon or adjoining any street, and the owner, or person in charge of an unoccupied dwelling or lot fronting as aforesaid, shall clean the sidewalk in front of or adjoining such building or unoccupied lot or dwelling, as the case may be, of snow and ice from such sidewalk, and cause the same to be kept clear from snow and ice within 24 hours after cessation of a snowfall; provided that when ice has so formed on any sidewalk that it cannot be removed, then the persons herein referred to shall keep the same sprinkled with salt, sand or a similar substance. 
(3)  If any owner shall fail or neglect to keep any sidewalk free of snow or ice, the Town may clear such sidewalk and shall charge the expenses thereof as a special charge against the premises to be collected as other taxes on real estate. The Town may, but shall not be required to, give notice to the owners of the property before the Town takes action to clear such sidewalks. 
8.04 - ASSIGNMENT OF STREET NAMES . 
(1)  STREET NAMES. All streets and roads in the Town shall be assigned a name by the Town Board. 
(2)  MAP. The Town Clerk shall keep a map approved by the Town Board on file at the Town Hall setting forth locations and names of all streets in the Town, which map shall be designated as the Town street map. 
(3)  AMENDMENTS TO MAP. After dedication and opening of a new street, the town Clerk shall amend the Town street map to include the location and name of the new street. 
8.05 - RECEPTACLE REGULATIONS . 
(1)  DEFINITION. Receptacle shall mean any container used for the delivery of mail, newspapers, advertising circulars or other printed material along any public right-of-way in the Town. 
(2)  PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall erect any receptacle in the Town without first obtaining written approval from the Town board. 
(3)  APPROVAL. Approval shall be made on forms prescribed by the town board. Such approval shall specify the precise location of the receptacle and whether or not such receptacle is to be grouped with other receptacles. 
(4)  LOCATION, GROUPING. 
(a)  One Side of Roadway . Receptacles shall be located on the right hand side of the highway right-of-way in the direction of travel of the mail carrier. 
(b)  Setback . The front edge of all receptacles shall be in a perpendicular line with the outside line of the shoulder portion of the highway right-of-way, except as the Town Board may otherwise order. The Town Board shall determine the width of the shoulder portion of all highways. 
(c)  Grouping . Receptacles shall be grouped as the Town Board shall from time to time determine and order. 
(5)  EXISTING RECEPTACLES. All receptacles presently existing in the Town are subject to the standards and conditions as set forth in this section, including orders of the Town Board to group receptacles. 
(6)  COMPLIANCE; ORDERS AND NOTICE. 
(a)  Compliance Orders . The Town Board shall notify any person who is in violation of the standards of this section in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address, ordering such person to correct the stated violation or violations within 30 days from the date of the notice. 
(b)  Grouping Orders . Upon any determination of the Town Board that certain receptacles should be grouped in a particular location, the Town Board shall order any person affected by such determination in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address, to comply with the determination of the Town Board within 30 days from the date of the notice. Such order shall specify the number of receptacles to be grouped, the names of the persons whose receptacles are being grouped and the precise location of such grouped receptacles. 
(7)  POST OFFICE TO BE NOTIFIED OF VIOLATIONS. The name and address of any person failing to comply with the orders of the Town Board within the time prescribed shall be forwarded to the local post office or the firm or corporation owning the receptacle. 
8.06 - STREET PRIVILEGE PERMIT . (Cr. #91-05) 
(1)  GRANTING. Permits for the use of the streets, sidewalks, public ways or other public grounds of the Town may be granted to applicants by the Town Board for the purpose of encumbering such public grounds with materials, equipment, structures or pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  BOND AND INSURANCE. Prior to issuing a permit, the Town Board shall determine if a bond is required in order that the provisions of sub. (5) be obtained out of the proceeds of such bond. The Board may also require the filing of a certificate of insurance. The amount of any bond or the policy limits and coverage of any insurance shall be in the sole discretion of the Town Board. 
(3)  APPLICATION. Unless a fee for application to a special Town Board meeting is paid, any application shall be completed and submitted to the Town Clerk one week before a regular Town Board meeting. 
(4)  FEES. (Am. #12-01; #13-07) 
(a)  The fee for timely application shall be found in the Annual Fee Schedule which is available through the Town Treasurer. 
(5)  CONDITIONS OF OCCUPANCY. The use of the public grounds shall be as stated in the permit and is subject to the following terms and conditions, including revocation without notice for violation thereof, by the Board of Public Works: 
(a)  A temporary obstruction shall cover only that portion of the public grounds as set forth in the permit. 
(b)  The obstructions shall be adequately barricaded and lighted so as to be in full view of the public from all directions. 
(c)  If sidewalk use by pedestrians is interrupted, temporary sidewalks guarded by a fence or other structure may be required during the period of occupancy. 
(d)  No building or structure shall remain overnight on any street crossing or intersection or where it prevents access to any building by emergency vehicles. 
(e)  Upon termination of the work or event necessitating such obstruction, all parts of the public grounds occupied under the permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish and obstructions, restored to a condition reasonably similar to that prior to the permittee's occupancy, but in all cases placed in a safe condition for use by the public at the expense of the permittee. 
(f)  All street privilege permits shall automatically terminate at the end of 3 months from the date of issuance, unless some other date is specified thereon by the Town Board. 
(6)  BLOCK PARTY PERMIT. (Cr. #92-10) 
(a)  Permits for a block party held by a Town resident on his street of residence consented to by the residents on the street may be issued by an official or employee designated by the Town Board upon application forms approved by the Town Board instead of Town Board approval as provided in subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4)(b) of this section. The fee shall be as specified in paragraph (4)(a). 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the official or designee of the Town Board regarding issuance of a permit, bonds or other requirements may appeal to the Town Board. A special hearing shall be subject to the requirements of paragraph (4)(b). 
8.07 - HOUSE NUMBERING REQUIRED . (Cr. #92-02) 
(1)  Every owner or lessee of any house or building used or occupied as a residence, store, shop or other place of business in the Town shall affix in some conspicuous and suitable place on the front of the house or building its appropriate number in figures not less than 3 inches in height, either in bright metal or plainly painted so to be easily seen and read from the street or road. 
(2)  If any owner or lessee shall fail or neglect to affix a number to their building or house within 10 days after being notified to do so by the Town, the Town shall cause the same to be numbered and the expense thereof shall be entered by the Clerk in the tax roll as a special charge against the lot or parcel of land upon which the building or residence is situated and the same shall be collected in all respects like other taxes upon real estate. 
8.10 - PENALTY . 
Except as otherwise provided, any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or order promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided in § 25.04 of this General Code. 
8.11 - USE OF TOWN ROADS FOR CIVIC EVENTS . (Cr. #11-04) 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any organization to conduct a run, walk, or bike event on Town roads in the boundaries of the Town without first obtaining a permit and paying the required fee. Any organizers holding such an event without first obtaining a permit and paying the required fee will be directed to cancel the event immediately. 
(2)  Any organization wishing to use Town roads for a run, walk, or bike event must submit a permit application and a $100.00 fee to the Town Clerk not less than 30 days prior to the day that they wish to hold the event, along with a certificate of insurance showing the Town as a named insured in an amount of insurance coverage established by the Town. 
(3)  Prior to issuing the permit, the Town Board shall determine if a bond is required. The amount of any bond shall be in the sole discretion of the Town Board. 
(4)  Said permit application must include the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the organization wishing to hold the event; 
(b)  The date and time of the proposed event and any proposed rain date; 
(c)  The proposed event route; 
(d)  The proposed start and finish times for the event; 
(e)  The expected number of participants; 
(f)  A copy of the insurance policy or certificate showing the Town as an additional insured in the amount established by the Town. 
(5)  In addition, the permit application must identify how the event organizers intend to (1) mark the event route, (2) maintain crowd control, and (3) clean up any trash. Markings must be made with a nonpermanent substance. 
Chapter 9 - PEACE AND ORDER 
9.29.29- 9.951.165 Offenses Against State Laws Subject to Forfeiture 9.02 Discharging of Firearms Prohibited 9.025 Carrying of Weapons on Town Property 9.03 Throwing or Shooting of Arrows, Stones or Other Missiles Prohibited 9.04 Burning of Grass and Trash Restricted 9.05 Sale and Discharge of Fireworks Restricted 9.06 Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks Prohibited 9.07 Disorderly Conduct Prohibited 9.08 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited 9.09 False Fire Alarms Prohibited 9.10 Obedience to Officers 9.11 (Rep. #08-13) 9.12 Personating Police Officers 9.13 Gambling, Lotteries, Fraudulent Devices and Practices Prohibited 9.14 Loitering Prohibited 9.15 Indecent Conduct and Language Prohibited 9.16 Destruction of Property Prohibited 9.17 Littering Prohibited 9.18 Fair Housing 9.19 Regulation of Nondealership Motor Vehicle Sales 9.20 Penalties 9.21 Noise Regulation  

9.29.29 to 9.951.165 - OFFENSES AGAINST STATE LAWS SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE . (Am. MSC '93; #99-8) 
The following statutes following the prefix "9" defining offenses against the peace and good order of the State are adopted by reference to define offenses against the peace and good order of the Town, provided the penalty for commission of such offenses shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under § 25.09 of this Code: 
9.29.29 Noxious Substances 9.134.66 Restrictions on Sale or Gift of Cigarettes or Tobacco Products 9.175.25 Storage of Junked Vehicles 9.254.76 Causing Fires by Tobacco Smoking 9.938.983 Purchase or Possession of Tobacco Products Prohibited 9.939.22 Words and Phrases Defined 9.940.19(1) Battery 9.941.10 Negligent Handling of Burning Material 9.941.12(2), (3) Interfering with Fire Fighting 9.941.13 False Alarms 9.941.20(1) Endangering Safety by Use of Dangerous Weapon 9.941.23 Carrying Concealed Weapon 9.941.24 Possession of Switchblade Knife 9.943.01(1) Criminal Damage to Property ($1,000 or less) 9.943.13 Trespass to Land 9.943.14 Criminal Trespass to Dwellings 9.943.20 Theft ($1,000 or less) 9.943.50 Retail Theft (Shoplifting) 9.944.20 Lewd and Lascivious Behavior 9.944.23 Making Lewd, Obscene or Indecent Drawings 9.946.40 Refusing to Aid Officer 9.946.41 Resisting or Obstructing Officer 9.946.42(t) Escape 9.946.70 Impersonating Peace Officer 9.946.72(2) Tampering with Public Records and Notices 9.947.01 Disorderly Conduct 9.947.06 Unlawful Assemblies 9.9.948.51 Hazing 9.951.01-9.951.165 Crimes Against Animals  
9.02 - DISCHARGING OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED (Rep. & recr. #2015-03) 
(1)  ENDANGERING LIFE. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle, spring or air gun of any description within the Town toward any person or dwelling or in any direction or manner whatsoever so as to endanger the life, health or property of any other person. 
(2)  TERRITORY. No rifle, shotgun, handgun or other firearm of any kind shall be fired or discharged in the territory of the Town lying easterly of a line drawn as follows; except that shotguns may be fired or discharged within the shores and upon the waters of Lake Wausau and the Big Rib River, but said shotguns shall not be fired or discharged within the shores or upon the waters of Lake Wausau at any time north of a line beginning at the southerly tip of Everest Landing and running straight east to the city of Wausau municipal limits: Beginning on the north line of Section 4, T28N, R7E in said Town where the north and south center section line intersects such north line; thence running south along the north and south centerline of said Section 4 and the south limits of the floodplain as delineated on the currently adopted or any amended Marathon County Floodplain Zoning Ordinance; thence westerly across Sections 4 and 5 along said southerly floodplain limits line to Red Wing Rd; thence south on the centerline of Red Wing Rd. to CTH "NN"; thence east along the centerline of CTH "NN" to the centerline of Section 4; thence running south along the north and south centerline of said Section 4 and the north and south section lines of Sections 9 and 16 in said Town to the center of CTH "N"; thence easterly along the centerline of said CTH "N" to its intersection with the west line of Section 23 in said Town, and thence southerly along the west lines of Sections 23, 26 and 35 in said Town to the Wisconsin River. Exempt the area described as; all of the property located in Section 23 south of the south right of way of Trillium Lane and west of the west right of way of Interstate Highway 39. 
(2a)  STATE PARK EXEMPTION. (Rep. & recr. #04-10) The Town Board may by written resolution exempt from this ordinance the lands lying within the boundaries of the Rib Mountain State Park for periods up to one year. 
(3)  PERMITS. (Cr. #94-06) The Town Board may issue permits to persons allowing the discharge of firearms within the area described in sub. (2) in circumstances where the Town Board determines, in its sole discretion, that the discharge of a firearm is necessary for the protection of persons, property, or livestock from the clear and present risk of loss, damage or injury. The Town Board shall establish such conditions on any permit issued as it deems required by the circumstances, including, but not limited to, limitations as to area and time, requirements for proof of insurance coverage and/or agreements to hold harmless and indemnify the Town, limitation on the type of firearm, or satisfactory proof of valid permits or authorizations from the DNR or other state or governmental agencies. Any permits shall be valid only for the period provided by the Town Board, but under no circumstance shall the period exceed 180 days. 
9.025 - CARRYING OF WEAPONS ON TOWN PROPERTY . (Cr. #11-03) 
(1)  Pursuant to § 943.13(1m)(c)4, Wis. Stats., no person shall enter or remain in any part of a building owned, occupied or controlled by the Town of Rib Mountain if notified not to enter or remain in the building while carrying, concealed or otherwise, a weapon or firearm. 
(2)  Definitions: 
Firearm . Firearm means a weapon that acts by force of gun powder. 
Law Enforcement . Law enforcement means any person employed by the State of Wisconsin or any political subdivision of this State, for the purpose of detecting or preventing crime and enforcing laws or ordinances and who is authorized to make arrests for violations of the laws or ordinances he or she is employed to enforce. 
Weapon . Weapon means a handgun, an electric device as defined by § 941.24, Wis. Stats., or billy club. 
(3)  In addition to the provisions of § 175.60, Wis. Stats., enumerating places where the carrying of a weapon or a firearm is prohibited, including exceptions thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person other than law enforcement to enter the following buildings owned, occupied or under the control of the Town of Rib Mountain while carrying a weapon or firearm: 
(a)  Municipal Center. 
(b)  Public Works Garage. 
(c)  Public Safety Building. 
(d)  Enclosed park shelters (i.e., Doepke Park). 
(4)  Signs meeting the requirements of § 943.13(2)(bm)1, Wis. Stats., shall be posted in prominent places near all entrances of such buildings listed in subsection (3), above, providing notice that no person is to enter or remain in any such building while carrying a weapon or firearm. 
(5)  Any person who enters or remains in any Town buildings owned, occupied or under the control of the Town of Rib Mountain listed in subsection (3), above, contrary to such signage, shall be considered a trespasser subject to penalty as prescribed under § 943.13, Wis. Stats. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
9.03 - THROWING OR SHOOTING OF ARROWS, STONES OR OTHER MISSILES PROHIBITED . 
(1)  No person shall throw or shoot any hard object, arrow, stone or other missile or projectile by hand or by any other means at any person or at, in or into any building or any street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park, playground or other public place within the Town. 
(2)  No firearm, hard object, arrow, stone or other missile or projectile shall be shot in the territory of the Town lying easterly of a line drawn as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the north line of Section 4, T28 N, R7 E in the Town of Rib Mountain where the north and south center section line intersects such north line; thence running south along the north and south centerline of said Section 4, however, excluding those portions of Sections 3 and 4 lying west of U.S. Highway 51 outside of the boundaries of the Rib Mountain Sanitary District, and continuing along the north and south centerline of Sections 9 and 16 to the centerline of CTH "N"; thence easterly along said CTH "N" to its intersection with the west line of Section 23 in said Town; and thence southerly to the south right-of-way line of Trillium Lane, and thence easterly to the west right-of-way line of U.S. Interstate 39 and U.S. Highway 51, thence southerly along said right-of way line to the Wisconsin River. (Rep. & recr. #96-11) 
(3)  EXCEPTION. (Cr. #94-06) Subsection (2) shall not apply to any activity permitted in a valid permit issued by the Town Board pursuant to § 9.02(3). 
(a)  STATE PARK. (Cr. #04-10) The Town Board may by written resolution exempt from this ordinance the lands lying within the boundaries of the Rib Mountain State Park for periods up to one year. 
9.04 - BURNING OF GRASS AND TRASH RESTRICTED . 
(1)  GRASS FIRES REGULATED. No person shall light, start or kindle any brush or grass fire within the Town without first securing a written permit from an authorized fire warden, who shall issue such permit only upon approval of and subject to any conditions imposed by the DNR. 
(2)  TRASH BURNING RESTRICTED. No person shall set, kindle or cause to be set or kindled any trash or refuse fire in or upon any street, alley, public way, park or any public or private ground within the Town, including fires set, kindled or caused to be set or kindled within a wire refuse burner, basket, metal enclosure, incinerator or other device used for the purpose of burning trash or refuse. 
9.05 - SALE AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS RESTRICTED . 
(1)  PRIVATE USE AND SALE. No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale, use, keep, discharge or explode any fireworks, except toy pistol paper caps, sparklers and toy snakes within the Town unless he shall be authorized by a fireworks permit as provided in sub. (2). The term "fireworks" as used in this section shall be defined as provided in § 167.10(1), Wis. Stats., and shall be deemed to include all rockets or similar missiles containing explosive fuel. 
(2)  FIREWORKS PERMITS. (Rep. & recr. #96-07) Fireworks, except those prohibited by the laws of the State, may be used and displayed in open fields, parks, rivers, lakes and ponds by public authorities, fair associations, amusement parks, park boards, civic organizations and other groups of individuals when a permit for such display has been granted by the Town Chairman. No fireworks shall be discharged within the town after 11:00 p.m. or before dusk of the following day, and no fireworks display shall exceed one hour in length. All applications shall be referred to the Fire Chief for investigation and no permit shall be granted unless the applicant will use the fireworks in a public exhibition and all reasonable precautions will be exercised with regard to the protection of the lives and property of all persons and the display will be handled by a competent operator and conducted in a suitable, safe place and manner. Before granting any fireworks permit, the Town Chairman shall require the applicant to provide a Certificate of Insurance showing the applicant has a policy of liability of insurance for the payment of all claims that may arise by reason of injuries to persons or property from the handling, use, or discharge of fireworks under the permit. Coverage shall be no less than $1,000,000.00, and shall also be taken in the name of the Town of Rib Mountain as an additional named insured. 
(3)  APPLICATION AND FEES. (Cr. #09-08) Application shall be on forms approved by the Town Board and shall contain sufficient information for evaluation under subsection (2) above. The Town Board shall establish appropriate fees for all permits issued and such fees shall be approved in writing by Resolution of the Town Board. 
(4)  REVIEW. (Cr. #09-08) Denials of permits or objection to restrictions may be appealed by the applicant to the Town Board. 
9.06 - OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED . 
No person shall stand, sit, loaf or loiter or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground within the Town in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place. 
9.07 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED . 
No person shall within the Town: 
(1)  In any public or private place engage in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to cause or provoke an immediate disturbance of public order or tends to disturb or annoy any other person or persons. 
(2)  Intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or noisy altercation other than a bona fide athletic contest. 
9.08 - LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED . 
No person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or disturb another in or about any public street, alley or park or any private residence. 
9.09 - FALSE FIRE ALARMS PROHIBITED . 
No person shall give or send or cause to be given or sent in any manner any alarm of fire which he knows to be false. 
9.10 - OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS . 
No person shall without reasonable excuse or justification resist or in any way interfere with any officer of the Town while such officer is doing any act in his official capacity and with lawful authority. 
9.11 - RESERVED . 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 08-13, adopted Sept. 2, 2008, repealed § 9.11, assisting escape of prisoner, in its entirety. 
9.12 - PERSONATING POLICE OFFICERS . 
No person shall personate a constable or other peace officer within the Town. 
9.13 - GAMBLING, LOTTERIES, FRAUDULENT DEVICES AND PRACTICES PROHIBITED . 
All forms of gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices and practices are prohibited within the Town, except as permitted by State statute and licensed accordingly. Any constable or peace officer of the Town is hereby authorized to seize anything devised solely for gambling or found in actual use for gambling within the Town and to dispose thereof after a judicial determination that such device was used solely for gambling or found in actual use for gambling. 
9.14 - LOITERING PROHIBITED . 
(1)  LOITERING OR PROWLING. No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this subsection if the police or peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the police or peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(2)  OBSTRUCTION OF HIGHWAY BY LOITERING. No person shall obstruct any street, bridge, sidewalk or crossing by lounging or loitering in or upon the same after being requested to move on by any police officer. 
(3)  OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC BY LOITERING. No person shall loaf or loiter in groups or crowds upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossing or bridges, or in any other public places within the Town, in such manner as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct the ordinary free use of the public streets, sidewalks, street crossings and bridges or other public places by persons passing along and over the same. 
(4)  LOITERING AFTER BEING REQUESTED TO MOVE. No person shall loaf or loiter in groups or crowds upon the public streets, sidewalks or adjacent doorways or entrances, street crossings or bridges or in any other public place or on any private premises without invitation from the owner or occupant, after being requested to move by any police officer or by any person in authority at such places. 
9.15 - INDECENT CONDUCT AND LANGUAGE PROHIBITED . 
No person shall use any indecent, vile, profane or obscene language or conduct himself in any indecent, lewd, lascivious or obscene manner within the Town. 
9.16 - DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY PROHIBITED . 
No person shall willfully injure or intentionally deface, destroy or unlawfully remove, take or meddle with any property of any kind or nature belonging to the Town or its departments or to any private person without the consent of the owner or proper authority. 
9.17 - LITTERING PROHIBITED . 
No person shall throw any glass, rubbish, waste or filth upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the Town or upon any private property not owned by him or upon the surface of any body of water within the Town. 
9.18 - FAIR HOUSING . (Am. MSC '90) 
(1)  POLICY. It is the policy of the Town Board to provide within constitutional limitations for fair housing throughout the Town. 
(2)  WISCONSIN STATUTES. Section 101.22, Wis. Stats., is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(3)  DEFINITIONS. As used in this section, the following words and phrases have the meanings indicated: 
Discriminatory Housing Practice. Means: 
1.  To refuse to sell or rent after making a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, handicap, religion, national origin, sex or marital status of the person maintaining a household, lawful source of income, age or ancestry. 
2.  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, handicap, religion, national origin, sex or marital status of the person maintaining a household, lawful source of income, age or ancestry. 
3.  To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitations or discrimination based on sex, race, color, sexual orientation, handicap, religion, national origin, sex or marital status of the person maintaining a household, lawful source of income, age or ancestry. 
4.  To represent to any person because of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, handicap, religion, national origin, sex or marital status of the person maintaining a household, lawful source of income, age or ancestry that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is, in fact, so available. 
5.  For any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, handicap, religion, national origin, sex or marital status of the person maintaining a household, lawful source of income, age or ancestry of such person. 
6.  To deny any person access to membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate broker's organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him in terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, handicap, religion, national origin, sex or marital status of the person maintaining a household, lawful source of income, age or ancestry. 
Dwelling. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed for occupancy as a residence by one or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction thereof of any such buildings or structures. 
Family. Includes a single individual. 
Person. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy and receivers. 
To Rent. To lease, sublease, let and otherwise grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(4)  DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED. No person shall discriminate in the sale or rental of housing or commit any discriminatory housing practice, except that this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
(a)  Any single family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that in case of the sale of any such single family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within a 24 month period and provided that the sale or rental of any such single family house shall be excepted from the applications of this section only if such house is sold or rented without the use of any real estate broker, agent or salesman and without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement in violation of the provisions of par. 3. under the definition of Discriminatory Housing Practice in sub. (3), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors or title companies to perfect or transfer title. 
(b)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than 4 families living independent of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(c)  To a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, handicap, religion, national origin, sex or marital status of the person maintaining a household, lawful source of income, age or ancestry. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a private club not open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members. 
(5)  TOWN ATTORNEY TO ADMINISTER. 
(a)  This section shall be administered by the Town Attorney, who may promulgate such rules as are necessary to carry out this section. The Town Attorney shall at the end of every year make a report in writing stating in detail the work he has done and his recommendations, if any. No publicity shall be given a complaint in those cases where the Town Attorney finds or obtains compliance with this section or where the Town Attorney finds that the complaint is without foundation. 
(b)  The Town Attorney may receive and investigate complaints charging violations of this section. A complaint shall be a written statement of the essential facts constituting the discrimination charged and shall be verified by the person making the complaint. 
(c)  In carrying out this section, the Town Attorney and his authorized agents are empowered to hold hearings, subpoena witnesses, take testimony and make investigations. 
(d)  If the Town Attorney finds probable cause to believe that any discrimination has been or is being committed in violation of this section, he shall immediately endeavor to eliminate such discrimination by conference, conciliation and persuasion. If the Town Attorney determines that such efforts have not eliminated the alleged discrimination, he shall issue and serve a written notice of hearing, specifying the nature and acts of discrimination which appear to have been committed and requiring the person named to answer the complaint at a hearing before the Town Attorney. The notice shall specify a time and place of hearing not less than 10 days after service of the complaint. The testimony at the hearing shall be recorded. In all hearings, except those for determining probable cause, the burden of proof shall be on the party alleging discrimination. If the Town Attorney finds by a fair preponderance of the evidence that the respondent has engaged in discrimination in violation of this section, the Town Attorney shall immediately file a complaint against the respondent with the Marathon County court alleging such violation and shall serve a summons upon the respondent requiring the respondent to appear in answer to such complaint. If the Town Attorney finds that the respondent has not engaged in discrimination as alleged in the complaint, he shall serve certified copies of his findings upon the complainant and respondent, together with an order dismissing the complaint. 
9.19 - REGULATION OF NONDEALERSHIP MOTOR VEHICLE SALES . (Cr. #90-4) 
(1)  SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON UNOWNED PROPERTY PROHIBITED. No person shall sell, advertise or display an automobile or automobiles for sale on any property, unless the person owns the property on which the automobile is sold, displayed or advertised. 
(2)  EXCEPTIONS. This section shall not apply to any person licensed by the State as a motor vehicle dealer at the property's address and who occupies the property pursuant to a written lease. 
(3)  ABANDONED VEHICLES. Any motor vehicle remaining on property more than 48 hours which is not titled in the owner of the property as shown on the Town's tax records or as may be determined by other reasonable means shall be deemed abandoned and dealt with as provided in § 342.50, Wis. Stats., or any subsequent amendments, revisions or successor statutes. 
9.20 - PENALTIES . 
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 25.04 of this General Code. In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of § 9.943.01 (1), any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the costs of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parents of any unemancipated minor child who violates § 9.943.01(1) may also be held liable for the cost of repairing such damaged or destroyed property in accordance with § 895.035, Wis. Stats. 
9.21 - NOISE REGULATION . (Cr. #98-04) 
(1)  PURPOSE. Noise at excessive levels and frequencies can adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of Town residents and guests, and interfere with rights to peaceful occupancy and enjoyment of property. This ordinance establishes standards to preserve the health, safety and welfare of Town residents. It is not intended to supersede, repeal or conflict with any other Town ordinance regulating the same or similar occurrences or activities. Instead, it is intended to establish specific standards with remedies which may be supplemental to any other which may appear in this code of ordinances. 
(2)  NOISE LIMITS. 
(a)  The noise emitted from any source and measured at the lot line of the source of the noise, or at any point beyond 50 feet of the public right-of-way, or 50 feet from the noise source when such is emitted from public property, shall not exceed the amounts established in TABLE 1, below, in the following zoning districts established by Chapter 17 of the Rib Mountain Municipal Code or in properties that abut these districts: Countryside Residential, Estate Residential, Suburban Residential, Mixed Residential, Urban Residential, Estate Office, Suburban Office, and Neighborhood Commercial. 
TABLE I 
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND PRESSURE 
(Levels in Decibels re 0.0002 Microbars) 
DAY 
OCTAVE 
BAND 
CENTER 
Frequency 
(Hz) NIGHT 
OCTAVE 
BAND 
CENTER 
Frequency 
(Hz) 31.5 70 31.5 69 63 69 63 68 125 64 125 62 250 58 250 54 500 52 500 48 1000 47 1000 42 2000 42 2000 36 4000 38 4000 31 8000 35 8000 29 A-Scale levels 57 dB (A) A-Scale levels 52 dB (A)  
(b)  In all other zoning districts the noise shall not exceed the levels in Table 17.179(3)(a) in section 17.179 of the Rib Mountain Municipal Code. 
(3)  NOISE MEASUREMENT. Noise measurements shall be made in compliance with generally accepted practices and procedures. 
(4)  EXCEPTIONS. The following noise emitting activity are exempt from this ordinance in accordance with the conditions identified below: 
(a)  Lawnmowers, chain saws, snow blowers or powered garden equipment which exceed the levels established herein when operated during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. 
(b)  Emergency equipment, such as ambulances, law enforcement and fire vehicles, snow removal, civil defense or emergency sirens, public utility equipment when necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(5)  PENALTY. Any person violating this ordinance shall be subject to a penalty as provided by Section 25.04 of the Rib Mountain Code of Ordinances. 
Chapter 10 - PUBLIC NUISANCES 
10.01 Public Nuisance Defined 10.02 Prohibited 10.03 Affecting Health 10.04 Offending Morals and Decency 10.05 Affecting Peace and Safety 10.06 Junk, Certain Vehicles and Recreational Equipment 10.10 Abatement Of 10.11 Cost of Abatement 10.12 Penalty 10.13 Noxious Weeds and Other Unsightly Growth 10.14 Deer Feeding 10.15 Prohibiting Feeding of Wildlife in Public Parks and Other Public Areas  

10.01 - PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED . 
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public. 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property. 
(3)  Greatly offend the public morals or decency. 
(4)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct, or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way. 
10.02 - PROHIBITED . 
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the Town. 
10.03 - AFFECTING HEALTH . 
The following act, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of § 10.01 of this chapter. 
(1)  All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public. 
(2)  Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
(3)  Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease carrying insects, rats or other vermin breed. 
(4)  All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply. 
(5)  Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not flytight. 
(6)  All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation. 
(7)  All animals running at large. 
(8)  The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the Town in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property, or the escape of smoke, soot, cinder, gases, ash, or related material or substance, so as to interfere with the use and enjoyment by persons of ordinary sensibilities of their property. (Am. #03-04) 
(9)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances. 
(10)  Any use of property, substances or things within the Town emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary people which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the Town. 
(11)  All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use. 
10.04 - OFFENDING MORALS AND DECENCY . 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of § 10.01 of this chapter: 
(1)  All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling. 
(2)  Any place or premises within the Town where Town ordinances or State laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated. 
(3)  Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the State or the ordinances of the Town. 
10.05 - AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY . 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace and safety coming within the provisions of § 10.01 of this chapter: 
(1)  All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. 
(2)  All structures, billboards, advertising signs, directional signs and buildings erected, repaired or altered within the Town in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the Town relating to location, materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within such district. 
(3)  All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interferes with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal. 
(4)  All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(5)  All limbs of trees which project over and less than 14' above the surface of a public sidewalk or street or less than 10' above any other public place. 
(6)  All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the State and ordinances of the Town. 
(7)  All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use. 
(8)  All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15' above the surface thereof. 
(9)  All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any kind. 
(10)  The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any considerable number of persons within the Town. 
(11)  All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the Town or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished. 
(12)  All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(13)  All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside. 
(14)  Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks. 
(15)  Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the Town or laws of the State relating to the storage of flammable liquids. 
(16)  All billboards and outdoor advertising or display advertising signs located anywhere in the Town excepting one advertising sign on the same premises upon which the business offering such advertised product or service is located and conducted and which premises are owned or leased by the same person who conducts such business; provided that the Town will, upon application and payment of the cost thereof, erect directional signs of uniform design, selected by the Town and not more than 2 in number for any one business (unless such number is increased by special action of the Town Board) on Town rights-of-way at efficient places designated by the Town Board, for the sole purpose of appraising highway travelers in such Town of the services and products available and an efficient means of reaching the same. 
(17)  All abandoned, wrecked, dilapidated, junked, unsightly, burned out, partially demolished, partially salvaged or damaged motor vehicles, buses, house trailers, vans, tractors, be they truck or agricultural, farm implements, trailers of any kind or any other vehicle or device designed to be upon the highway or used with or by on or off-the-road vehicles. 
10.06 - JUNK, CERTAIN VEHICLES AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT . (Cr. #92-09) 
(1)  PUBLIC NUISANCES DECLARED. The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances wherever they may be found within the Town: 
(a)  Any motor vehicle, truck body, tractor or trailer as enumerated in subs. (3) and (4) below and defined in sub. (2). 
(b)  Any junk stored contrary to sub. (5) below. 
(c)  Any recreational equipment stored contrary to sub. (6) below. 
(2)  DEFINITIONS. The words, phrases and terms used in this section shall be interpreted as follows: 
Disassembled, Inoperable, Junked or Wrecked Motor Vehicles, Truck Bodies, Tractors, Trailers. Motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers in such state of physical or mechanical ruin as to be incapable of propulsion or being operated upon the public streets or highways. 
In the Open. Land which may be viewed from public streets or adjoining property. 
Junk. Worn out or discarded material of little or no value including, but not limited to, household appliances or parts thereof, machinery and equipment or parts thereof, vehicles or parts thereof, tools, discarded building materials or any other unsightly debris, the accumulation of which has an adverse effect upon the neighborhood or Town property values, health, safety or general welfare. 
Motor Vehicle. As defined in § 340.01(35), Wis. Stats. 
Recreation Equipment. Boats, canoes, boat and utility trailers, mobile homes, campers, off highway vehicles and snowmobiles. 
Unlicensed Motor Vehicles, Truck Bodies, Tractors or Trailers. Motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers which do not bear lawful current license plates. 
(3)  STORAGE OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES, ETC. 
(a)  Restricted . No person shall accumulate, store or allow any disassembled, inoperable, junked or wrecked motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers in the open upon any public or private property in the Town for a period exceeding 10 days. 
(b)  Exceptions . 
1.  Any business engaged in automotive sales or repair located in a properly zoned district may retain no more than 3 disassembled or wrecked vehicles, including vehicles under repair, in the open for a period not to exceed 30 days after which such vehicles shall be removed. 
2.  Junkyards permitted under Ch. 17 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  STORAGE OF UNLICENSED VEHICLES, ETC. 
(a)  Restricted . No person shall accumulate, store or allow any unlicensed motor vehicle, truck body, tractor or trailer in the open upon any public or private property in the Town for a period exceeding 10 days. 
(b)  Exceptions . 
1.  Any business engaged in the sale, repair or storage of such unlicensed vehicles in a properly zoned district. 
2.  Garden tractors and mowers may be stored in the rear yard not less than 10' from any property line. 
(5)  STORAGE OF JUNK PROHIBITED. No person, except a junk dealer permitted under Ch. 17 of this Code of Ordinances, shall accumulate, store or allow any junk outside of any building on any public or private real estate located in the Town. 
(6)  STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT REGULATED. No person shall store any recreational equipment on any street right-of-way or within the front setback, including the driveway, for a period of more than 48 hours from October 1 to May 1. 
(7)  ISSUANCE OF CITATION; ACTION TO ABATE. (Am. #08-13) Whenever the Building Inspector or the Code Enforcement Officer shall find any such vehicle, junk or recreation equipment, as defined in sub. (2) above, accumulated, stored or remaining in the open upon any property within the Town contrary to the provisions of subs. (3), (4), (5) and (6) above, he shall notify the owner of the property on which the vehicle, junk or recreational equipment is located of the violation of this section. If such vehicle, junk or recreational equipment is not removed within 10 days, the Code Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector shall cause a citation or summons and complaint to be issued to the property owner or the occupant of the property upon which such vehicle, junk or recreational equipment is located. In addition, action to abate such nuisance may be commenced as provided in § 10.10 of this chapter. 
(8)  PENALTY. Any person who shall be adjudicated to have violated any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in § 25.04 of this Code of Ordinances, plus the costs of prosecution and, upon default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, the Town shall remove any object in violation and place the cost thereof on the tax roll. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
10.10 - ABATEMENT OF . (Ren. MSC '92) 
(1)  INSPECTION OF PREMISES. (Am. #08-13) Whenever a complaint is made to the Town Chairman that a public nuisance exists within the Town, he shall promptly notify the Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer, who shall immediately inspect, or cause to be inspected, the premises complained of and shall make a written report of his findings to the Town Chairman. Whenever practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises and shall file the same in the office of the Town Clerk. 
(2)  SUMMARY ABATEMENT. 
(a)  Notice to Owner . (Am. #08-13) If the inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists within the Town and that there is a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Town Chairman may direct the Code Enforcement Officer to serve notice upon the owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is caused, permitted, or maintained and to post a copy of such notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such nuisance within the time stated in the notice, and such notice shall further state that unless such nuisance is abated within the time stated in the notice, the Town shall cause the nuisance to be abated and shall charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the same as the case may be. 
(b)  Abatement by the Town . If the nuisance is not abated within the time allowed by such notice or if the owner, occupant or person causing such nuisance cannot be found, the Town shall cause the abatement or removal of such nuisance and the cost and expense thereof shall be charged and collected as provided in par. (a) above. 
(c)  Abatement by Court Action . If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises, but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report on his findings with the Town Chairman who shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the name of the Town in the circuit court in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 280, Wis. Stats. 
(d)  Other Methods Not Excluded . Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Town or its officials in accordance with the laws of the State. 
10.11 - COST OF ABATEMENT . (Ren. MSC '92) 
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Town shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. 
10.12 - PENALTY . (Ren. MSC '92) 
Except as otherwise provided, any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 25.04 of this General Code. 
10.13 - NOXIOUS WEEDS AND OTHER UNSIGHTLY GROWTH . (Cr. #01-07) 
(1)  DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Noxious Weed . The following are noxious weeds: 
1.  Canada or other thistles; 
2.  Chicorium itybus (commonly called "chicory"); 
3.  Ambrosia artemis laipolia (commonly called "ragweed"); 
4.  Lactuca scariola (commonly called "prickly lettuce"); 
5.  Hordeum jubatum (commonly called "squirrel tail"); 
6.  Lappa officinalis (commonly called "burdock"); 
7.  White or ox-eyed daisies, snapdragon or toad flax, cockle-burr, sow thistle, sour dock and yellow dock, wild mustard, wild parsnip, quitch grass, also known also as quack grass or leafy spurge, field bind weed (commonly called "creeping jenny"); 
8.  Cuscuta sp. (commonly called "dodder"); 
9.  Brassica juncea (commonly called "Indian mustard"); 
10.  Plantage lanceolate (commonly called "buckhorn"); 
11.  Raphanus raphanistrum (commonly called "wild radish"); and 
12.  Barbarea vulgaris (commonly called "yellow rocket"). 
(b)  Weed Commissioner shall refer to the Town Building Inspector or another person appointed or designated by the Town Board to serve in the capacity of Weed Commissioner. 
(c)  Destroy means the complete killing of weeds or the killing of weed plants over the surface and ground by the use of chemicals, cutting tillage, croppage system, or a combination of these at such time and in such manner as will effectively prevent such plants from maturing to the bloom and flower stage. 
(d)  Lawn Ground, (Cr. #2015-1) means the area around a residence, in a garden or in a park that is covered with grass and is commonly kept mowed. 
(e)  Natural Lawn. (Cr. #2015-1) Prairie or any land managed to preserve or restore native Wisconsin grasses and forbes, native trees, shrubs, wildflowers and aquatic plants. 
(f)  Yard, front. (Cr. #2015-1) A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
(g)  Yard, street. (Cr. #2015-1) A side yard or a rear yard which abuts a public or private street right-of-way. 
(2)  NOXIOUS WEEDS TO BE DESTROYED. 
(a)  Every person shall destroy all noxious weeds on all lands the person owns, occupies or controls. The person having immediate charge of any public lands shall destroy all noxious weeds on such lands. 
(b)  If the owner fails to destroy such weeds, the Weed Commissioner shall destroy or cause such weeds to be destroyed in the manner deemed to be the most economical. The cost of destroying the weeds shall be charged and assessed in the manner provided by § 66.0517, Wis. Stats. 
(3)  UNSIGHTLY GROWTH. 
(a)  To Be Controlled. (Am. #2015-1) 
1.  The owner, occupant, or person in control of any property adjacent to or adjoining a lot shall not allow, permit, or maintain the growth of grass, weeds, or any unsightly growth, to a height of over 8 inches in any lawn area. (Am. #2016-6) 
2.  Exemptions. The height requirement of subsection (a)(1) above shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Active farming operations. 
b.  Active construction sites. 
c.  Non-noxious weeds and vegetation in wetland areas. 
d.  Grass or non-noxious weeds on public or private property previously approved by the Weed Commissioner to stay natural. 
e.  Undeveloped properties or lots, the height requirement shall only apply to a twenty foot frontage on any front yard or street yard. 
f.  Any terrain that makes the cutting of grass and/or weeds unsafe or impractical to do so. 
3.  NOTIFICATION. Anytime a property is found to be in violation of this chapter, the Weed Commissioner or their representative shall send notice to the property owner requesting compliance. Only one violation notice is required per property per year. The first violation notice of a calendar year shall remain in effect and valid for any subsequent violations that occur at that property for the remainder of the year. 
(b)  Policy and Intent . The permitting of such growth as enumerated in subsection (3)(a) above, by blighting residential area and other properties, permitting breeding areas for obnoxious insects and other pests, and concealing vermin and filthy deposits. 
(4)  [ENFORCEMENT.] This section is not to be construed as limiting or prohibiting abatement of [a] public nuisance or any other ordinance violation by the Town, or its officials, or any other remedies the Town may have [for] enforcement, including, but not limited to, the penalty provisions of § 10.12 of the Rib Mountain Municipal Code. 
10.14 - DEER FEEDING . (Cr. #06-06) 
(1)  FEEDING OF DEER PROHIBITED. No person may feed deer through the placement of any salt block, mineral, seeds, grain, hay, fruit or vegetable material outdoors on any public or private property. 
(2)  DEFINITION OF DEER FEEDING. The following acts shall constitute deer feeding: 
(a)  The placement of salt blocks, minerals, seeds, grain, hay, fruit or vegetable material in a combined quantity of greater than one-half gallon at the height of less than 7 feet off the ground. 
(b)  The placement of salt blocks, minerals, seeds, grain, hay, fruit or vegetable material in a drop feeder, automatic feeder, feed bunk or similar device regardless of the height above the ground. 
(c)  Any other methods of placing salt blocks, minerals, seeds, grain, hay, fruit or vegetable material out of doors, or allowing these materials to remain out of doors in a manner that would entice or encourage consumption by deer. 
(3)  EXCEPTION. This section shall not apply to the following situations: 
(a)  Hunting . The placement of bait for the purposes of hunting deer subject to all other laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations governing hunting and the discharge of hunting weapons. 
(b)  Naturally Growing Plants . Native and/or planted grasses, legumes, flowers, shrubs, trees, and gardens. 
(c)  Bird Feeders . 
(4)  PENALTIES. 
(a)  Notice. The Town may, prior to issuing a citation, give notice that a violation of this section exists, however, notice is not required. 
(b)  Forfeitures . The forfeiture for a first violation of this section, upon conviction, shall be up to $100.00, plus applicable costs. The forfeiture for a second violation of this section, upon conviction, shall be $200.00 plus applicable costs. The forfeiture for the third and all subsequent offenses shall be $300.00 plus applicable costs. 
(c)  Declaration of Nuisance . Feeding of deer is declared a public nuisance under Chapter 14 of this Municipal Code, and may be abated pursuant to the provision of said Municipal Code. 
10.15 - PROHIBITING FEEDING OF WILDLIFE IN PUBLIC PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC AREAS. (Cr. #2018-02) 
(1)  No person shall feed or provide food to any wildlife on public property in the Town of Rib Mountain. It is prohibited to place, deposit, scatter or distribute in a location accessible to wildlife any type of food, including but not limited to, corn, wheat or other grains, bread, popcorn, bird seed, scraps or any substance liable to be eaten by wildlife. 
(2)  Wildlife shall be defined as mammals or birds that are neither human nor domesticated. 
(3)  PENALTY. Except as otherwise provided, any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 25.04 of this General Code. 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
12.01 Licenses Required 12.02 General Provisions as to Licenses 12.03 Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages 12.04 Regulating Direct Sellers 12.05 (Rep. #96-02) 12.06 Cigarettes 12.07 Regulation and Licensing of Dogs and Cats 12.08 Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks 12.09 Permits for Temporary Outdoor Sales and Outdoor Assembly 12.10 Penalty 12.12 Regulation and Licensing of Amusement Devices  

12.01 - LICENSES REQUIRED . (Am. #91-10; #13-03) 
A license and annual fee, unless otherwise indicated shall be required as follows: 
Category Fee (1) Fermented Malt Beverages (a) Retail Class A (Am. #93-02) $250.00 (b) Retail Class B $100.00 (c) Wholesalers $25.00 (d) Provisional Retail License (Cr. #05-01) $15.00 (e) Picnic $10.00 (f) Sports Club $15.00 (g) Operators License (New/Renewal) (Am. #04-04; #12-01) $40.00 (h) Operator Provisional (Cr. #91-03) $15.00 (i) Operator Temporary (Picnic Server) $10.00 (j) Transfer of License from place to place $10.00 (2) Intoxicating Liquor (Am. #04-04; #12-01) (a) Retail Class A (Am. #93-02; #94-07) $500.00 (b) Retail Class B (Am. #93-02; #94-07) $500.00 (c) Class B Winery $500.00 (d) Class C Wine (Cr. #94-07) $100.00 (e) Wholesalers $25.00 (f) Provisional Retail License (Cr. #05-01) $15.00 (g) Picnic $10.00 (h) Sports Club $15.00 (i) Operators License (New/Renewal) (Am. #04-04; #12-01) $40.00 (j) Operator Provisional (Cr. #91-03) $15.00 (k) Operator Temporary (Picnic Server) $10.00 (l) Transfer of License from place to place $10.00 (3) Cigarettes (Rep and recr. #99-13) $100.00 (4) Direct Sellers (Am. #12-01) $100.00 (5) (Rep. #96-02) (6) Mobile Home Parks (See also §66.058, Wis. Stats.) $100.00 (7) Dogs (Am. #01-10; #03-08) (a) Neutered Males and Spayed Females $7.00 (b) Unneutered Males and Unspayed Females $12.00 (c) Dogs attaining the age of 5 months during license year shall be one-half the amount in (a) (8) Cats (Cr. #03-09) (a) Neutered Males and Spayed Females $5.00 (b) Unneutered Males and Unspayed Females $10.00 (c) Cats attaining the age of 5 months during license year shall be one-half the amount in (a) (9) Kennel License (Private Residential Kennel and Commercial Animal Boarding) (a) 4 to 12 dogs and/or cats in all zoning districts except: ER-1, CR-35ac, RA-1, RA-2, OR-35ac and RR-35ac $60.00 (b) 7 to 12 dogs and/or cats in ER-1, CR-35ac, RA-1, RA-2, OR-35ac and RR-35ac zoning districts $60.00 (c) Each animal in excess of 12 shall be individually licensed for the amount specified in (7)(a) and (b) or (8)(a) and (b) of this section (10) Amusement Devices (Cr. #04-03) Licenses shall be for one year or part of any year due July 1 (a) Coin-operated amusement devices $25.00 (b) Coin-operated music devices $25.00 (c) Coin-operated casino-like devices (Cr. #12-02) $100.00  
12.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO LICENSES . 
(1)  TERMS INTERCHANGEABLE. The words "license" and "permit" as used throughout this chapter shall be interchangeable. 
(2)  LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall engage in any business or activity enumerated in §12.01 without a license therefor as provided by this chapter. 
(3)  APPLICATION. Application for a license required by this chapter shall be made to the Town Clerk on a form furnished by the Town, and shall contain such information as may be required by the provisions of this chapter or as may be otherwise required by the Town Board. 
(4)  LICENSE FEES. License fees imposed under §12.01 shall accompany the license application. The Town Clerk shall issue the applicant a receipt for his license fee. Except as otherwise provided, no fee paid shall be refunded unless the license is denied. 
(5)  GRANTING OF LICENSES. Unless otherwise designated, licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Town Clerk only with the approval of the Town Board. 
(6)  TERMS OF LICENSES. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on June 30 in the year of issuance unless issued for a shorter term, when they shall expire at midnight of the last effective day of the license or unless otherwise provided by these ordinances or State laws. 
(7)  FORM OF LICENSE. All licenses issued hereunder shall show the dates of issue and expiration and the activity licensed and shall be signed by the Town Clerk. 
(8)  RECORDS OF LICENSES. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued. 
(9)  DISPLAY OF LICENSES. All licenses hereunder shall be displayed upon the premises or vehicle for which issued or, if carried on the person, shall be displayed to any officer of the Town upon request. 
(10)  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCES REQUIRED. Any person holding a license under this chapter shall comply with all portions of this General Code. Failure to do so shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(11)  TRANSFER OF LICENSES. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be personal to whom issued and no license shall be transferred without the consent of the Town Board. 
12.03 - INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES . 
(1)  STATE STATUTES ADOPTED. (Am. #91-03) The provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., defining and regulating the sale, procurement, dispensing and transfer of alcohol beverages, including provisions relating to underage persons, are adopted and made a part of this section by reference. Any act to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions, recreations or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of alcohol beverages. 
(2)  LICENSES, PERMITS, AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED. 
(a)  When Required . Except as provided by §125.06, Wis. Stats., no person shall, within the Town, serve, sell, manufacture, rectify, brew or engage in any other activity for which this chapter or Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., requires a license, permit or other authorization without holding the appropriate license, permit or other authorization as provided in this chapter. See §125.04(1), Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Separate License Required for Each Place of Sale . Except for licensed public warehouses, a license shall be required for each location or premises where alcohol beverages are stored, sold or offered for sale. See §125.04(9), Wis. Stats. 
(3)  CLASSES OF LICENSES AND FEES. (Am. MSC '90) There shall be the following classes and denominations of licenses which, when issued by the Clerk under the authority of the Town Board, shall allow the licensee to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages as provided in the referenced State Statute. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the full license fee shall be charged for the whole or fraction of any year. 
(a)  Class A Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer's License . See §125.25, Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Class B Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer's License . See §125.26, Wis. Stats. 
1.  Part-time. A license may be issued at any time for 6 months in any calendar year, for which 3/4 of the applicable license fee shall be paid; but such temporary license shall not be renewable during the calendar year in which issued. See §125.26(5), Wis. Stats. 
2.  Picnic. See §125.26(6), Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Wholesaler's Fermented Malt Beverage License . See §125.28, Wis. Stats. 
(d)  Retail Class A Liquor License . See §125.51(2), Wis. Stats. 
(e)  Retail Class B Liquor License . See §125.51(3), Wis. Stats. 
(f)  Operator's License . (Cr. MSC '92) See §125.17, Wis. Stats. 
1.  Operator's licenses may be granted to individuals by the Town Board for the purposes of complying with §§125.32(2) and 125.68(2), Wis. Stats. 
2.  Operator's licenses may be issued only on written application on forms provided by the Town. 
3.  Operator's licenses shall be valid for one year and shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
4.  All persons holding operator licenses for the dispensing of liquor or fermented malt beverages shall have passed a written test administered by the Town relating to their qualifications as such operators. 
5.  The Town Board may issue an operator's license to applicants who have met the following requirements: 
a.  Have attained the age of 18. 
b.  Are a citizen of the United States and have established State residency. 
c.  Have fully completed the information requirements of the application form. 
d.  Have completed the written examination, administration of which shall be determined by the Town Board. 
e.  Have paid the annual license fee as provided in §12.01. 
6.  Any violation of this section shall be cause for the revocation of such license. There may be revocation on other grounds. 
(g)  Provisional Operator's License . (Cr. #91-03; Ren. MSC '92) 
1.  Purpose. This paragraph allows for issuance on a provisional basis of a license to those applying for an operator's (bartender's) license for service or sale of alcohol beverages. A provisional license may only be issued to those persons that have not completed a responsible beverage service course and exhibited proof of compliance with that training standard set forth in current §125.17(6), Wis. Stats. A provisional license allows time to obtain training required for working without supervision of another licensed person in a Class A or B business or organization. 
2.  Eligibility. Each applicant must be at least 18 years of age and have completed an application form supplied by the Clerk. All arrests and convictions of the applicant shall be disclosed on the application or an attached sheet. The applicant for a provisional license must present with the application proof that the applicant is enrolled in a training course under §125.17(6)(a), Wis. Stats. 
3.  Term. The provisional license shall be effective until a certificate or other proof of compliance with training requirements is presented to the Clerk. In no case will the provisional license be effective more than 60 days after issuance. The issuance date, final date of validity or both shall be placed on the license form when issued. 
4.  Issuance. Upon written application for a provisional license, the Clerk or deputy clerk shall conduct a record check for past crimes or arrests. If the applicant has no past crimes or arrests as verified by the record check, the Clerk is authorized to issue a provisional license to the applicant which shall be reviewed by the Town Board at the next regularly scheduled Town Board meeting. 
5.  Fee. The sum as provided in §12.01 of this chapter is required to be paid by or for the applicant prior to license issuance. 
6.  Revocation. In the event following issuance it is discovered a part of the license application was false that, in the Clerk's judgment, might have affected the decision on whether to license including, but not limited to, past crimes or arrests, then the Clerk may revoke such license. Upon making such a decision, the Clerk shall mail or have a written notice delivered to the license holder, notifying the person of the action taken, the reason for such action and the right to have a license review hearing before the Town Board upon the applicant's written request. When a request for hearing is made, the Board shall follow general procedures as set forth in §125.12, Wis. Stats., although no complaint is required. The Clerk shall notify the licensee of the Board time scheduled for hearing the matter by mail or delivery. Any mail notice in this paragraph is sufficient if mailed by first class to the last known address of the licensee in an envelope containing the return address of the Town or Clerk. No request for a license review hearing is valid when received past the final day the provisional license would have been effective. 
(h)  Provisional Retail Licenses . (Cr. #05-01) The Town Clerk may issue provisional retail licenses in accordance with §125.185, Wis. Stats., and the requirements of this section. Such licenses shall be issued within 10 days of application. 
1.  Provisional retail licenses may be issued only to persons applying for Class "A" beer, Class "B" beer, Class "A" liquor, Class "B" liquor, or Class "C" wine authorizing only the activities allowed that type of license. 
2.  The fee for the provisional retail license shall be as provided for in §12.01 of this Code. 
3.  The provisional retail license shall expire 60 days after issuance or when the person is issued a retail license described in §12.03(3)(a) through (e). The provisional retail license may be revoked by the Town Chairman or Clerk if it is discovered that the holder of the license made any false statement in the application for the license. 
4.  Prior to issuing the provisional retail license, the Town Clerk, or his/her designee, shall conduct a preliminary background check on the applicant. 
5.  The Town Clerk may not issue any provisional license under this section if such issuance will violate the Town's quota under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats. 
6.  No person may hold more than one provisional retail license for each type of license applied for per year. 
(4)  LICENSE APPLICATION. 
(a)  Form . Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by the State Department of Revenue and filed with the Clerk. The premises shall be physically described, including every room and storage space to be covered by the license and including all rooms joined by connecting entrances or not separated by a solid wall. 
(b)  Application to be Notarized . Applications shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant as provided by §887.01, Wis. Stats. 
(c)  List of Licenses . By July 15 of each year, the Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Revenue a list containing the name, address and trade name of each person holding a license issued under this section, except a picnic, manager's or operator's license. 
(5)  LICENSE RESTRICTIONS. 
(a)  Statutory Requirements . Class A and B licenses shall be issued only to persons eligible therefor under §125.04, Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Location . 
1.  No retail Class A or Class B license shall be issued for premises the main entrance of which is less than 300' from the main entrance of any established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. The distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway from the closest point of the main entrance of the school, church or hospital to the main entrance to such premises. 
2.  This paragraph shall not apply to premises licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to occupation of real property within 300' thereof by any school, hospital or church building. 
(c)  Violators of Liquor, Beer Laws or Ordinances . No retail Class A or B license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or State liquor or fermented malt beverage law or the provisions of this section or whose license has been revoked under §125.12, Wis. Stats., during one year prior to such application. A conviction of a member of a partnership or the partnership itself shall make the partnership or any member thereof ineligible for such license for one year. 
(d)  Health and Sanitation Requirements . No retail Class A or B license shall be issued for any premises which does not conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the State Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations pertaining to buildings and plumbing, to the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health and Social Services applicable to restaurants and all such ordinances and regulations adopted by the Town. 
(e)  License Quota . 
1.  The number of persons and places that may be granted a retail Class B liquor license under this section is limited as provided in §125.51(4), Wis. Stats. 
2.  The number of persons and places that may be granted Class A retail liquor licenses under this section shall be and hereby is limited as follows: There shall be only one Class A retail liquor license for each 1,000 inhabitants or fraction thereof in the Town as determined by the last preceding census of the Bureau of the Census of the United States Government or the estimate made by the State of Wisconsin. (Am. #93-07) 
(f)  Corporations . No corporation organized under the laws of this State or any other state or foreign country may be issued any alcohol beverage license or permit unless such corporation meets the requirements of §125.04(6), Wis. Stats. 
(g)  Age Requirement . No license hereunder, except an operator's license, shall be granted to any person who has not attained the legal drinking age. Operator's licenses may be issued only to applicants who have attained the age of 18. 
(h)  Effect of Revocation of License . Whenever any license has been revoked, at least 12 months shall elapse before another license shall be granted to the person whose license was revoked. 
(i)  Reserved . (Rep. #03-06) 
(j)  Class B Licensed Premises to be on Street Level . A retail Class B License shall be issued only for that portion of a premises located on the street level. This restriction shall not apply to a bona fide club, society or lodge in existence not less than 6 months prior to application nor prohibit any hotel holding a State permit from supplying beverages in original containers to bona fide patrons in rooms rented by such patrons. 
(k)  Issuance for Sales in Dwellings Prohibited . No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment. 
(l)  Building Requirement . (Cr. #95-05) No Class A or Class B intoxicating liquor license shall be issued or reissued unless at the time of application the applicant has a building on the premises for the purposes of utilizing the license. Said building shall comply with all federal, State, County and Town laws, regulations and ordinances. If the building where alcoholic beverages are sold is destroyed, the license shall remain valid until the expiration of the license term and, in addition, the person issued the license shall have 60 days after expiration to complete construction of a new building for reissuance of a new license. The Town Board, at its option, may waive the construction completion requirement if the Town Board receives from the applicant written plans or written contracts with a signed sworn statement from the applicant that construction of a building for retail alcohol sale will be completed for actual business operations and in conformity with state and Town laws, regulations and ordinances within 90 days after the submittal of the application. 
(m)  If an applicant fails to operate under a granted license for ninety (90) days, the Town Board may rescind such license or grant further period of non-operation, based on the then-existing circumstances, but said applicant shall be operational within the granted extended period or the license will be deemed rescinded at the end of the granted extension period. If rescinded, any license fee paid shall be non-refundable. (Cr. #2016-07) 
(6)  FORM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee and, unless sooner revoked, shall expire on June 30 thereafter except as otherwise provided. The Clerk shall affix his affidavit as required by §125.04(4), Wis. Stats. 
(7)  TRANSFER OF LICENSES. 
(a)  As to persons . No license shall be transferable to a different licensee except as provided by §125.04(12)(b), Wis. Stats. The granting of the transferred license to the new licensee is to be reviewed in the same manner as the granting of a new license by the Town Board. 
(b)  As to place . Licenses issued pursuant to this section may be transferred to another premises once during any license year as provided in §125.04(12), Wis. Stats. Proceedings for transfer shall be made in the same manner and form as the original application. The fee for such transfer shall be as stated in §12.01 of this chapter. 
(8)  REGULATION OF LICENSED PREMISES AND LICENSEES. 
(a)  Gambling and disorderly conduct prohibited . Each licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner; and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct or gambling shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises. 
(b)  Employment of underage persons . No licensee shall employ any underage person who does not have a valid operator's license to serve, sell, dispense or give away any alcohol beverage. 
(c)  Sales by clubs . No club shall sell intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages except to members and guests invited by members. 
(d)  Safety and sanitation requirements . Each licensed premises shall be maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and proper place for the purpose for which used. 
(9)  CLOSING HOURS. (Rep. & recr. #01-01) Pursuant to §§125.32(3), 125.10 and 125.68(4), no premises for which a wholesale or retail liquor or fermented malt beverage license has been issued shall remain open for the sale of alcohol beverages: 
(a)  Class A. 
1.  Off-premises carryouts. (Am. #12-04) 
a.  Fermented malt beverages. Between midnight and 6 a.m. (Rep. & recr. #01-01; Rep. & recr. #01-02) 
b.  Intoxicating liquor. Between 9 p.m. and 6 a.m. (Rep. & recr. #01-01) 
2.  On-premises consumption . Not permitted. 
(c)  Class B. 
1.  Off-premises carryouts . Between midnight and 5 a.m. 
2.  On-premises consumption . Between 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. on weekdays and between 2:30 a.m. and 6 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays. 
(d)  January 1 . On January 1, premises operating under a Class B license are not required to close. 
(10)  REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES. 
(a)  Procedure . Whenever the holder of any license under this section violates any portion of this section, proceedings for the revocation or suspension of such license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure established by §125.12, Wis. Stats., and the provisions therein relating to granting a new license shall likewise be applicable. 
(b)  Effect of Revocation . See par. (5)(h) of this section. 
(11)  NONRENEWAL OF LICENSES. Before renewal of any license issued under this section is refused, the licensee shall be given written notice of any charges or violations against him or the reasons proposed for nonrenewal and a copy of any proposed motion for nonrenewal and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the Town Board. 
(12)  VIOLATIONS BY AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES. A violation of this section by an authorized agent or employee of a licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee. 
12.04 - REGULATING DIRECT SELLERS . (Am. #2014-05) 
(1)  REGISTRATION REQUIRED. No direct seller shall engage in direct sales within the Town without being registered for that purpose as provided herein. This chapter shall apply to vendors of raw unprocessed produce and vendors of natural Christmas trees, wreaths, boughs, garland and similar products. The permit issued under this chapter is in addition to any other local, state, or other federal approvals, permits, or licenses required by applicable law. 
(a)  PROHIBITED. This chapter shall not apply to mobile food vendors and temporary food establishments who sell ready-to-eat prepared foods. Mobile food vendors and temporary food establishments who sell ready-to-eat prepared foods are prohibited within the Town. 
(2)  DEFINITIONS. 
Charitable Organization. Shall include any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be such. 
Clerk. The Town Clerk. 
Direct Seller. Any individual who, for himself or for a partnership, association or corporation, sells goods or takes sales orders for the later delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of such individual, partnership, association or corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. 
Goods. Shall include personal property of any kind and shall include goods provided incidental to services offered or sold. 
Permanent Merchant. A direct seller who, for at least one year prior to the consideration of the application of this provision to such merchant: 
1.  Has continuously operated an established place of business in the Town. 
2.  Has continuously resided in this Town and now does business from his residence. 
Person. All humans of any age or sex, partnership, corporations, associations, groups, organizations, and any other description of a collection of human beings working in concert, or for the same purpose or objective. 
Prepared Food. Food processed by the manufacturer or seller by cooking, cleaning, or the like as to be ready to serve or use with little or no further preparation. 
Produce. Farm-produced crops and goods, including fruits and vegetables. 
Ready-to-Eat Food. Food in a form that is edible without additional preparation to achieve FOOD safety. 
(3)  EXEMPTIONS. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter: 
(a)  Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes. 
(b)  Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods. 
(c)  Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown, when sold from the property where such items were grown. 
(d)  Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in their regular course of business. 
(e)  Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis and in which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home visit by, such person. 
(f)  Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer. 
(g)  Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of goods. 
(h)  Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law. 
(i)  Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for, or on behalf of, such organization, provided that there is submitted to the Clerk proof that such charitable organization is registered under § 440.41, Wis. Stats. Any charitable organization not registered under § 440.41, Wis. Stats., or which is exempt from that statute's registration requirements, shall be required to register under this chapter. 
(j)  Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom complaint has been made to the Clerk that such person is a transient merchant; provided that there is submitted to the Clerk proof that such person has leased for at least one year, or purchased, the premises from which he is conducting business, or proof that such person has conducted such business in this Town for at least one year prior to the date complaint was made. 
(k)  A person, on behalf of a charitable organization, selling individually wrapped, sealed food items that are prepared and packaged by a licensed processor. 
(4)  REGISTRATION. 
(a)  Applicants for registration must complete and return to the Clerk a registration form furnished by the Clerk which shall require the following information: 
1.  Name, permanent address, telephone number and temporary address, if any. 
2.  Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes. 
3.  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold. 
4.  Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any. 
5.  Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods and any services offered. 
6.  Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable. 
7.  Name, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the conduct of his business. 
8.  Dates in which selling activity shall occur; 
9.  Last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed 3, where applicant conducted similar business. 
10.  Place where applicant can be contacted for at least 7 days after leaving this Town. 
11.  Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant business within the last 5 years, the nature of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(b)  Applicants shall present to the Clerk for examination: 
1.  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
2.  A State certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and measures where applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by State authorities. 
3.  A State health officer's certificate where applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under State law; such certificate to state that applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is made. 
(c)  At the time the registration is returned, the fee prescribed in § 12.01 of this chapter shall be paid to the Clerk to cover the cost of processing such registration. 
1.  The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Clerk as his agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant, in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. 
Upon payment of the fee and the signing of the registration statement, the clerk shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry. Sales may take place only within the time period permitted by a license; there shall be four license periods of thirty, sixty, ninety, and one hundred twenty days, respectively. The information submitted on the registration application shall be valid for the licensing period not to exceed one hundred twenty days, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in section 12.04(5) of this chapter, or forfeiture as provided in section 12.04(9). 
Applicants may only be permitted as a direct seller within the Town a maximum of 120 combined days within any calendar year. 
Applicants shall obtain a license to conduct sales activities and shall pay a licensing fee as follows: 
Period Cost 30 Days $ 50.00 60 Days $100.00 90 Days $150.00 120 Days $200.00  
(5)  INVESTIGATION. 
(a)  Upon receipt of each application, the Clerk may refer it immediately to the Code Enforcement Officer who may make and complete an investigation of the statement made in such investigation. (Am. #08-13) 
(b)  The Clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that: 
1.  The application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement. 
2.  Complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and towns, not exceeding 3, in which the applicant conducted similar business. 
3.  The applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last 5 years the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or 
4.  The applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of par. (4)(b). 
(6)  APPEAL. Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Town Board or, if none has been adopted, under the provisions of §§ 68.07 through 68.16, Wis. Stats. 
(7)  REGULATION OF DIRECT SELLERS. 
(a)  Prohibited Practices. 
1.  A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of their visit, their identity or the identity of the organization they represent. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the goods. 
2.  No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100' radius of the source. 
3.  No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he is conducting business. 
4.  No direct seller shall conduct sales in a period not specifically noted on the permit. 
5.  Connection of a vending unit to a public source of electricity, water or sewer is prohibited. 
(b)  Display. Definition: Display Size includes footprint area of any vehicle and any display that is outside of the vehicle footprint. 
1.  Display Size shall not exceed 300 square feet of area. 
2.  Any display shall not have more than one (1) vehicle. 
(c)  Location Regulations and Restrictions. 
1.  A direct seller shall be prohibited from calling or conducting business at: 
a.  Any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or words of similar meaning. 
b.  The rear door of any dwelling place, or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant, or other person having authority over such premises. 
2.  No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
3.  No permit issues under this chapter authorizes the holder to vend in any public park including driveways, parking areas, and public right-of-way within city parks. 
4.  Minimum Setbacks: 
a.  The direct seller's vehicle and/or display must maintain a minimum setback from any front or street side lot line a minimum of 25 feet. 
b.  The direct seller's vehicle and/or display must maintain a minimum setback from any side or rear lot line a minimum of 10 feet. 
c.  The direct seller's vehicle or display is prohibited from being placed within the required vision clearance triangle per RMMC Section 17.173 
(d)  Signage & Display Regulations. 
1.  Temporary signs used by sellers must comply with the provisions of chapter 17.217 of this code. 
2.  No direct seller shall allow any sign, display, merchandise, equipment or vehicle to obstruct the view of any driver on a public street or way. 
3.  No direct seller shall leave any sign, display, merchandise, equipment or vehicle overnight on any property without receiving prior authorization from the Town. 
(e)  Disclosure Requirements. 
1.  After the initial greeting, and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he offers to sell. 
2.  If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel such transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in §423.203(1)(a), (b), (c), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats. 
3.  If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, he shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
4.  Possession/Display of Permit. Direct sellers shall at all times when engaging in direct sales activities, have on their person and/or visibly displayed to the public, the permit issued pursuant to this section, as well as photo identification. Direct sellers shall show their permit to sell issued by the Town of Rib Mountain, as well as photo identification upon request. 
(8)  RECORDS. The Code Enforcement Officer shall report to the Clerk all convictions for violation of this provision and the Clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted. 
(9)  REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION. Registration may be revoked by the Town Board or issuing Town official if the registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales, violated any provision of this section or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct selling. 
12.05 - RESERVED . (Rep. #96-02) 
12.06 - CIGARETTES . 
(1)  LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall in any manner, directly or indirectly, manufacture, sell, exchange, dispose of or give away or keep for sale any cigarettes or cigarette papers or wrappers without first obtaining a license therefor from the Town Clerk in the manner provided in §134.65, Wis. Stats. This section shall not apply to jobbers or manufacturers doing interstate business with customers outside Wisconsin. 
(2)  FORM OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION; TRANSFER. All cigarette licenses shall be signed by the Town Clerk and indicate thereon the name of the licensee and the place where he is authorized to conduct the licensed business and shall expire on June 30th next succeeding the date of issue. 
Upon payment of a fee a license issued hereunder may be transferred from the licensee to another owner, but no license shall be transferable as to the location of the licensed premises. 
12.07 - REGULATION AND LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS . 
(1)  LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog or cat without complying with this section or keep any dog without complying with the provisions of §§174.05 through 174.10, Wis. Stats., relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of the same. 
(2)  DEFINITIONS. (Am. #13-04) In this section, unless the context or subject matter otherwise require: 
At large. A dog or cat off the premises of the owner and not under the control of some person either by leash or otherwise, but a dog or cat within an automobile of its owner or in an automobile of any other person with the consent of the dog's or cat's owner shall be deemed to be upon the owner's premises. 
Keeper of a kennel. (Rep. & recr. #00-04) The "keeper of a kennel" means any person owning, harboring or keeping either more than 3 dogs 5 months of age or 3 cats 5 months of age, or any combination thereof in all zoning districts except ER-1, CR-5ac, RA-1, RA-2, OR-35ac, or RR-35ac. In zoning districts designated as ER-1, CR-5ac, RA-1, RA-2, OR-35ac, or RR-35ac, the "keeper of a kennel" means any person owning, harboring or keeping either more than 6 dogs 5 months of age or 6 cats 5 months of age, or any combination thereof. 
Owner. Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog or a cat and the occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or to which it customarily returns daily for a period of 10 days is presumed to be harboring or keeping the dog or cat within the meaning of this section. 
(3)  RESTRICTIONS ON KEEPING OF DOGS AND CATS. No person within the Town shall own, harbor or keep any dog or cat which: 
(a)  Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway in the Town. 
(b)  Assaults or attacks any person. 
(c)  Is at large within the limits of the Town. 
(d)  Habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any person or persons. 
(e)  Kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal. 
(f)  Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or have been bitten by an animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
(4)  KENNEL LICENSE. (Am. #01-06) Any person being the keeper of a kennel shall be required to purchase annually from the Town Treasurer a kennel license at the time and in the manner provided by law for the payment of personal property taxes. No kennel license shall be issued unless the applicant is in compliance with all Town of Rib Mountain ordinances, including, but not limited to, Chapter 17 of the Rib Mountain Municipal Code. 
(5)  DUTY OF OWNER IN CASES OF DOG BITE. Every owner or person harboring or keeping a dog who knows that such dog has bitten any person shall immediately report such fact to the Health Officer and shall keep such dog confined for not less than 14 days or for such period of time as the Health Officer shall direct. The owner or keeper of any such dog shall surrender the dog to the Health Officer or any Town law enforcement officer upon demand for examination. 
(6)  IMPOUNDING OR KILLING OF DOGS OR CATS. In addition to any penalty provided for a violation of this section, any person may impound any dog or cat found to be at large within the Town and any law enforcement officer of the Town may kill any dog or cat at large which habitually pursues any vehicle upon any street, alley or highway of the Town, assaults or attacks any person, habitually barks or howls, kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal or is infected with rabies. Possession of dogs or cats impounded under this section may be obtained by paying the impoundment fee set by resolution of the Town Board for each day such animal has been impounded. Dogs or cats impounded for a period of 7 days may be destroyed in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 174, Wis. Stats. 
(7)  FEMALE ANIMALS IN SEASON. (Cr. #94-03) Any female dog or cat in season shall be kept confined in a building or secure kennel enclosure, veterinary hospital or boarding kennel during the duration of such season. 
(8)  EXERCISING ANIMALS. (Cr. #94-03) 
(a)  No person shall exercise or walk a dog on a leash more than 61 inches in length, except that no leash is required where the dog has such training that the person who is conducting the exercise shall be able to cause the dog, upon command, to heel. Evidence that such training is not present includes, but is not limited to, the dog touching other dogs, cats, animals or human beings after the order to heel or an equivalent command has been or should have been given. 
(b)  The owner or person having immediate care, custody or control of any animal shall promptly remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner, any excreta left or deposited by the animal upon any public or private property. 
(c)  No person shall permit an animal to be on public or private property not owned or possessed by him, unless such person has in his immediate possession an appropriate means of removing animal excreta. 
12.08 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS . 
(1)  LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall establish, operate or maintain a mobile home park in the Town without first obtaining a mobile home park license. Such license shall expire one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed for additional periods of one year. 
(2)  APPLICATION. Application for an initial or renewal mobile home park license shall be accompanied by the fee in §12.01 of this chapter and a surety bond of $1,000. Such bond shall guarantee the payment by the licensee of any sums owing to the Town as license fees or otherwise under any provisions of the ordinances of the Town and any forfeiture, including legal costs, imposed upon or levied against such licensee for a violation of the ordinances of the Town and such bond shall be for the use and benefit and may be prosecuted and recovery had thereon by any person who may be injured or damaged by reason of the licensee violating the provisions of this General Code. Application for a license or a renewal shall be made on forms furnished by the Town Clerk in conformity with §66.058(4), Wis. Stats., and shall include the name and address of the applicant and owner in fee of the tract (if the fee is vested in some person other than the applicant, a verified statement by that person that the applicant is authorized by him to construct or maintain the mobile home park and make the application) and such a legal description of the premises upon which the park is or will be located as will readily identify and definitely locate the premises. The application shall be accompanied by 2 permanent copies of the camp plan showing the following, either existing or as proposed: 
(a)  The extent and area used for camp purposes. 
(b)  Roadways and driveways. 
(c)  Location of units for mobile homes. 
(d)  Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets, washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of units. 
(e)  Method and plan of sewage disposal. 
(f)  Method and plan of garbage removal. 
(g)  Plan of water supply. 
(h)  Plan for electrical lighting of units. 
(3)  INSPECTION. Before such license may be issued the premises shall be inspected and approved by the Town Board as complying with all the provisions of Ch. HSS 177, Wis. Adm. Code, this section and all other applicable ordinances of the Town. 
(4)  RESTRICTIONS. Licenses issued under the terms of this section grant no right to erect any building or to do any plumbing or electrical work. 
(5)  ZONING. All mobile homes and mobile home parks shall comply with the provisions of §17.08(2) of this General Code. 
(6)  MONTHLY CHARGES. In addition to the annual license fee the licensee shall collect from each mobile home in the mobile home park the monthly fee as determined by §66.058, Wis. Stats., and shall remit such fees directly to the Town Treasurer. 
(7)  MANAGEMENT. In every mobile home park there shall be located the office of the person in charge of such park. A copy of the park license and of this section shall be posted therein and the park register shall at all times be kept in such office. The licensee shall: 
(a)  Keep a register of all guests to be open at all times to inspection by State and federal officers and officials of the Town in which shall be entered for each guest immediately upon arrival: 
1.  Names and addresses. 
2.  Dates of entrance and departure. 
3.  License numbers of all mobile homes and vehicles. 
4.  States issuing such licenses. 
5.  Purpose of stay in camp. 
6.  Place of last location and length of stay. 
(b)  Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
(c)  Insure that the provisions of this section are complied with and enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of this section or any other violation of law which may come to his attention. 
(d)  Report to the Health Officer all cases of persons or animals affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable disease. 
(e)  Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats or other animals or pets. 
(f)  Maintain in convenient places approved by the Fire Chief hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one 21/2 gallon water type extinguisher designed to resist freezing to each 8 units. 
(g)  Collect the monthly parking fee. A book shall be kept showing the names of the persons paying such fees and the amount paid. 
(h)  Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises. 
(8)  PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL AND BUILDING CODES. All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any mobile home park licensed under this section shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the Town and all State laws and regulations pertaining to such work. 
(9)  REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION. Any license granted under the provisions of this section shall be subject to revocation or suspension for cause by the Town Board upon complaint filed with the Clerk by any law enforcement officer, health officer or building inspector after a public hearing upon such complaint, provided that the holder of such license shall be given 10 days notice in writing of such hearing and he shall be entitled to appear and be heard as to why such license should not be revoked. An appeal may be taken from any order of the Town Board revoking or suspending such license as provided by §66.058, Wis. Stats. 
12.09 - PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SALES AND OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY . (Cr. #96-05) 
(1)  PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(a)  Outdoor sales of not more than 7 days or seasonal sales of garden and farm products of not longer than 7 days shall obtain a permit from the Town Chairman, or his designee. Temporary outdoor sales include, but are not limited to: seasonal garden shops, tent sales, and bratwurst stands. Garage and rummage sales of not more than 5 days are exempt from the permit requirement. 
(b)  Organized outdoor assemblies of more than 100 persons shall obtain a permit from the Town Chairman, or his designee. 
(2)  PERMIT CRITERIA. The Town Chairman, or his designee shall issue permits based on the following criteria: 
(a)  Display or temporary use shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular sight distances. 
(b)  If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, sales and displays shall be limited to daylight hours. 
(c)  The outdoor lighting system, if any, shall be designed so that no direct source of light is visible from the public right of way and so that no direct beam of light shall be cast upon adjacent lands. 
(d)  Fencing may be required for safety and security reasons. 
(e)  Hours of operation and duration of temporary outdoor sales shall be as specified in the permit. 
(f)  Adequate parking shall be provided. 
(g)  Consideration of possible substantial or undue adverse impact on adjacent property, character of neighborhood, or other matters affecting the public health, safety or general welfare, as contrasted with public benefits of the proposed use. 
(h)  Plan for restoration of site to original condition, and time for same. 
(i)  Outdoor assemblies shall have adequate drinking water and toilet facilities, and provision for crowd control, in addition to meeting (a) through (h) above. 
(3)  APPLICATION AND FEES. (Am. #09-07) Application shall be on forms approved by the Town Board and shall contain sufficient information for evaluation under subsection (2) above. The Town Board shall establish appropriate fees for all permits issued and such fees shall be approved in writing by Resolution of the Town Board. 
(4)  REVIEW. Denials of permits or objection to restrictions may be appealed by the applicant to the Town Board. 
12.10 - PENALTY . 
Except as otherwise provided, in addition to the suspension or revocation of any license issued under the provision of this chapter, any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or order promulgated hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in §25.04 of this General Code. 
12.12 - REGULATION AND LICENSING OF AMUSEMENT DEVICES . (Cr. #04-03; #04-07) 
(1)  DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Amusement device means any table, platform, mechanical device or apparatus operated or intended to be operated for amusement, pleasure, competition or sport, the use or operation of which is conditioned upon payment of a consideration either by insertion of a coin in a slot or by other means, and includes the types of such devices commonly known as baseball, football, basketball, hockey, shuffleboard, ray guns, bowling games, bumper games, skiball, billiard tables, pool tables, electronic video, or other similar amusement devices, except coin-operated music machines as defined in this section, and also excepting radios and television sets. 
(b)  Coin includes any token, slug, as well as coins minted by any sovereign government. 
(c)  Building, public or private , includes any tent, stand, roof, shelter, or other full or partial shelter. 
(d)  Coin-operated music machines means phonographs, compact discs, soundies and any other devices for the reproduction of music, sound or other audible entertainment operated by the insertion of a coin or by other means, whether or not the particular entertainment is selected mechanically, electronically, manually, or by an operator upon request, excepting radios and television sets. 
(2)  AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE. No person within the town shall operate or place or keep or have in his or her possession, under his or her control or on his or her premises for operation, any amusement device without having posted on the premises, in a conspicuous place, plainly visible to all persons, an unexpired license in such form and substance as shall have been issued by the clerk for the current year. Such license shall be issued by the clerk upon payment of the sum provided for in §12.01 for each amusement device operated on the premises. 
(3)  COIN-OPERATED MUSIC MACHINE LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE. No person shall operate or place or keep or have in his or her possession or under his or her control or on his or her premises for operation, any coin-operated music machine without having posted on the premises, in a conspicuous place, plainly visible to all persons, an unexpired license in such form and substance as shall have been issued by the clerk for the current year. Such license shall be issued by the clerk upon payment of the sum provided for in §12.01 for each coin-operated music machine operated on the premises. 
(4)  EXCEPTIONS. This chapter shall not be held to prohibit operations required by statutes or by order of any court. 
Chapter 14 - BUILDING CODE 
14.01 Permits; Fees; Inspections 14.02 Building Code 14.03 Electrical Code 14.04 Plumbing Code 14.05 Unsafe Buildings 14.06 Regulation and Licensing of Open Pit Mining 14.07 Holding Tanks 14.08 Permits for Moving Buildings 14.10 Penalty  

14.01 - PERMITS; FEES; INSPECTIONS . 
(1)  PERMIT REQUIRED. No building, plumbing or electrical work shall be performed and no building shall be moved into or within the Town unless a permit therefor is obtained as required in the provisions of this chapter. In addition to any penalty, failure to obtain the proper permit before commencing work shall result in double the applicable fee for each permit required. 
(2)  FEES. The fees required for construction, heating, ventilating and air conditioning, plumbing and electrical permits shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the Town Board and on file in the office of the Building Inspector. 
(3)  PERMIT LAPSES. A building, electrical or plumbing permit shall lapse and be void unless operations under the permit are commenced within 6 months from the date of issuance thereof. 
(4)  REVOCATION. If the Building Inspector shall find at any time that any ordinances, laws, orders, plans and specifications are not being complied with and that the holder of the permit refuses to conform after a written warning or instruction has been issued to him, he shall revoke the building, electrical or plumbing permit by written notice posted at the site of the work. When any such permit is revoked, no person shall do any further work thereunder until the permit is reissued, excepting such work as the Building Inspector may order to be done as a condition precedent to the reissuance of the permit or as he may require for the preservation of human life and safety or property. 
(5)  REPORT OF VIOLATIONS. All law enforcement officers shall report at once to the Building Inspector any building, electrical or plumbing work which is being carried on without a permit as required by ordinance. 
(6)  RECORDS. The Building Inspector shall keep a record in the Town Hall of all permits, fees and inspections and shall make an annual report thereon to the Town Board. 
14.02 - BUILDING CODE . 
(1)  PERMIT. 
(a)  Required . No building or any part thereof shall hereafter be erected within the Town or ground broken for the same except as hereafter provided until a permit therefor shall first have been obtained from the Building Inspector by the owner or his authorized agent. The term building as used in this section shall include any building or structure and any enlargement, alteration, heating or ventilating installation, moving or demolishing or anything affecting the fire hazards or safety of any building or structure. 
(aa)  Exception . (Cr. #96-01) To the extent reasonably practicable, conversion of lawful existing residential uses to permitted commercial uses shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to determine which requirements of this chapter may not be reasonably and practically enforced against such conversions. 
(b)  Application . Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the Building Inspector and shall state the name and address of the owner of the land and also the owner of the building, if different, and the legal description of the land upon which the building is to be located and shall contain such other information as the Building Inspector may require for effective enforcement of this section. 
(c)  Plans . With each application there shall be submitted two complete sets of plans and specifications, including a plot plan showing the location of the proposed building with respect to adjoining streets, alleys, lot lines and buildings. Plans for buildings required to comply with the State Building Code shall bear a stamp of approval from DILHR. Such plans and specifications shall be submitted in duplicate; one set shall be returned after approval as provided below; the other set shall remain on file in the office of the Town Clerk. All plans and specifications shall be signed by the designer. 
(d)  Waiver of Plans . If the Building Inspector finds that the character of the work is sufficiently described in the application, he may waive the filing of plans for alterations, repairs or moving provided the cost of such work does not exceed $2,000.00. 
(e)  Approval of Plans . If the Building Inspector determines that the proposed building will comply in every respect with all ordinances of the Town and all applicable laws and orders of the State, he shall officially approve and stamp one set of the plans and return it to the owner and shall issue a building permit therefor which shall be kept and displayed at the site of the proposed building. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect which involves any of the above-mentioned ordinances, laws and orders or the safety of the building or occupants, except with the written consent of the Building Inspector. 
(f)  Minor Repairs . (Rep. & recr. #96-01) The Building Inspector may authorize minor repairs or alterations which do not change the occupancy, area, structural strength, fire protection, exits, light or ventilation of the structure without issuing a building permit. A building permit is not required for maintenance, repair or replacement of roofing or siding, or similar work, if similar materials are used. 
(g)  Inspection of Work . The builder shall notify the Building Inspector when ready and the Building Inspector shall inspect all buildings upon completion of the foundation forms or before the foundation is laid and again when ready for lath and plaster or before paneling is applied. After completion he shall make a final inspection of all new buildings and alterations. 
(2)  ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ADOPTED. 
(a)  Buildings . 
1.  All new buildings, one-and two-family dwellings, alterations and additions, including repairs and maintenance, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
2.  The codes adopted by reference herein shall apply to all structural alterations and additions, as well as to all new construction in the Town. 
3.  All construction below grade shall have drain tile installed except if the soil is sandy gravel and the ground water and bedrock lie more than 7 below the undisturbed surface. 
4.  All buildings shall be constructed a minimum of 18 above the centerline of the highest road right-of-way adjoining the building site and the top of the lowest point of a basement, frost wall or slab. 
(b)  Building Permit Required . No person shall build or cause to be built any one-or two-family dwelling without first obtaining a State uniform building permit for such dwelling. Such building permit shall be furnished by the Town. A copy of such permit issued shall be filed with the Building Inspector. A permit shall be automatically revoked if the project set forth on the permit is not completed within two years from the date of issuance of the permit. 
(c)  Duties of Building Inspector . 
1.  The Building Inspector shall be responsible for plan approval and inspections under this subsection only where the State has not preempted jurisdiction. 
2.  The Building Inspector, as certified by the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. 
14.03 - ELECTRICAL CODE . 
(1)  STATE CODE APPLIES. All electrical work, including the placing of wires and other equipment, shall conform to the Wisconsin State Electrical Code, Volumes 1 and 2, and all amendments and revisions adopted to date, which are hereby made by reference a part of this section. 
(2)  PERMIT. No electric wiring or other equipment shall be installed or altered without first securing a permit therefor from the Building Inspector, except that repairs or replacements of broken or defective sockets, switches or base receptacle may be made without a permit. The application for such permit shall be on a form furnished by the Building Inspector and shall state clearly the work planned, alterations to be made and equipment and materials to be used and all later deviations from such plan must be submitted to and approved by the Building Inspector. Fees shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the Town Board. 
(3)  INSPECTION OF WORK. After roughing in the wiring of any building and before any such work is covered up or upon completion of any outside wiring construction work, the person doing such work shall notify the Building Inspector who shall at once inspect or cause to be inspected the same. Upon completion of such wiring, the Inspector shall be notified and shall inspect or cause to be inspected the finished work. If he finds that the work conforms to the State Electrical Code, he shall issue a certificate of compliance which shall contain the date and an outline of the result of such inspection, a duplicate of which shall be filed by location in the office of the Building Inspector. No person shall use any electrical equipment until such certificate has been issued. 
14.04 - PLUMBING CODE . 
(1)  STATE CODE APPLIES. The construction, reconstruction, installation and alteration of all plumbing, drainage and plumbing ventilation shall conform to the State Plumbing Code, Ch. 82, Wis. Adm. Code, which is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
(2)  PERMIT. No plumbing or drainage of any kind shall be installed or altered, except that leakage or stoppage repairs may be made, without first securing a permit therefor from the Building Inspector. The application for a permit shall be on a form furnished by the Building Inspector and shall state clearly the work planned, alterations to be made and equipment and materials to be used. All later deviations from such plan must be submitted to and approved by the Building Inspector. Fees shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the Town Board. 
(3)  INSPECTION OF WORK. Upon completion of the plumbing work on any premises, the person doing such work shall notify the Building Inspector before such work is covered up, and the Building Inspector shall at once inspect or cause to be inspected the work. If he finds that the work conforms to the State Plumbing Code, he shall issue a certificate of compliance which shall contain the date and an outline of the result of such inspection, a duplication of which shall be filed by location in the office of the Building Inspector. No person shall use or permit to be used any plumbing or drainage until it has been inspected and approved by the Building Inspector. 
14.05 - UNSAFE BUILDINGS . 
Whenever the Building Inspector finds any building or part thereof within the Town to be in his judgment so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, he shall order the owner to raze or remove such building or part thereof, or if it can be made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at the owner's option. Such order and proceedings shall be as provided in § 66.05(5), Wis. Stats. 
14.06 - REGULATION AND LICENSING OF OPEN PIT MINING . 
(1)  PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate an open pit mine for the purpose of extracting sand, gravel, granite or any other material or mineral in the Town without having first obtained a Town permit according to the provisions of this section and a county permit according to the provisions of the Marathon County Nonmetallic Mining Ordinance. 
(2)  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Applicants for a permit shall file with the Town Clerk a sworn application in such form as shall be required by the Clerk, which application must give the minimum following information: 
(a)  The name, address and residence of the applicant. 
(b)  The legal description of the operating or proposed open pit mine. 
(c)  The method of operation of such open pit mine. 
(d)  A statement that the operation complies or will comply with the terms of this section. 
(e)  A survey by a registered land surveyor of the property lines of the entire parcel owned or operated by the applicant, including proper corner monuments. 
(f)  Proposed and existing roads and the depth of all existing and proposed excavations. 
(3)  PERMIT FEE. The annual fee for the permit shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the Town Board and shall be paid to the Clerk with the application for a permit. If a permit is denied, the Clerk shall retain the fee to reimburse the Town for the cost of investigating the application. 
(4)  INVESTIGATION. 
(a)  Upon receipt of each application, the Town Clerk shall refer such application to the Town Board. 
(b)  The Town Board shall particularly consider the effect of the proposed operation upon existing streets, neighboring development, proposed land use, drainage, water supply, soil erosion, natural beauty, land value of the locality and shall also consider the practicability of the proposed restoration of the site. 
(c)  The Town Board shall issue or deny such permit within 60 days after receipt of each application by the Town Clerk. 
(d)  Issuance of a permit shall be granted upon the condition that the Town Board or its agent shall have reasonable access to the licensed premises to determine compliance with this section. 
(5)  MINIMUM OPERATION REQUIREMENTS. Open pit mines in the Town shall be operated in compliance with the following minimum requirements and with the requirements of the Marathon County Nonmetallic Mining Ordinance: 
(a)  Before abandonment of any working area, the pit sides shall be sloped to a 3 to 1 ratio. 
(b)  Before abandonment of any working area, the pit bottom shall be leveled, contoured or both. 
(c)  Before abandonment of any working area, the sloped pit sides and bottom of the pit shall be covered with a minimum of 2" of topsoil which shall sustain the growth of grass and trees. 
(d)  Open pit operations shall be abandoned by regular stages and when a part of the pit is no longer in use the pit walls shall be sloped, the bottom leveled and the topsoil replaced. 
(e)  If groundwater is reached during any excavation, a pond shall be created by continuing excavation to a minimum depth, after sloping, of 8' below the highest groundwater level. Ponds created by excavation shall have side slopes of not more than a 3 to 1 ratio. All ponds shall have an excavated minimum diameter of at least 75'. If groundwater is reached and a pond is not to be dug, backfilling shall be required to a point 2' above groundwater. 
(f)  There shall be no excavation within 200' of any existing public right-of-way nor within 30' of any property boundary lines. 
(g)  Garbage, scrap lumber, timber poles, logs, stumps, wrecked motor vehicles, or any part thereof, abandoned appliances or any other refuse of any type shall not be deposited on the site. 
(6)  TERM OF PERMIT, REISSUANCE. 
(a)  Any permit issued by the Town Board for the operation of an open pit mine shall expire on April 1 of the year following issuance. 
(b)  Each permit holder shall reapply to the Town Clerk for reissuance of the permit no earlier than November 1 and no later than February 1 for the following permit year. The Town Board shall establish appropriate fees for all permits issued and such fees shall be approved in writing by Resolution of the Town Board. Reissued permits shall be valid for a term of one year through the next March 31. In addition, the applicant shall pay all professional review fees including, but not limited to, professional planning, engineering, and legal review fees. The fees shall be submitted at the time of application and are nonrefundable. (Am. #09-06) 
(c)  The Town Board shall make such investigation of each application for reissuance of a permit as it deems necessary and shall not reissue such permit if the Town Board determines that the requirements of this section have not been met or that a public nuisance exists. 
(d)  The Town Board shall notify each person applying for reissuance of a permit that such permit will not be reissued by March 1. 
(e)  Upon sale or lease of all or any part of the premises, whether licensed or not, on which future mining may occur, the owner or lessee shall be in full compliance with provisions of this section affecting any currently licensed area, upon such sale or lease, and no license shall be issued to any subsequent owner or lessee for any part of the owned or leased premises, whether formerly licensed or not, until all provisions of this section have been met. 
(7)  AUTHORIZED VARIANCES. 
(a)  The Town Board, after a public hearing, may determine and vary the regulations of this section in harmony with their general purpose and intent in accordance with the standards prescribed below if it finds that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulation of this section. 
(b)  An application for a variance shall be filed in writing with the Town Clerk. The application shall contain such information as the Town Board may, by rule, require. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published as a Class I notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., and also by mailing notice to parties in interest. The Town Board shall thereafter reach its decision within 40 days from the filing of the application. 
(c)  The Town Board shall not vary the regulations of this section unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
1.  Because of the particular physical surroundings, slope or topographical condition of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of this section were to be carried out. 
2.  The conditions upon which a petition for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought. 
3.  The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property. 
4.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other adjoining property or improvements. 
5.  The granting of the variance will not endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values in the immediate area. 
6.  The Town Board may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards established by this subsection. 
(d)  Variances from the regulations of this section shall be granted by the Town Board in accordance with the standards established above and may be granted only in the following instances and no others: 
1.  To permit any setback less than required by this section if the adjoining property is zoned for mining and actively mined and the adjoining owner also seeks a variance from the setback requirements of this section. 
2.  To permit the pit bottom to be other than leveled or contoured completely because of specific hardships. 
3.  To permit covering other than with 2" of topsoil if erosion is permanently suppressed and growth of grass and trees can be sustained by other means. 
4.  To permit variations in the size and depth of created ponds because of specific hardships. 
5.  To permit variations in the size and depth of created ponds, but only if sloping is physically impossible. 
14.07 - HOLDING TANKS . 
(1)  STATEMENT OF POLICY. The Town does not encourage holding tanks as a permanent solution to sanitary disposal problems. Holding tanks are a temporary measure until a recognized and approved on-site disposal system or a public sewer system is available. Permits for on-site disposal systems other than septic systems are not now being issued by Marathon County for new construction, but may be approved in the future. The purpose of this section is to provide sufficient area for an alternate on-site disposal system for new construction when allowed by the State. 
(2)  RESIDENTIAL. 
(a)  Lot Size . The minimum lot size for a holding tank for new residential construction shall be as follows: 
1.  Single Family. 3 acres. 
2.  Multiple Family. 5 acres. 
3.  Sufficient area of the minimum lot shall be reserved upon which no structure or impervious area is constructed to allow the installation of an on-site disposal system when required to qualify for an alternate on-site disposal system and such larger lot size shall be required if necessary. 
(b)  Approval of Installation . No person shall install a holding tank for new residential construction in the Town without first taking the following steps: 
1.  A septic tank permit is or will be denied because of unsuitable soil, groundwater, rock or other physical condition. 
2.  Application for an alternate on-site disposal system permit is made: 
a.  If the lot does not meet the administrative and legal regulations of the State and county for an alternate on-site disposal system on the date of application, the Town will not enter into an agreement with the owner for a holding tank on the lot. 
b.  Provided the lot meets all administrative and legal regulations of the State and county for an alternate on-site disposal system on the date of application, including lot size which may be in excess of the minimum required in this section, the Town will enter into an agreement with the owner for a holding tank, if the owner agrees to comply with all requirements of this section, agrees to comply with all other requirements set by the Town Board from time to time and an alternate on-site disposal system permit is not issued. 
(3)  COMMERCIAL. 
(a)  Lot Size . The minimum lot size for a holding tank for new commercial construction shall be as follows: 
1.  Commercial use where estimated effluent does not exceed 200 gals. per day (per day effluent gallonage shall be determined by the Town): one acre. 
2.  All other commercial and industrial: determination by the Town on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)  Approval of Installation . No person shall install a holding tank for new commercial construction in the Town without the approval by the Town Board on a case by case basis. The criteria established by this section for a residential holding tank shall be applied by the Town Board for a commercial holding tank. 
(4)  PERMIT. 
(a)  A separate Town building permit for a holding tank shall be required prior to installation. The permit shall not be issued until all requirements of this section are met. 
(b)  A building permit shall be issued for new residential construction upon written evidence from the county that the lot qualifies for an alternate on-site disposal permit, pursuant to regulations then in effect. 
(c)  A building permit shall be issued for new commercial construction upon written evidence from a certified soil tester or certified plumber that the lot qualifies for an alternate on-site disposal permit pursuant to regulations then in effect. 
(5)  SIZE. Holding tank minimum size shall be as set forth in the State Plumbing Code. 
(6)  PERMIT FEE. (Rep. & recr. #92-01) The fee for the special building permit and the holding tank agreement shall be $50. 
(7)  INSPECTION. 
(a)  Issuance of a building permit for a holding tank by the Town shall give the Town or its agent the right to inspect any holding tank to determine compliance with this section, the agreement or any Town ordinance, county ordinance or State statute which is applicable. The inspection may be made with or without notice, except that such inspections shall be reasonably made. 
(b)  Inspections will be charged against the property owner in accordance with fees established by the Town Board. Inspection fees chargeable to the property owner shall not exceed 5 in any calendar year. Inspection fees shall be charged against the required cash bond deposit. 
(8)  SCOPE OF VIOLATIONS. Violations shall refer to use, disposal, construction and installation, maintenance and repair as set forth in applicable codes of the Town, county and State. 
(9)  VIOLATIONS. The Town or its agent shall notify the owner in writing or in person of any violation. Notice shall also be sent to the Marathon County Health Department. Enforcement of this section shall be conducted by the Town or its agents, the county or its agents or both. If an immediate health hazard is apparent, the tank shall be pumped immediately by the Town or its agent. 
(10)  PROOF OF COMPLIANCE. Upon request by the Town or its agent, the property owner shall furnish evidence of pumping of the holding tank as necessary. Satisfactory evidence shall be determined by the Town. 
(11)  INSTALLATION OF ALTERNATE SYSTEM. Property owner agrees to install the approved alternate system, when available and issuable under existing laws of the Town, county and State. Installation of the alternative system shall be completed within 6 months after a permit is or could be issued. 
14.08 - PERMITS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS . (Cr. #97-7) 
(1)  INTENT. The following regulations are adopted to minimize the impact of moving buildings within the Town of Rib Mountain. These regulations are intended to protect utilities, roads and other public and private lands from damage, limit the amount of traffic disruption resulting from moving buildings, and otherwise protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents and businesses in the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(2)  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  No existing building as defined in Chapter 17 of the Rib Mountain Municipal Code may be moved from one place or location to another within the town, or into the town, without first obtaining a "building moving permit". If any portion of a town road or county trunk highway will be used during the move, a "street privilege permit" must also be obtained. Ice fishing shanties and other buildings with less than 250 square feet of floor area, buildings hauled exclusively on State Trunk Highway 29 or US Highway 51, and buildings ordered to be moved by the town board, are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance. Moving a new manufactured dwelling or new manufactured home shall not be required a building moving permit; a street privilege permit, however, is required if a town road or county trunk highway will be used during the move. 
The fee for applying for a building moving permit shall be paid at the time an application is submitted and shall be as follows: 
Garages ..... $100.00 
Dwellings and other buildings ..... $300.00 
The fee for applying for a building street privilege permit shall be paid at the time an application is submitted and shall be per §8.06, Street Privilege Permit, of the Rib Mountain Municipal Code. (Am. #13-05) 
(b)  No building moving permit may be issued by the town board until it has reviewed the recommendation of the town plan commission and the town building inspector as provided in Subsection (4). 
(c)  Any person moving a building within or into the town as provided herein shall obtain a building permit only after both the building moving permit and street privilege permit have been approved by the town board. 
(d)  Moving a building out of the town shall only require a street privilege permit. 
(3)  BUILDING MOVING PERMIT APPLICATION. The Town of Rib Mountain requires a written application for a building moving permit in addition to an application for a street privilege permit as required in Subsection (8). The firm moving the building shall file full and complete information and a plan signed by a principal or other authorized person of the firm moving the building and signed by the owner of the building to be moved specifying the following: 
(a)  Type of building to be moved; 
(b)  A map and photographs showing the present location of the building to be moved; 
(c)  Exterior dimensions of the building to be moved; 
(d)  A map showing the place to which it is intended to move the building, a plot plan showing where the building will be located on the new site, and photographs of the new site where the building will be moved; 
(e)  Exterior elevations of the existing building and accurate photographs of all sides and views of the building, and in cases where it is proposed to alter the exterior of the building to be moved after it is moved, detailed plans and specifications showing any changes proposed to be made to the building after the move and a detailed schedule for accomplishing the alterations; 
(f)  The start date and time of the move; 
(g)  The expected date and time the move will be completed; 
(h)  A map showing the streets to be crossed and traversed in moving the building and the type and location where overhead wires and other utilities will need to be moved; 
(i)  The type of fencing that will be placed around the foundation at the site from which the building is moved; 
(j)  A schedule for filling the building foundation; and 
(k)  Any other information required by the town board to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(4)  PLAN COMMISSION AND BUILDING INSPECTOR REVIEW REQUIRED. 
(a)  The building inspector shall investigate the condition of the building proposed to be moved at the location from which it is to be moved, to determine if said building is in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of the building code if a moving permit is granted. Should any repairs, improvements or remodeling be contemplated or required with respect to said building, the building inspector may order that these alterations be made before the building is taken from the premises from which it is to be moved. 
Complete plans of all further repairs, improvements and remodeling with reference to such building shall be submitted to the building inspector who shall make a finding of fact as to whether the planned repairs, improvements and remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of the building code, and that when same are completed, the building as such will comply with said building code. The building inspector shall report said findings to the town board and the plan commission prior to issuance of a moving permit. 
(b)  Upon submission of a completed building moving permit application, the plan commission shall schedule a public hearing and shall publish a class I notice thereof in accordance with Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes. Such hearing may be adjourned for a reasonable length of time, and within 14 days after the close of the hearing, the plan commission shall make the recommendation required by this section. The town board may meet jointly with the plan commission to act on the moving permit and the street privilege permit, or it may reserve its decision for a separate meeting. 
(c)  The plan commission and building inspector shall review all of the application information required to be submitted, view the building or photographs of the building proposed to be moved and carefully examine its current exterior architectural appeal and the plans for any proposed building alterations. The plan commission and building inspector shall also view the proposed site or photographs of the proposed site where the building to be moved will be relocated. 
The exterior design and construction materials of the building to be moved or moved and altered shall be in close harmony with the exterior architectural appeal of the buildings already constructed or likely to be constructed in the immediate neighborhood where the building is proposed to be moved. 
In cases where the exterior of the building will be altered after the building is moved, the building owner shall submit with the application for a building moving permit complete plans and specifications for the proposed alterations and a detailed time schedule for completing the alterations. Before a permit is issued for a building to be moved and altered, the owner shall provide a financial surety to the town board which shall not be less than an amount needed for the town to remove the building from the site or to complete the proposed alterations if the applicant fails to do so. The amount of said financial surety shall be recommended to the town board by the building inspector. The financial surety shall be executed and administered in the manner provided in Section (7) hereto to the effect that the owner will within a time to be set by the town board, complete the proposed exterior alterations to said building in the manner set forth in the plans and specifications as submitted if a building moving permit is approved by the town board. This financial assurance shall be in addition to any other bond or surety which may be required by this and other town ordinances. 
No occupancy permit shall be issued for said building until the exterior alterations proposed to be made have been completed. 
(5)  DENIAL OF PERMIT. The town board may refuse to grant a building moving permit or a street privilege permit for any reason, if, in the judgment of the town board, damage to the streets, surrounding area, trees, wires, pipes, utilities or other facilities may result from the move or the building proposed to be moved will not be in close harmony with the exterior architectural appeal of the buildings already constructed or likely to be constructed in the immediate neighborhood where the building is proposed to be moved or if the move will otherwise be contrary to or jeopardize the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(6)  MOVING PERMIT SPECIFICS. If a building moving permit is granted, said permit shall specify the present location of the building, the location to which it is permitted to be moved, the streets to be traversed, the alterations to the building which shall be made after the building is moved, a detailed schedule for accomplishing the building alterations, a list and schedule of any other work deemed necessary and any other conditions imposed by the town board including the right to stop the moving operations if it becomes apparent that damage, with reasonable probability, will ensue if the operations are continued. 
(7)  FINANCIAL SURETY REQUIRED. A bond, certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit or a certified check shall be filed by the applicant or owner of the building with the town treasurer to insure that the work associated with moving a building, including the proposed alterations to the building after the move is completed, are in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted and are accomplished to the satisfaction of the town board and in accordance with the approved schedule and permit conditions. The amount of financial surety shall not be less than an amount needed for the town to remove the building from the site or to complete the proposed alterations if the applicant fails to do so. The amount of said financial surety shall be recommended to the town board by the building inspector. This surety shall constitute an agreement to comply with this ordinance and any conditions of granting a permit as established by the town board. 
Within 30 days following a written request by an applicant for release of the financial surety, the town building inspector shall report to the town board on the condition of the building and present a determination as to compliance with the permit conditions. The town board shall determine if the building alterations and other work has been accomplished and whether to release the funds. 
If the building alterations and other work, including placement of fencing and proper abandonment of the former foundation of the building, have not been completed in accordance with the schedule established in the building moving permit, the town board shall notify the applicant in writing that the town will undertake the repair work and other necessary action, including removal of the building from the site, and that the cost of said work shall be paid from the applicant's financial surety. 
The town board may also require an additional financial surety to be filed for a moving permit under such special conditions as the town board may prescribe. Any surety filed under this provision shall be returned to the applicant within 30 days following satisfactory completion of the work, as determined by the town board, for which the financial surety was provided. If the work is not accomplished within the time period specified in the moving permit the town board may undertake the repair work and other necessary action and the cost of said work shall be paid from the applicant's financial surety. 
(8)  BUILDING STREET PRIVILEGE PERMIT. 
(a)  Granting . Permits for the use of the streets, sidewalks, public ways or other public grounds of the town may be granted to applicants by the town board upon recommendation of the Public Works Committee for the purpose of moving any building. 
(b)  Financial Surety . Prior to issuing a permit, the town board shall determine the type and amount of financial surety required to insure that the conditions of the permit, as provided in subsection (c) are mot. If the conditions of the permit are not followed, the financial surety may be used by the town board to remedy any failure of the permit holder to comply with the conditions of the permit. The amount of any financial surety required shall be in the sole discretion of the town board. 
A bond, certificate of deposit, or revocable letter of credit or a certified check shall be filed by the applicant or owner with the town treasurer to insure that the work associated with moving a building is completed in accordance with the condition of the street privilege permit to the satisfaction of the town board. This surety shall constitute an agreement to comply with this ordinance and any conditions of granting a permit as established by the town board. Within 30 days following completion of building move, the town building inspector shall report to the town board on the condition of the streets and other public lands which were used to move the building. If these public areas have not been damaged by the move, the town board shall release the applicant's financial surety. If damage of any sore has resulted that has not been repaired to the satisfaction of the town board, the town board shall notify the applicant that the town will undertake the repair work and the cost of said repairs shall be paid from the applicant's financial surety. 
(c)  Conditions of Permit . The use of the public street and other public lands shall be as stated in the permit, and is subject to the following terms and conditions, including revocation without notice for violation thereof, by the building inspector: 
(1)  A temporary obstruction shall cover only that portion of the public street as set forth in of the permit. 
(2)  The obstruction shall be adequately barricaded and lighted so as to be in full view of the public from all directions. 
(3)  If sidewalk use by pedestrians is interrupted, temporary sidewalks, guarded by a fence or other structure, may be required during the period of occupancy. 
(4)  The movement of buildings shall be a continuous operation during all of the hours of the day, and day by day and at night, until such movement is fully completed. All of such operations shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street crossing or intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lighted warning flashers shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end the building during of the night. 
(5)  No building or structure shall remain overnight on any street-crossing or intersection or where it prevents access to any building by emergency vehicles. 
(6)  Buildings shall be moved only along the route approved by of the town board. 
(7)  Upon termination the work necessitating such obstruction, all parts of the public grounds occupied under of the permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish and obstructions; restored to a condition reasonably similar to that prior of the permittee's occupancy, but in all cases placed in a safe condition for use by of the public, at of the expense of the permittee. 
(8)  The town board may impose any other requirements as conditions of the permit as it deems necessary to protect of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(d)  Termination . All street privilege permits shall automatically terminate at the end of three months from the date of issuance unless some other date is specified thereon by of the town board. 
(9)  INSURANCE. In addition to any financial surety that may be required, the applicant or firm moving the building shall file a certificate of insurance of the policy limits of which shall be at least five hundred thousand dollars for each person, five hundred thousand dollars for each occurrence, and fine hundred thousand dollars for property damage. Insurance coverage shall include a one million dollar excess limit umbrella policy. 
14.10 - PENALTY . 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or order promulgated hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 25.04 of this General Code. In addition to any penalty imposed upon conviction, the Town may bring an action before a court of competent jurisdiction to seek equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Chapter 17 - ZONING ORDINANCE (Rep. & recr. #00-11) 
SUBCHAPTER 17-I. - INTRODUCTION 

Section 17.001 - Title. 
    This Chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the TOWN OF RIB MOUNTAIN ZONING ORDINANCE except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this Chapter". 
Section 17.002 - Authority. 
    This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Wisconsin Statutes including, but not limited to, §60.62 (Zoning authority if exercising village powers), §61.35 (Village planning), §62.23 (City planning), and §60.627 (Town construction site erosion control and storm water management zoning). The specific statutory references which are provided within the body of this Chapter are intended to assist the reader and should not to be considered as all inclusive and shall in no manner be construed so as to limit the application or interpretation of this Chapter. 
Section 17.003 - Legislative Intent. 
    In enacting this Chapter, special attention has been given to ensuring a direct relationship of these regulations to the Town of Rib Mountain's Comprehensive Master Plan. The general intent of this Chapter is to implement certain goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Master Plan which are best addressed through zoning approaches, as enabled by State of Wisconsin Statutes. 
Section 17.004 - Rationale and the Appearance of Ordinance Text. 
(1)  Rationale. Throughout this Chapter, paragraphs labeled "Rationale" are included to ensure a complete understanding of the purpose and reasoning of the Town in adopting that particular portion of this Chapter. Each Rationale is intended as an official statement of the legislative findings or purposes, and shall serve to guide the administrative and judicial interpretation of this Chapter. The specific rationale expressed in each Rationale section are not intended to be exhaustive, and other non-explicit rationale may also be applicable. These paragraphs have been legislatively adopted together with the more formal text of this Chapter and shall be treated in the same manner as other aspects of legislative history. 
(2)  Appearance of Ordinance Text. The underlined, boldfaced, italicized, alternative point-sized, and/or capitalized typefaces used in this Chapter are inserted only for convenience, and are in no way to be construed as part of the provisions of this Ordinance or as a limitation on the scope of the particular sections or subsections to which they refer. 
Section 17.005 - Purpose. 
(1)  The overall purpose of this Chapter is to implement the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan to the extent possible under zoning, as authorized by State of Wisconsin Statutes. 
(2)  This Chapter is designed to achieve the purposes of Town zoning as authorized by State Statutes. Specifically, the Town intends to: 
(a)  Regulate, restrict and determine: the areas within which agriculture, forestry, mining and recreation may be conducted; the location of roads, schools, trades and industries; the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of a lot which may be occupied; the size of yards, courts and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the location of buildings designed for specified uses; the trades, industries or purposes that may be engaged in or subject or regulation; and the uses for which buildings may not be erected or altered. 
(b)  Establish districts of such number, shape and area necessary to carry out the purposes under paragraph (a). 
(c)  Establish building setback lines. 
(d)  Regulate, restrict and determine the areas in or along natural watercourses, channels, streams and creeks in which trades and industries, filling or dumping, erection of structures and the location of buildings may be prohibited or restricted. 
(e)  Adopt an Official Zoning Map showing areas suited to carry out the purposes of this Section. 
(f)  Regulate, restrict and determine the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures and objects of natural growth in any area of the Town in the vicinity of an airport owned by the Town or privately owned, divide the territory into several areas and impose different restrictions on each area. 
(g)  Encourage the protection of groundwater resources. 
(h)  Provide for the preservation of burial sites as defined in §157.70(1), Wis. Stats. 
(3)  Specifically, this Chapter is adopted for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare by implementing certain goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Master Plan. Additional purposes of this Chapter are specified throughout this Chapter. 
Rationale: In developing the specific regulations of this Chapter, much effort has gone into balancing the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Master Plan. The current status of this Chapter and its components (including the Official Zoning Map) represents the cohesive result of carefully considered plan implementation practices. Amendments to these provisions and/or the Official Zoning Map shall seriously consider the effect of such changes on the interrelationships which exist within this Chapter, and between this document, the Comprehensive Master Plan, and related long-range planning policies and programs. (See Sections 17.222 and 17.223.) 
Section 17.006 - Separability and Non-Liability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Board that the several provisions of this Chapter are separable in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Chapter to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect any other provisions of this Chapter not specifically included in said judgement. 
(2)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any portion of this Chapter to a particular property, water, building, other structure, such judgement shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in said judgement. 
(3)  If any requirement or limitation which is attached to an authorization given under this Chapter is found invalid, it shall be presumed that the authorization would not have been granted without the requirement or limitation. 
(4)  The Town does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as flood plains will be subject to periodic inundation and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the Town Board, its agencies, or its employees for any flood damages, sanitation problems, or structural damages, upon reliance or conformance with this Chapter. 
Section 17.007 - Abrogation. 
    It is not intended that this Chapter abrogate or interfere with any constitutionally protected vested right. It is also not intended that this Chapter abrogate, repeal, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits (including conditions attached to zoning map amendments, Conditional Use Permits, Unified Developments, and other actions of the Town Board or Plan Commission specific to an individual property or project) previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. Rules pertaining to legal nonconforming uses, lots, and developments are presented subsequently in this Chapter. 
Section 17.008 - Application. 
(1)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare, and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Town and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(2)  Where property is affected by the regulations imposed by any provision of this Chapter and by other governmental regulations, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail. Regardless of any other provision of this Chapter, no land shall be developed or used, and no structure erected or maintained in violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(3)  No structure shall be constructed, erected, modified, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, altered, placed or maintained, and no land shall be used, modified, or maintained for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(4)  Except as provided in this Chapter, under provisions for Nonconforming Uses (Section 17.057), Nonconforming Developments (Section 17.077), Nonconforming Lots (Section 17.098), and Nonconforming Structures and Buildings (Section 17.099), no building, structure, development or premises shall be hereinafter used or occupied and no applicable permit granted that does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter. 
(5)  In cases of mixed-occupancy or mixed-use, the regulations for each land use shall apply to the portion of the structure or land so used. 
(6)  Except for outlots authorized under the Land Division Ordinance to contain permanently protected green space area, no yard or other open space shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building or structure on any other lot. 
Section 17.009 - Jurisdiction. 
    This Chapter is applicable to all territory located within the corporate limits of the Town of Rib Mountain. 
Section 17.010 - Re-enactment and Repeal. 
(1)  This Chapter, in part, carries forward by re-enactment some of the provisions of the regulations governing zoning and related matters, being previously known collectively as the "Zoning Ordinance", Chapter 17 of the Code of Ordinances for the Town of Rib Mountain, adopted prior to the effective date of this Chapter. It is not the intention of this Chapter to repeal, but rather to re-enact and continue in force such existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are preserved and may be enforced, unless explicitly surrendered by specific provisions of this Chapter or altered by the Official Zoning Map. 
(2)  All provisions of Chapter 17 of the Town of Rib Mountain Code of Ordinances which are not re-enacted herein are hereby repealed. 
(3)  The adoption of this Chapter shall not adversely affect the Town's right to prosecute any violation of the predecessor Zoning Ordinance provided the violation occurred while that Ordinance was in effect. 
Section 17.011 - Effective Date. 
    The initial effective date of the Re-Enactment of this Chapter is February 1, 1994. 
SUBCHAPTER 17-II. - DEFINITIONS AND CROSS REFERENCES 

Section 17.021 - Purpose of Subchapter 17-II. 
    The purpose of this Subchapter is to define words, terms and phrases contained in this Chapter which are essential to the understanding, administration and enforcement of this Chapter, and which are not part of common English usage. 
Section 17.022 - Word Usage. 
    The interpretation of this Chapter shall abide by the provisions and rules of this Section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise, or where the result would clearly be inconsistent with the manifest intent of this Chapter. 
(1)  Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms. 
(2)  Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number shall include the single number. 
(3)  The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(4)  The words "shall", "must" and "will" are mandatory. 
(5)  The words "may", "can" and "might" are permissive. 
(6)  The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, trusts, and any other similar entities. 
(7)  The word "Town" shall mean the Town of Rib Mountain, Wisconsin. 
(8)  The word "County" shall mean the County of Marathon, Wisconsin. 
(9)  The word "State" shall mean the State of Wisconsin. 
(10)  The word "Commission" shall mean the Town of Rib Mountain Plan Commission. 
(11)  The words "Board" and "Town Board" shall refer to the Town of Rib Mountain Town Board. 
(12)  If there is any ambiguity between the text of this Chapter and any caption, illustration, or table, the text shall control. 
Section 17.023 - Abbreviations. 
(1)  The following abbreviations used in this Chapter have the following meanings: 
ac acre CC Central Commercial (zoning district) CR-5ac Countryside Residential (zoning district) db decibel du dwelling unit EO Estate Office (zoning district) ER-1 Estate Residential (zoning district) FAR Floor Area Ratio ft foot GSA Gross Site Area GSR Green Space Ratio HI Heavy Industrial (zoning district) ISR Impervious Surface Ratio LSR Landscape Surface Ratio max maximum MBS Maximum Building Size MGD Maximum Gross Density min minimum MH Maximum Height MLA Maximum Lot Area MR-4 Mixed Residential (zoning district) MSA Minimum Site Area na not applicable NC Neighborhood Commercial (zoning district) NDA Net Developable Area nonres nonresidential RA-35ac Rural Agricultural (zoning district) res residential RPA Resource Protection Area SC Suburban Commercial (zoning district) SI Suburban Industrial (zoning district) SO Suburban Office (zoning district) SR-2 Suburban Residential-2 (zoning district) SR-3 Suburban Residential-3 (zoning district) sf square feet sq square st street UC Urban Commercial (zoning district) UI Urban Industrial (zoning district) UR-8 Urban Residential (zoning district) 8- eight or fewer 9+ nine or more 16+ sixteen or more #F number of floors  
Section 17.024 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, wherever they occur in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this Section. Definitions provided by this Section include: 
    Abutting: Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by an alley or easement. 
    Access: A means of vehicular approach, i.e., entry to or exit from a property, street or highway. 
    Access, secondary: A means of vehicular or non-vehicular approach, entry to, or exit from property from a source other than a public street or highway. 
    Access standards: See Section 17.172. 
    Acre: 43,560 square feet. 
    Accessory use or structure: A use or structure subordinate to, and serving, the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto. See Section 17.052(5). 
    Active outdoor public recreational (land use): See Section 17.056(3)(b). 
    Activity center: An area which is typified by a concentration of nonresidential and/or multi-family development. 
    Addition: Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter and/or height of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
    Adjacent: Abutting, or being located directly across a right-of-way from, a separate lot. 
    Agricultural district: See Section 17.035. 
    Agricultural land use(s): See Section 17.056(2). 
    Agricultural services (land use): See Section 17.056(2)(d). 
    Air pollution standards: See Section 17.180. 
    Airport (land use): See Section 17.056(6)(b). 
    Alley: A public right-of-way usually of reduced width which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Amendment of zoning regulations: See Section 17.222. 
    Amendment of official zoning map: See Section 17.223. 
    Animal unit: A measure which represents a common denominator for the purposed of defining a husbandry or intensive agricultural land use. The animal unit measure relates to the carrying capacity of one acre of land and is related to the amount of feed various species consume, and the amount of waste they produce. The following table indicates the maximum number of common farm species which comprise a single animal unit: 
ANIMAL UNIT TABLE Type of 
Livestock Maximum Number 
of Animals on 
One Acre of Land 
to Equal One 
Animal Unit Type of Livestock Maximum Number 
of Animals on 
One Acre of Land 
to Equal One 
Animal Unit Type of 
Livestock Maximum Number 
of Animals on 
One Acre of Land 
to Equal One 
Animal Unit Horse (> 2 yrs) 1.0 Calves (< 1 yr) 4.0 Lambs  14.0 Colt (< 2 yrs) 2.0 Brood Sow or Board 2.5 Chickens 200.0 Cattle (> 2 yrs) 1.0 Hogs (up to 220 lbs) 5.0 Other Poultry 200.0 Cattle (< 2 yrs) 2.0 Sheep 7.0 Source: The Stockman's Handbook  
    Apartment: See Section 17.093(18). 
    Appeal: A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination, order, or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this Chapter as expressly authorized by the provisions of Section 17.232. 
    Arterial: A street that has as its primary function the movement of a relatively high volume of traffic through the Town. It has as a secondary, limited function, the provision of access to abutting property. 
    Atrium house: See Section 17.093(14). 
    Attic: That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing. 
    Average ground elevation: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or structure. 
    Base flood: The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The 100-year flood as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Basement: A portion of a building located partly underground, but having one-half or more of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(l). 
    Bedroom: A room in a residence marketed, designed, or otherwise likely to function primarily for sleeping. 
    Blanket variance: A variance which is automatically granted by a provision of this Chapter in order to reduce the creation of legal nonconforming developments (see Section 17.077) or legal nonconforming residential structures. See Section 17.099(9). 
    Board of Zoning Appeals: See Section 17.254. 
    Boarding house (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(o). 
    Bufferyard: Any permitted combination of distance, vegetation, fencing and berming which results in a reduction of visual and other interaction with an adjoining property. See Subchapter 17-VIII. 
    Building: A structure built, maintained, or intended for use for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. The term is inclusive of any part thereof. Where independent units with separate entrances are divided by party walls, each unit is a building. 
    Building, accessory: A building which: 
(a)  Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal use; 
(b)  Is subordinate in area, extend, and purpose to the principal structure or use served; 
(c)  Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served except as otherwise expressly authorized by provisions of this Chapter; and 
(d)  Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. Any portion of a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory building. 
    Building front: That exterior wall of a building which faces the front lot line of the lot. 
    Building height: The vertical distance from: (1) the average elevation of the adjoining ground level or (2) the established grade, whichever is lower to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to a point of the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, to the mean distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof. Also applies to structures. See Section 17.097. 
    Building line: A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or road right-of-way line, located a sufficient distance therefrom to provide the minimum yards required by this Chapter. The building line determines the area in which buildings are permitted subject to all applicable provisions of this Chapter. This is also referred to as a "setback". 
    Building envelope: A component of a group development which conforms to the lot lines of developments which are not group developments, in that required minimum setback distances are measured from the building envelope line. Refer to Sections 17.058, 17.093, and 17.094. 
    Building, principal: A building in which is conducted, or in which is intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
    Building separation: The narrowest distance between 2 buildings. See Minimum Building Separation. 
    Building size: The total gross floor area of a building. See Maximum Building Size. 
    Bulk (of a building): The combination of building height, size, and location on a lot. See Subchapter 17-VI. 
    Bulkhead line: A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the Department of Natural Resources pursuant to §30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this ordinance. 
    Cafeteria, company (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(h). 
    Caliper: A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measurement 0.5 foot above natural grade. Used for trees in a nursery setting. 
    Campground (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(n). 
    Candlepower: The amount of light that will illuminate a surface one foot distant from a light source to an intensity of one footcandle. Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of candlepower emitted by any lamp, light source, or luminaire. 
    Canopy/tent accessory structures: Canopy or tent-like structures are typically a fabric or tarp like material stretched over a semi-rigid or rigid frame. It shall include rigid metal frames and siding, as well as inflatable structures. Said structures do not comply with the minimum design standards of Section 17.059, and are not permitted. (Cr. #2007-04) 
    Canopy tree: A tree that would occupy the upper canopy of a forest in a natural ecological situation. These trees are often referred to as shade trees. Examples include beech, hickory, oak, sassafras, maple, tulip tree, etc. See Section 17.150. 
    Caretaker's residence: A dwelling unit which is used exclusively by either the owner, manager, or operator of a principal permitted use and which is located on the same parcel as the principal use. 
    Carport (land use): An open sided, roofed vehicle shelter, usually formed by extension of the roof from the side of a building. See Section 17.056(8)(d) 
    Cellar: That portion of the building having more than one-half of the floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Central Commercial (CC) District: See Section 17.035(3)(f). 
    Certificate of Occupancy: See Section 17.229. 
    Clear cutting (land use): See Section 17.056(2)(g). 
    Clerestory window: A window in which the lowest glassed area is a minimum of 7 feet above the level of the floor located directly under the window. 
    Collector: A street which collects and carries traffic between arterial streets and local streets. It also provides access to abutting property. 
    Commercial animal boarding (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(j). 
    Commercial apartment (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(a). 
    Commercial district(s): See Section 17.032. 
    Commercial indoor lodging (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(k). 
    Commercial land use(s): See Section 17.056(4). 
    Commercial vehicle: Any motor vehicle used for business or institutional purposes or having painted thereon or affixed thereto a sign identifying a business or institution or a principal product or service of a business or institution. Agricultural equipment used as part of a permitted agricultural principal use shall not be considered as a commercial vehicle. 
    Communication tower (land use): See Section 17.056(7)(c). 
    Community character: The impression which an area makes in regard to the type, intensity, density, quality, appearance, and age of development. 
    Community living arrangement (land use): See Sections 17.056(3)(g) through (i). 
    Compact cluster development: See Section 17.056(1)(e). 
    Company provided on-site recreation (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(i). 
    Composting operation (land use): See Section 17.056(5)(f). 
    Comprehensive Master Plan: The Town of Rib Mountain Community Development Plan, adopted in December 1989 with amendments thereto. 
    Conditional use: A land use which requires a conditional use permit in order to develop. See Section 17.052(4). See Section 17.225 for applicable procedures. 
    Conforming structure: A structure which is located on a lot of adequate size and dimensions and in a location so as to meet the current terms of this Chapter. 
    Conforming use: A use of land or use of a structure, or both, which is permitted under the current terms of this Chapter. 
    Construction materials standards: See Section 17.188. 
    Construction, Start of: The installation of foundation footings and/or materials for road construction. 
    Contractor's on-site equipment storage (land use): See Section 17.056(9)(b). 
    Contractor's project office (land use): See Section 17.056(9)(a). 
    Countryside Residential (CR-5ac) District: See Section 17.035(2)(a). 
    Conventional residential development: See Section 17.056(1)(a). 
    Cultivation (land use): See Section 17.056(2)(a). 
    Day Care: See family day care home, intermediate day care home, or group day care center. 
    Deck: A structure that has no roof or walls. Can be attached or detached to the principle structure. If attached, it is required to have main supports and footings below grade by 48 inches and must be raised above grade and must comply with the principle setback requirements. If detached, shall be an accessory structure. 
    Dedication: The transfer of property interest from private to public ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of fee-simple interest or of a less than fee-simple interest, including an easement. 
    Density: A term used to describe the number of dwelling units per acre. 
    Detached energy system: Any detached energy system, such as wood or other solid fuel burners, liquid fuel burners, boilers or furnaces, windmills, or generators, associated with the production of useable heat or energy, which are not located within the primary structure, shall be considered as an accessory use, under Section 17.225, conditional uses. (Cr. #03-03) 
    Detailed site analysis map: See Section 17.120. 
    Developer: The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or parcel of any land proposed for inclusion in a development, including an optionee or contract purchaser. 
    Development: The division of a parcel of land into 2 or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any buildings or land; any extension of any use of land; or any clearing, grading, or other movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this Chapter. 
    Development option(s): The type of residential or nonresidential development as categorized by the proportion of the site devoted to permanently protected green space. See Section 17.074 for residential uses, and Section 17.075 for nonresidential uses. 
    Development pad: The area of a lot within a large lot residential development which is devoted to structures and septic systems. See Section 17.120(2)(d). 
    Direct access: A condition of immediate physical connection resulting from adjacency of a road or right-of-way abutting a property. 
    Disposal land use(s): See Section 17.056(5). 
    Distribution center (land use): See Section 17.056(6)(d). 
    Drainage: The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means. Drainage includes the control of runoff, to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development, and the means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding. 
    Drainage structure (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(n). 
    Drainageway: See Section 17.116(1). 
    Drainage standards: See Section 17.187. 
    Dripline: Outer perimeter edge of a tree canopy as transferred perpendicularly to ground level. 
    Drive-in theater (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(i). 
    Dryland access: A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land which is outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above the regional flood elevation and wide enough to accommodate wheeled vehicles. 
    Duplex: See Section 17.093(12). 
    Dwelling: A residential building or one or more portions thereof occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residence purpose, but not including habitations provided in nonresidential uses such as lodging uses and commercial campgrounds. 
    Dwelling, attached: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls. 
    Dwelling, detached: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
    Dwelling, single-family detached: A dwelling, including a manufactured home, designed for and occupied by not more than one family and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other dwelling unit. All single-family detached dwellings shall meet the minimum standards set forth in Section 17.059. 
    Dwelling unit: A room or group of rooms, providing or intended to provide living quarters for not more than one family. See Section 17.093(1)-(20). 
    Dwelling unit separation: The narrowest distance between 2 dwelling units. See Minimum dwelling unit separation. 
    Easement: Authorization by a property owner for another party to use for a specified purpose any designated part of his property. 
    Electromagnetic radiation standards: See Section 17.182. 
    Elevated Building: A non-basement building built to have its lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings columns (post and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
    Encroachment: Any fill, structure, building, use, or development in the floodway. 
    Environmental Control Facility: Any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce, or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air, or water pollutants, solid waste or thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities. 
    Equestrian development: See Section 17.056(1)(b). 
    Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, and/or gravity. 
    Essential Services: Facilities that are: 
(a)  Owned or maintained by public utility companies or public agencies, and; 
(b)  Located in public ways or in easements provided for the purpose, or on a customer's premises and not requiring a private right-of-way, and; 
(c)  Reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate water, sewer, gas, electric, communication, or similar services to adjacent customers, and; 
(d)  Not including any cross-country line on towers. 
    Estate Office (EO) District: See Section 17.035(3)(a). 
    Estate Residential (ER-1) District: See Section 17.035(2)(b). 
    Explosion standards: See Section 17.184. 
    Extraction use (land use): See Section 17.056(7)(d). 
    Family: An individual or 2 or more persons, each related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than 4 persons not so related, maintaining a common household. 
    Family day care home (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(u). 
    Farm residence (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(c). 
    Fees: See Section 17.255. 
    Fencing standards: See Section 17.190. 
    Filling (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(o). 
    Fire standards: See Section 17.184. 
    First habitable floor: The top surface above an unfinished basement,cellar or crawl space that is intended for living quarters. 
    Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas, as regulated by the County Zoning Department, caused by: 
(a)  The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
(b)  The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source; and 
(c)  The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
    Flood frequency: The probability of a flood occurrence as regulated by the County Zoning Department. A flood frequency is generally determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any given year. 
    Flood fringe: That area of the floodplain lying outside of the floodway but still lying within the 100-year floodplain, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the floodway area as "Zone A"., as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the flood fringe and floodway areas, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Flood insurance study: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Flood storage: Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Floodlands: For the purpose of this Code, the "floodlands" are all lands contained in the "regional flood." For the purpose of zoning regulation, the floodlands are divided into the floodway overlay district, the floodplain conservancy overlay district, and the floodplain fringe overlay district, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Floodplain: Those areas along streams or swales inundated by 100-year flood, comprised of the floodway and flood fringe areas, as designated on the FEMA flood insurance maps, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. See Section 17.113. 
    Floodplain fringe: Those floodlands, outside the floodway, subject to inundation by the regional flood. For the purpose of this Code, the floodplain fringe includes the floodplain conservancy overlay zoning district and floodplain fringe overlay zoning district, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Floodplain island: A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Floodproofing: Structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures subject to flooding which reduce or eliminate flood damages to a structure, and/or its contents, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas required to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building including all spaces, such as: balconies, mezzanines, basements and attached accessory buildings, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings, heating and utility rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space. Measurements shall be made from the outside of the exterior walls and to the center of interior walls. (Am. #2007-03) 
    Floor area ratio (FAR): The ratio calculated by dividing the total floor area of all buildings on a site by the gross site area. See Maximum floor area ratio. In one-family and two-family dwellings, the floor area ratio shall be the lot coverage ratio. See also the Key to Table 17.075, and Section 17.093(1)-(20). (Am. #2007-03) 
    Footcandle: A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one foot from a uniform point source of one candle. 
    Freeboard: Represents a factor of safety usually expressed in terms of a certain amount of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated. These unknown factors may include, but are not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed, loss of flood storage areas due to development and the sedimentation of a river or stream bed. 
    Freight terminal (land use): See Section 17.056(6)(c). 
    Garage (residential): A detached accessory building or portion of the principal building which is used primarily for storing passenger vehicles, trailers or one truck of a rated capacity not in excess of 10,000 pounds. See Section 17.056(8)(d). 
    Gas station: See in-vehicle sales or service. 
    General floor plans: A graphic representation of the anticipated utilization of the floor area within a building or structure, but not necessarily as detailed as construction plans. 
    General temporary outdoor sales (land use): See Section 17.056(9)(e). 
    Glare: The brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort. 
    Glare standards: See Section 17.183. 
    Green space ratio (GSR): The percentage of the gross site area which is preserved as permanently protected green space. Green space ratio is calculated by dividing the area of permanently protected green space by the gross site area. See Minimum green space ratio. See also, the Key to Table 17.074. 
    Gross density: The result of dividing the number of dwelling units located on a site by the gross site area. See Maximum gross density. See also, the Key to Table 17.074. 
    Gross floor area: The total floor area of a building. 
    Gross site area (GSA): The total area of a site available for inclusion in calculations of the maximum permitted density or intensity of development, as determined by the calculation contained in Section 17.073(3)(a). See minimum site area. See also, the Key to Table 17.074. 
    Group day care center (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(m). 
    Group development: See Section 17.058. 
    Habitable buildings: Any building, or portion thereof used for human habitation. 
    Heat standards: See Section 17.183. 
    Hearing Notice: Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Ch. 985, Stats. Class 1 notice is the minimum required for appeals: Published once at least one week (7 days) before hearing. Class 2 notice is the minimum required for all zoning ordinances and amendments including map amendments: published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (7 days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums. 
    Heavy industrial (land use): See Section 17.056(7)(b). 
    Heavy Industrial (HI) District: See Section 17.035(3)(h). 
    Height of structure: See Building Height. 
    Heliport (land use): See Section 17.056(6)(b). 
    High flood damage potential: Any danger to human life or public health or the potential for any significant economic loss to a structure or its contents, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Holding zone: A zoning district designed to limit development potential until adequate public services and infrastructure are provided. 
    Home occupation (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(s). 
    Husbandry (land use): See Section 17.056(2)(b). 
    Husbandry, high density: Husbandry land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals at an intensity of more than one animal unit per acre, and 500 or more animal units total. This type of facility requires livestock facility licensing in accordance with Marathon County licensing regulations. (Cr. #09-05) 
    Husbandry, low density: Husbandry land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals at an intensity of less than one animal unit per acre, and less than 500 animal units total. (Cr. #09-05) 
    Increase in regional flood height: A calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal or greater than 0.01 foot, resulting in comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Indoor commercial entertainment (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(h). 
    Indoor institutional (land use): See Section 17.056(3)(c). 
    Indoor maintenance service (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(e). 
    Indoor sales (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(c). 
    Indoor sales accessory to light industrial use (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(m). 
    Indoor service (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(c). 
    Indoor storage (land use): See Section 17.056(5)(a). 
    Indoor wholesaling (land use): See Section 17.056(5)(a). 
    Industrial district(s): See Section 17.032. 
    Industrial land use(s): See Section 17.056(7). 
    Infill development: Development located in areas which are for the most part developed already. 
    Institutional land use(s): See Section 17.056(3). 
    Institutional residential development: See Section 17.056(1)(f). 
    Institutional residential unit: See Section 17.093(19). 
    Intensity: A term used to describe the amount of gross floor area or landscaped area, on a lot or site, compared to the gross area of the lot or site. 
    Intensive agriculture: See Section 17.056(2)(c). Description: Intensive agricultural land uses include all operations primarily orientated to the on-site raising and/or use of animals at an intensity equal to or exceeding one animal unit (as defined in Section 17.024) per acre and/or agricultural activities requiring large investments in structures. (Am. #09-05) 
    Interpretation: See Section 17.231. See also, Section 17.252(2)(n) for applicable procedures. 
    In-vehicle sales (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(g). 
    In-vehicle sales as accessory use (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(k). 
    In-vehicle service (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(g). 
    In-vehicle service as accessory use (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(k). 
    Junkyard (land use): See Section 17.056(5)(d). 
    Lakeshore: Those lands lying within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream; or to a landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is the greater, as regulated by the County Zoning Department per §144.26, Wis. Stats. Lakeshores shall not include those lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches where (a) such lands are not adjacent to a navigable stream or river; (b) those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching or had no previous stream history; and (c) such lands are maintained in non-structural agricultural use. See Section 17.115(1). 
    Landscape point: See Section 17.143. 
    Landscaped area: The area of a site which is planted and continually maintained in vegetation, including grasses, flowers, herbs, garden plants, native or introduced groundcovers, shrubs, bushes, and trees. Landscaped area includes the area located within planted and continually maintained landscaped planters. 
    Landscape surface area ratio (LSR): The percentage of the gross site area or lot area which is preserved as permanently protected landscaped area. See the Key to Table 17.075 and Section 17.093. 
    Land use: The type of development and/or activity occurring on a piece of property. 
    Lawn care (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(p). 
    Light industrial (land use): See Section 17.056(7)(a). 
    Light industrial incidental to indoor sales: See Section 17.056(8)(m). 
    Lighting standards: See Section 17.177. 
    Livestock facility: A feedlot, dairy farm, or other operation where livestock are or will be fed, confined, maintained or stabled of a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period. (See ATCP 51 WAC.) (Cr. #09-05) 
    Loading standards: See Section 17.175. 
    Local residential street: A street used primarily for access to abutting residential properties. 
    Loose cluster development: See Section 17.056(1)(c). 
    Lot: A parcel of land that: 
(a)  Is undivided by any street or private road; 
(b)  Is occupied by, or designated to be developed for, one building or principal use; and 
(c)  Contains the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to such building, use, or development, including such open spaces and yards as designed and arranged or required by this Chapter for such building, use, or development. 
    Lot area: The area contained within the property boundaries of a recorded lot. See minimum lot area. See also, Key to Table 17.074 and Key to Table 17.075. 
    Lot corner: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on 2 or more intersection streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage ratio (LCR): The ratio calculated by dividing the total ground area (footprint) of all buildings on a site, by the gross site area. In this ordinance, it is used in lieu of a floor area ratio for one-family and two-family dwellings. (Cr. #2007-03) 
    Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot. 
    Lot frontage: Lot width measured at the street lot line. When a lot has more than one street lot line, lot width shall be measured, and the minimum lot width required by this Chapter shall be provided at each such line. 
    Lot interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line: A lot line is the property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this Chapter. 
    Lot line, front: A lot line which abuts a public or private street right-of-way. In the case of a lot which has 2 or more street frontages, the lot line along the street from which the house is addressed shall be the front lot line. 
    Lot line house: See Section 17.093(10). 
    Lot line, rear: In the case of rectangular or most trapezoidal shaped lots, that lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of lots which have frontage on more than one road or street, the rear lot line shall be opposite the lot line along which the lot takes access to a street. 
    Lot line, side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line, a street side lot line, or a rear lot line. 
    Lot line, street side: Any lot line which abuts a public or private street right-of-way which is not the front lot line. 
    Lot of record: A platted lot or lot described in a certified survey map or metes and bounds description which has been approved by the Town or by Marathon County; and has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds. 
    Lot, through: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting 2 substantially parallel streets (one or more of which may be a portion of a cul-de-sac). Except for through lots which abut an arterial or nonresidential collector street, through lots shall be prohibited under the provisions of this Chapter. 
    Lot width: The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured parallel to the front lot line and at the rear of the required front yard. See minimum lot width. 
    Lowest floor: The lowest enclosed floor (including basement). Any unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosed area is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter. 
    Maintenance guarantee: A guarantee of facilities or work to either ensure the correction of any failures of any improvements required pursuant to this Chapter or to maintain same. 
    Manufactured Home: A structure certified and labeled as a manufactured home under 42 U.S.C. sections 5401 to 5426, which, when placed on the site: 
a.  Is set on an enclosed foundation in accordance with § 70.043(1), Wis. Stats., and Subchs. III, IV and V of Ch. ILHR 21, Wis. Adm. Code, or is set on a comparable enclosed foundation system approved by the building inspector. The building inspector may require a foundation plan to be certified by a registered architect or engineer to ensure proper support for the home. 
b.  Is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
c.  Is properly connected to utilities. 
    Master Plan: A plan, map, report, or other document pertaining to the physical development of the Town which has been adopted by the Town Plan Commission. 
    Maximum building size (MBS): The largest permitted total gross floor area a building may contain. See building size. See also, the Key to Table 17.075. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): The largest amount of floor area permitted on a site. See floor area ratio. See also the Key to Table 17.075 and Section 17.093. 
    Maximum gross density (MGD): The maximum number of dwelling units permitted per acre of Gross Site Area. See gross density. See also the Key to Table 17.074. 
    Maximum height: The maximum height of the highest portion of any structure. See height. See also Sections 17.093 and 17.094. 
    Maximum number of floors: See the Key to Table 17.075. 
    Migrant labor camp (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(v). 
    Minimum building separation: The narrowest permitted building separation. See building separation. 
    Minimum dwelling unit separation: The narrowest permitted dwelling unit separation. See dwelling unit separation. See also, Section 17.093. 
    Minimum floor elevation: The lowest elevation permissible for the construction, erection, or other placement of any floor, including a basement floor. 
    Minimum green space ratio (GSR): The lowest permitted green space ratio. See green space ratio. See also, Section 17.074. 
    Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): The lowest permitted landscape surface ratio. See landscape surface ratio. See also, Sections 17.075 and 17.093. 
    Minimum lot area (MLA): The minimum size lot permitted within the specified zoning district and development option. See also the Keys to Tables 17.074 and 17.075. 
    Minimum lot width: The smallest permissible lot width for the applicable dwelling unit type (Section 17.093) or nonresidential development option (Table 17.094). See also, lot width. 
    Minimum setback: The narrowest distance permitted from a street, side, or rear property line to a structure. See Sections 17.093 and 17.094. 
    Minimum site area (MSA): The minimum gross site area in which the specified development option may occur. See gross site area (GSA). See also the Key to Table 17.074. 
    Mini-warehouse: See Section 17.056(5)(c). 
    Mixed Residential (MR-4) District: See Section 17.035(2)(e). 
    Mobile home: A vehicle manufactured or assembled before June 15, 1976, designed to be towed as a single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and equipped and used, or intended to be used, primarily for human habitation, with fixed ridged walls, which has an overall length in excess of 45 feet (Section 17.093(20)). 
    Mobile Home Residential Development: See Section 17.056(1)(g). 
    Mobile Home Park Residential Development: See Section 17.056(1)(h). 
    Mobile home park: See Section 17.056(1)(h). 
    Mobile home sales: See Sections 17.056(4)(d). 
    Moderate cluster development: See Section 17.056(1)(d). 
    Motel, Motor Court, Hotel: See commercial indoor lodging. 
    Motor freight terminal: See freight terminal. 
    Multiplex: See Section 17.093(17). 
    Natural resource protection overlay zoning districts: Zoning districts which primarily identify and regulate the disturbance of areas containing protected natural resources. See Sections 17.036 and 17.037. (See overlay zoning districts.) 
    Natural resources site evaluation: See Section 17.073. 
    Navigable water: Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within Wisconsin, and all rivers, streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages, and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state, as regulated by the County Zoning Department per Wisconsin Statutes. The Wisconsin Supreme Court has declared navigable all bodies of water with a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and with levels of flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis. [Muench v. Public Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952), and DeGaynor and Co., Inc. v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)] For the purposes of this Ordinance, rivers and streams will be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps until such time that the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has made a determination that the waterway is not, in fact, navigable. 
    Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District: See Section 17.035(3)(c). 
    Net developable area (NDA): The area of a site which may be disturbed by development activity. Net Developable Area is calculated in Section 17.073(3)(c), and is the result of subtracting Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) from the Gross Site Area (GSA). 
    Noise standards: See Section 17.179. 
    Nonconforming development: A lawful development approved under provisions preceding the effective date of this Chapter, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the development were to be created under the current provisions of this Chapter. See Section 17.077. 
    Nonconforming lot: A lot of record which lawfully existed prior to this Chapter, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the lot were to be created under the current provisions of this Chapter. See Section 17.098. 
    Nonconforming structure: Any building, or other structure, which is lawfully existing under provisions preceding this Chapter, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the building or structure were to be erected under the provisions of this Chapter. See Section 17.099. 
    Nonconforming use: See Section 17.057(1). 
    Nonresidential collector street: A collector street serving primarily nonresidential land uses. 
    Nonresidential district(s): See Section 17.032. 
    Nonresidential land use(s): See Section 17.056(2)-(7). 
    Noxious matter or materials: Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals. 
    Noxious materials standards: See Section 17.185. 
    Odor standards: See Section 17.181. 
    Obstruction to flow: Any development which physically blocks the conveyance of any natural watercourse such that this development by itself or in conjunction with any future similar development will cause an obstruction to flow per §88.90, Wis. Stats. 
    Office (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(a). 
    Office district: See Section 17.032. 
    Official map: The map adopted by the Town Board which indicates the existing and proposed location of streets, highways, parks, playgrounds, roads, rights-of-way, waterways, public transit facilities and other public facilities as authorized by State Statutes. 
    Official zoning map: See Sections 17.033, 17.034, 17.037, and Appendix A. 
    Off-site parking lot (land use): See Section 17.056(6)(a). 
    On-site: Located on the lot in question, except in the context of on-site detention, when the term means within the boundaries of the development site as a whole. 
    On-site agricultural retail (land use): See Section 17.056(2)(e). 
    On-site composting (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(t). 
    On-site parking lot (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(b). 
    On-site real estate sales office (land use): See Section 17.056(9)(d). 
    Opacity: The degree to which vision is blocked by bufferyard. Opacity is the proportion of a bufferyard's vertical plane which obstructs views into an adjoining property. 
    Open sales lot: An unenclosed portion of a lot or lot of record where goods are displayed for sale, rent or trade. 
    Ordinary high water mark: The point on the bank or shore of a body of water up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristics. 
    Other permanently protected green space: Permanently protected green space areas which are not constrained by one of the protected natural resources under Subchapter 17-VII. Examples include portions of private lots, outlots, or parcels commonly held by a property owners' association (as in a cluster development) which are deed restricted from site disruption. 
    Outdoor assembly (land use): See Section 17.056(9)(g). 
    Outdoor commercial entertainment (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(i). 
    Outdoor display (land use): See Sections 17.056(4)(d). 
    Outdoor display incidental to indoor sales (land use): See Sections 17.056(8)(j)-(k). 
    Outdoor institutional (land use): See Section 17.056(3)(d). 
    Outdoor maintenance service (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(f). 
    Outdoor storage (land use): See Section 17.056(5)(b). 
    Outdoor wholesaling (land use): See Section 17.056(5)(b). 
    Overlay zoning district: A zoning district which imposes uniform restrictions on all properties within its area which are in addition to the restrictions specific to the standard zoning districts described in Section 17.032, as well as the general restrictions of this Chapter. See Sections 17.036, 17.037, and Subchapter 17-VII. 
    Owner: The person or persons having the right of legal title to a lot or parcel of land. 
    Pad, Development: See Development pad. 
    Parcel: The area within the boundary lines of a lot. 
    Parking standards: See Section 17.174. 
    Parking lot design standards: See Section 17.174(6)(j). 
    Parking requirements: See Sections 17.174(7)(c) and 17.056. 
    Parking space design standards: See Section 17.174(6)(h). 
    Passive outdoor public recreational (land use): See Section 17.056(3)(a). 
    Penalty: See Section 17.256. 
    Performance guarantee: A financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by this Chapter will be completed in compliance with the Chapter, regulations and the approved plans and specifications of a development. 
    Performance standard: Criterion established to control and limit the impacts generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. See Subchapter 17-IX. 
    Peripheral setback: The distance between a structure and the boundary of a development option. See Section 17.093. 
    Permanently protected green space: An area in which site disruption and/or development is strictly limited. See Section 17.054. 
    Permitted by right, use: See Section 17.052(2). 
    Personal service(s) (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(b). 
    Personal storage facility (land use): See Section 17.056(5)(c). 
    Plan Commission: The Plan Commission of the Town of Rib Mountain. See Section 17.253. 
    Plant unit: Reserved. 
    Prairie: Reserved. 
    Principal building: See Building, principal. 
    Principal use: Any and all of the primary uses of a property, treated as a use permitted by right, as a special use, or as a conditional use (rather than as an accessory use or a temporary use) per Section 17.056(1)-(7). 
    Private Residential Stable: (land use) See Section 17.056(8)(g). 
    Private Sewage System: A sewage treatment and disposal system serving a single structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure, as regulated by the County Zoning Department. This term also means an alternative sewage system approved by the Department of Industry, Labor, and Human Relations (DILHR) including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure, or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
    Professional service(s) (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(b). 
    Protected natural resources: Resources such as floodways, floodway fringes, floodplain conservancy areas, wetlands, drainageways, woodlands, steep slopes, and lakeshores, which are protected by the provisions of this Ordinance. See Section 17.036 and Subchapter 17-VII. 
    Public improvement: Any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to provide for public needs such as: streets, roads, alleys or pedestrian walks or paths, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility and energy services. 
    Public services and utilities (land use): See Section 17.056(3)(e). 
    Public sewer: Includes the Town of Rib Mountain sewer system and other forms of sewer systems approved by the State Department of Natural Resources and maintained by a public agency authorized to operate such systems. 
    Recorded lot: See Lot of record. 
    Relocatable building (land use): See Section 17.056(9)(c). 
    Required resource protection area (RPA): The area of a site which may not be disturbed by development activity and which must also be reserved as permanently protected green space. Required resource protection area is calculated in Section 17.073(3)(b), and is the result of subtracting the net developable area (NDA) from the gross site area (GSA). 
    Residential collector street: A collector street serving primarily residential land uses. 
    Residential district(s): See Section 17.032. 
    Residential kennel, private (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(f). 
    Residential stable, private (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(g). 
    Residential land use(s): See Section 17.056(1). 
    Residential recreational facility, private (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(e). 
    Residentially zoned: A property located in a residential district per Section 17.032. 
    Restrictive, more (less): A regulation imposed by this Chapter is more (less) restrictive than another if it prohibits or limits development to a greater (lesser) extent or by means of more (less) detailed specifications. 
    Restaurant: See indoor commercial entertainment. 
    Restaurant, fast food: See in-vehicle sales and service. 
    Reserved. 
    Rural Agricultural (RA) District: See Section 17.035(1)(a). 
    Salvage yard (land use): See Section 17.056(5)(d). 
    Scale (of development): A term used to describe the gross floor area, height, or volume of a single structure or group of structures. 
    Seasonal outdoor sales of farm products (land use): See Section 17.056(9)(f). 
    Sedimentation: The deposition of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a result of erosion. 
    Selective cutting (land use): See Section 17.056(2)(f). 
    Septic disposal system, individual (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(q), as regulated by the County Zoning Department. 
    Setback: The shortest distance between a building's or structure's exterior from the nearest point on the referenced lot line. See minimum setback. 
    Sexually-oriented use (land use): See Section 17.056(4)(p). 
    Shopping center: See group development. 
    Shrub: A low-lying deciduous or evergreen plant. Section 17.150. 
    Sign: See Section 17.213. See also, Section 17.227 for applicable procedures. 
    Single-family detached dwelling: See Dwelling, Single-Family Detached. 
    Site area: See Gross site area. 
    Site plan: See Section 17.228. See also, Section 17.228 for applicable procedures. 
    Skylight: A window or other paned area located on the ceiling or roof of a structure. 
    Solid fence: Any fence which cannot be seen through. Such fences include basketweave fences, stockade fences, plank fences, and similar fences. 
    Special use: A land use which must be developed per a set of requirements specifically applying to that use. See Section 17.052(3). See also Section 17.224 for applicable procedures. 
    Standard zoning districts: Zoning districts which primarily regulate the use of land,and intensity or density of such use. See Sections 17.032, 17.033, and 17.035. 
    Stable, commercial: See commercial animal boarding. 
    Stable, private: See private residential stable. 
    Standard Industrial Classification code (SIC): The numeric code for categorizing land uses developed by the US Department of Commerce. SIC codes in this Chapter are based on the listing contained within the 1987 manual. 
    Start of Construction: The date the building permit is issued, provided the actual start of activity was within 730 calendar days of the permit date. The actual start of activity means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on the site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, or the construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations; nor does it include the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or shed not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. 
    Steep Slope: See Section 17.118(1). 
    Storage land use(s): See Section 17.176. 
    Storage standards: See Section 17.176. 
    Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above; or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Neither a basement nor a cellar shall be counted as a story. 
    Street: Any public or private way dedicated or permanently open to pedestrian and vehicular use which is 22 feet or more in width if it exists at the time of enactment of this Chapter; and any such public right-of-way 66 feet in width when established after the effective date of this Chapter. 
    Street Line: See Lot line, front. 
    Strip development: A pattern of land uses typified by nonresidential and/or multi-family development located along one or both sides of a street which is generally only one lot deep and which is characterized by many curb cuts, low green space ratios, low landscape surface ratios, high floor area ratios, and/or low quantities of landscaping. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, excepting public utility fixtures and appurtenances. 
    Substantial improvement: Any structural repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the present assessed value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include either: 
(a)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; and 
(b)  Any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the Wisconsin State Historical Society, or listed on the National Register of Historic Places. 
Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications or additions. Such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other non-structural components. (For purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.) 
    Suburban Commercial (SC) District: See Section 17.035(3)(d). 
    Suburban Industrial (SI) District: See Section 17.035(3)(g). 
    Suburban Residential (SR-2) District: See Section 17.035(2)(c). 
    Suburban Residential (SR-3) District: See Section 17.035(2)(d). 
    Suburban Office (SO) District: See Section 17.035(3)(b). 
    Swale: A linear depression in land running downhill or having a marked change in contour direction in which sheet runoff would collect and form a temporary watercourse. 
    Temporary use: A land use which is present on a property for a limited and specified period of time. See Sections 17.052(6), 17.056(9), and Section 17.226 for applicable procedures. 
    Townhouse: See Section 17.093(16). 
    Toxic materials standards: See Section 17.185. 
    Transportation land use(s): See Section 17.056(6). 
    Truck stop: See In-Vehicle sales and service. 
    Twin house: See Section 17.093(12). 
    Two-flat house: See Section 17.093(13). 
    Understory tree: A tree that would occupy the understory of a forest in a natural ecological situation. These types of trees are often referred to as ornamental trees. Examples include redbud, hazel, alder, holly hornbeam, dogwood, witch-hazel, etc. See Section 17.150. 
    Unnecessary hardship: The circumstance where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance. 
    Urban Commercial (UC) District: See Section 17.035(3)(e). 
    Urban Industrial (UI) District: See Section 17.035(3)(g). 
    Urban Residential (UR-8) District: See Section 17.035(2)(f). 
    Use: The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
    Use, accessory: See Accessory use. 
    Use, Conditional: See Conditional use. 
    Use, Principal: See Principal use. 
    Use, Special: See Special use. 
    Utility shed (land use): See Section 17.056(8)(d). 
    Variance: Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this Chapter granted pursuant to Section 17.230. 
    Vibration standards: See Section 17.178. 
    Violation: See Section 17.256. 
    Visibility standards: See Section 17.173. 
    Waste disposal facility (land use): See Section 17.056(5)(e). 
    Waste materials standards: See Section 17.186. 
    Weak link townhouse: See Section 17.093(15). 
    Wetland: See Section 17.114(1). 
    Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map: Maps prepared by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, adopted by the Marathon County Board, and maintained and interpreted by the County Zoning Department. 
    Woodland: See Section 17.117(1). 
    Working days: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday; excluding holidays granted by the Town of Rib Mountain to its Department Heads. 
    Yard: A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky, except as expressly permitted in this Chapter. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, front: A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, rear: A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, side: A yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, street: A side yard or a rear yard which abuts a public or private street right-of-way. 
    Zoning Administrator: The Town employee charged with the application and interpretation of this Chapter. See Section 17.252. 
    Zoning district(s): See Section 17.032. 
    Zoning district categories: See Section 17.032. 
    Zoning map: See "Official zoning map", above. 
SUBCHAPTER 17-III. - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 17.031 - Purpose. 
    The area located within the jurisdiction of Rib Mountain is hereby divided into the zoning districts necessary to achieve compatibility of land uses within and between the districts, to implement the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan, and to achieve the other purposes of this Chapter as described in Section 17.005. 
    The type of districts created include: 
Standard Zoning Districts; 
Special Zoning Districts; and 
Overlay Districts. 
Section 17.032 - Standard Zoning Districts and Standard Zoning District Categories.(Am. #09-05) 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, all areas within the Town of Rib Mountain are hereby divided into the following standard zoning districts, and standard zoning district categories (listed in underlined text), which shall be designated as follows: 
    Agricultural District: 
Rural Agricultural Districts: 
RA-1-35ac 
RA-2-35ac 
    Residential Districts: 
Outdoor Recreation (OR-35ac) District 
Rural Residential (RR-35ac) District 
Countryside Residential (CR-5ac) District 
Estate Residential (ER-1) District 
Suburban Residential (SR-2) District 
Suburban Residential (SR-3) District 
Suburban Residential (SR-4) District 
Mixed Residential (MR-4) District 
Urban Residential (UR-8) District 
    Nonresidential Districts: 
Office Districts: 
Estate Office (EO) District 
Suburban Office (SO) District 
    Commercial Districts: 
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District 
Suburban Commercial (SC) District 
Urban Commercial (UC) District 
Central Commercial (CC) District 
    Industrial Districts: 
Suburban Industrial (SI) District 
Urban Industrial (UI) District 
Heavy Industrial (HI) District 
Section 17.0325 - Special Zoning Districts and Overlay Zoning Districts. 
    In addition to the Standard Zoning Districts listed above, certain areas of the town are located in Special Zoning Districts and Overlay Zoning Districts. The Unified Development District (Section 17.038) is a special zoning district which allows a variety of mixed use development and other deviations from the requirements contained in the standard zoning districts. The creation of residential cluster developments is also an option in the Unified Development District. Each Unified Development District is unique since the written plan and drawings approved for the district are the governing land use regulations for that particular property. 
    Overlay districts contain a standard set of land use controls which are in addition to the regulations contained in the underlying standard zoning district. Thus, property within an overlay district has 2 set of land use controls, those found in the standard or special zone and those of the overlay district. Where regulatory conflicts exist between the 2 districts, the most restrictive regulation applies. 
    The special and overlay districts are listed below: 
    Special District: 
Unified Development District (UDD) 
    Overlay Districts: 
USH 51/STH 29 Overlay District 
Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District 
Section 17.033 - Map of Zoning Districts. 
    Zoning districts established by this Chapter except the USH 51/STH 29 Overlay District are shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Rib Mountain, which together with all explanatory materials thereon, is hereby made part of this Chapter. The USH 51/STH 29 Overlay District is located as established in Section 17.039. 
Section 17.034 - Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries. 
    The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any zoning district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Rib Mountain: 
(1)  Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following the limits of any Town, Village, City or County boundary shall be construed as following such limits. 
(2)  Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets or railroad lines shall be construed as following the centerline of such streets or railroad lines. 
(3)  Zoning district boundary lines shown as following or approximately following platted lot lines or other property lines as shown on the Town of Rib Mountain or County of Marathon Tax Maps shall be construed as following such lines. 
(4)  Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the channel centerlines of such watercourses, and, in the event of a natural change in the location of such streams, rivers, or other watercourses, the zoning district boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel centerline. 
(5)  Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following ridgelines or watershed boundaries shall be construed as following such lines. 
(6)  Zoning district boundaries shown as separated from, any of the features listed in paragraphs (1) through (5), above, shall be construed to be at such distances therefrom as are shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
(7)  Where any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary line, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the location of the line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
Section 17.035 - Purpose and Intent of Standard Zoning Districts. 
    The following subsections specify the purpose and intent of the standard zoning districts established by this Chapter. 
(1)  Agricultural Districts. (Am. #09-05) 
(a)  Rural Agricultural (RA-1-35ac) District. 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit development which is solely of a rural community character. The land use standards for this district permit very low density single-family residential development at a density of one dwelling unit for every 35 gross acres, as well as a variety of agricultural and agricultural support land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that development which requires even a minimum of urban services does not occur until such services are available. As such, the Rural Agricultural (RA-35ac) District shall either serve as a designation which preserves and protects agricultural activities, or as a "holding zone" which provides for an interim land use (agriculture) that will easily permit further development (with rezoning to another district) at the appropriate time. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the protection of low density agricultural activities, and a very low density residential area for those who want to live in a rural environment and who retain enough land with their residence to ensure that the rural environment is maintained as long as the Rural Agricultural (RA-35ac) District designation is retained. In this manner, even if all property were developed in a given area with the Rural Agricultural (RA-35ac) District designation, the rural community character of that area would still be maintained. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Single-Family Detached House - 35 acre minimum lot area (per Section 17.093(1)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
On-Site Agricultural Retail (per Section 17.056(2)(e)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(g)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Husbandry, less than 500 animal units (per Section 17.056(2)(b)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(i)) 
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 17.057(4)(j)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
Campground (per Section 17.056(4)(n)) 
Composting Operation (per Section 17.056(5)(f)) 
Airport/Heliport (per Section 17.056(6)(b)) 
Communication Tower (per Section 17.056(7)(c)) 
Extraction Use (per Section 17.056(7)(d)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Private Residential Kennel (per Section 17.056(8)(f)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Private Residential Stable (per Section 17.056(8)(g) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
Migrant Labor Camp (per Section 17.056(8)(v)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equip. Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Home (per Section 17.056(9)(c) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: 
1)  Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): .03 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 35 acres 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 35 acres 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One-Floor Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .700 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .100 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 5 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  10 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  40 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(b)  Rural Agricultural (RA-2-35ac) District. 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit development which is solely of a rural community character, and high density husbandry or intensive agriculture. The land use standards for this district permit very low density single-family residential development at a density of 1 dwelling unit for every 35 gross acres, as well as a variety of agricultural and agricultural support land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that development which requires even a minimum of urban services does not occur until such services are available. As such, the Rural Agricultural (RA-2-35ac) District shall either serve as a designation which preserves and protects agricultural activities, or as a "holding zone" which provides for an interim land use (agriculture) that will easily permit further development (with rezoning to another district) at the appropriate time. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the protection of high density agricultural activities, and a very low density residential area to service the high density agricultural use. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Single-Family Detached House - 35 acre minimum lot area (per Section 17.093(1)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
On-Site Agricultural Retail (per Section 17.056(2)(e)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Husbandry, 500 or more animal units (per Section 17.056(2)(b)) 
Intensive Agriculture (per Section 17.056(2)(c)) 
Agricultural Services (per Section 17.056(2)(d)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(i)) 
Junkyard or Salvage Yard (per Section 17.056(5)(d)) 
Waste Disposal Facility (per Section 17.056(5)(e)) 
Composting Operation (per Section 17.056(5)(f)) 
Airport/Heliport (per Section 17.056(6)(b)) 
Communication Tower (per Section 17.056(7)(c)) 
Extraction Use (per Section 17.056(7)(d)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Private Residential Kennel (per Section 17.056(8)(f)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Private Residential Stable (per Section 17.056(8)(g) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
Migrant Labor Camp (per Section 17.056(8)(v)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equip. Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Home (per Section 17.056(9)(c) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: 
1)  Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): .03 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 35 acres 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 35 acres 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One Floor Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .700 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .100 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 5 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  10 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of street frontage 
4)  40 landscaping points per 10,000 square ft. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(2)  Residential Districts (Am. #09-05) 
(a)  Outdoor Recreational (OR) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit development which is solely of a rural community character. The land use standards for this district permit very low density single-family residential development at a density of 1 dwelling unit for every 35 gross acres, as well as a variety of outdoor recreational land uses such as golf courses, County and State Parks. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that development which requires even a minimum of urban services does not occur until such services are available. As such, the Outdoor Recreational (OR) District shall either serve as a designation which preserves and protects recreational activities, or as a "holding zone" which provides for an interim land use (recreational) that will easily permit further development (with rezoning to another district) at the appropriate time. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the protection of low density recreational activities, and a very low density residential area for those who want to live in a rural environment and who retain enough land with their residence to ensure that the rural environment is maintained as long as the Outdoor Recreational (OR) District designation is retained. In this manner, even if all property were developed in a given area with the Outdoor Recreational (OR) District designation, the rural community character of that area would still be maintained. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Single-Family Detached House - 35 acre minimum lot area (per Section 17.093(1)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(g)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(i)) 
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 17.057(4)(j)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
Campground (per Section 17.056(4)(n)) 
Airport/Heliport (per Section 17.056(6)(b)) 
Communication Tower (per Section 17.056(7)(c)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Private Residential Kennel (per Section 17.056(8)(f)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Private Residential Stable (per Section 17.056(8)(g) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equip. Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Home (per Section 17.056(9)(c) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: 
1)  Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): .03 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 35 acres 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 35 acres 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One-Floor Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .700 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .100 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 5 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  10 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  40 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(b)  Rural Residential (RR) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit development which is solely of a rural community character. The land use standards for this district permit very low density single-family residential development at a density of 1 dwelling unit for every 35 gross acres, as well as a variety of rural residential land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that development which requires even a minimum of urban services does not occur until such services are available. As such, the Rural Residential (RR) District shall either serve as a designation which preserves and protects residential activities, or as a "holding zone" which provides for an interim land use (low density residential) that will easily permit further development (with rezoning to another district) at the appropriate time. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the protection of low density residential activities, and a very low density residential area for those who want to live in a rural environment and who retain enough land with their residence to ensure that the rural environment is maintained as long as the Rural Residential (RR) District designation is retained. In this manner, even if all property were developed in a given area with the Rural Residential (RR) District designation, the rural community character of that area would still be maintained. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Single-Family Detached House - 35 acre minimum lot area (per Section 17.093(1) ) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(g)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
Communication Tower (per Section 17.056(7)(c)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
Private Residential Kennel (per Section 17.056(8)(f)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Private Residential Stable (per Section 17.056(8)(g) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equip. Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Home (per Section 17.056(9)(c) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: 
1)  Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): .03 du acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 35 acres 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 35 acres 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One-Floor Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .700 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .100 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 5 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  10 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  40 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(c)  Countryside Residential (CR-5ac) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a very low density, countryside community character. Unlike the case for the Rural Agricultural (RA-35ac) District, the land use standards for this district permit primarily single-family detached residential development and a variety of related institutional land uses, and are not oriented to a wide range of agricultural activities. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the Countryside Residential (CR-5ac) District shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the countryside community character of its area. A variety of residential development options are available in this district, with a Maximum Gross Density (MGD) of one dwelling unit for every 5 gross acres. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of a very low density residential area for those who want to live in a countryside environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the countryside community character is maintained as long as the Countryside Residential (CR-5ac) District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Single-Family Detached House - 5 acre minimum lot area (per Section 17.093(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(g)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Husbandry (per Section 17.056(2)(b)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(h)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Private Residential Kennel (per Section 17.056(8)(f)) 
Private Residential Stable (per Section 17.056(8)(g)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equip. Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Homes (per Section 17.056(9)(c)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: 
Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): .20 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 5 acres 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 5 acres 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One-Floor Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .700 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .100 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 5 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  50 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  30 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  50 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  100 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(d)  Estate Residential (ER-1) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a low density, estate community character. Like the case for the Countryside Residential (CR-5ac) District, the land use standards for this district permit primarily single-family detached residential development and a variety of related institutional land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the Estate Residential (ER-1) District shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the estate community character of its area. A variety of residential development options are available in this district, with a Maximum Gross Density (MGD) of one dwelling unit per 40,000 square feet of lot area. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of a low density residential area for those who want to live in an estate environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the estate community character is maintained as long as the Estate Residential (ER-1) District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Single-Family Detached House - 40,000 sf minimum lot area (per Section 17.093(5)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(g)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Husbandry (per Section 17.056(2)(b)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(h)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Private Residential Kennel (per Section 17.056(8)(f)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Homes (per Section 17.056(9)(c)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: 
Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 1.00 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 40,000 sf 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 48,400 sf 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
1)  One-Floor Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .700 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .100 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 5 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  45 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  25 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  45 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  90 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(e)  Suburban Residential (SR-2) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a moderate density, suburban community character. This district is intended to be the principal district for single-family development within the Town of Rib Mountain not served by both public water and public sanitary sewer. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the Suburban Residential (SR-2) District shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the suburban residential community character of its area. A variety of residential development options are available in this district, with a Maximum Gross Density (MGD) of 2 dwelling units per gross acre. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of a moderate density residential area for those who want to live in an suburban residential environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the suburban community character is maintained as long as the Suburban Residential (SR-2) District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Single-Family Detached House - 20,000 sf minimum lot area (per Section 17.093(7)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(g)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 17.0563)(h)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Homes (per Section 17.056(9)(c)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: 
1)  Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 2.00 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 20,000 sf 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 20,000 sf 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One-Floor Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .550 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .150 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 3 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  80 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(f)  Suburban Residential (SR-3) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a moderate density, suburban community character. This district is intended to be used for single-family areas served by both public water and public sanitary sewer. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the Suburban Residential (SR-3) District shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the suburban residential community character of its area. A variety of residential development options are available in this district, with a Maximum Gross Density (MGD) of 3 dwelling units per gross acre. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of a moderate density residential area for those who want to live in an suburban residential environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the suburban community character is maintained as long as the Suburban Residential (SR-3) District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Single-Family Detached House - 15,000 sf minimum lot area (per Section 17.093(8)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(g)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Two-Flat - 5,000 sf per dwelling unit (per Section 17.093(13)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 17.0563)(h)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equip. Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Homes (per Section 17.056(9)(c)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: 
1)  Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 2.60 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 15,000 sf 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 15,000 sf 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One-Floor Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .550 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .150 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 3 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  80 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(g)  Suburban Residential (SR-4) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is created as a means of allowing in-fill development within single-family residential areas where many of the lots cover less than 15,000 square feet. Designating these developed areas as a Suburban Residential-4 (SR-4) District will make many of the existing single-family dwellings conform to the lot size and setbacks requirements of this Chapter and will allow for the vacant portions of these districts to be developed at a density which is comparable to the existing development in the area. This district is not intended to be established in large, vacant tracts of land. This district is intended to be established only in areas served by both public water and public sanitary sewer. The density and intensity standards for this district are designed to preserve and protect the existing residential community character. Residential development is the primary development option, with a maximum density of one dwelling unit per 10,000 square feet of lot area. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of existing single-family dwellings which are constructed in areas where many of the existing lots cover approximately 10,000 square feet. These areas of smaller residential lots were established under the Town zoning ordinance that was in effect prior to 1994 when the minimum lot size in some zoning districts was 10,000 square feet. Within these areas of small residential lots are some larger lots or small tracts of land. This district will also allow for the division of these properties and the in-fill development of these larger lots or tracts at a density that is comparable with the existing built-up area. This district should only be designated in areas where there is a preponderance of smaller lots. The district is not intended as a development zone for large tracts of vacant land. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Single-Family Detached House - 10,000 sf minimum lot area (per Section 17.093(9)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(g)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: NONE 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Homes (per Section 17.056(9)(c)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements 
a.  Residential Uses: 
1)  Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 4.3 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 10,000 sf 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 10,000 sf 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One-Floor Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .550 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .150 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 1 acre 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  80 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(h)  Mixed Residential (MR-4) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a moderately high density community character which lies somewhere between suburban and urban. The land use standards for this district permit both single-family detached residential development and certain types of moderately high density single-family attached development permitted by right, and both moderately high density single-family attached development and certain types of multi-family development permitted as a conditional use, as well as a variety of related institutional land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the Mixed Residential (MR-4) District shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the moderately high density residential community character of its area. A variety of residential development options are available in this district, with a Maximum Gross Density (MGD) of 4 dwelling units per gross acre. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of an area for those who want to live in a moderately high density residential environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the desired community character is maintained as long as the Mixed Residential (MR-4) District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. As such, this district is intended to provide the principal location for a wide range of single-family attached dwelling types, including twin houses, duplexes, atrium houses, and weak link townhouses. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Single-Family Detached House - 10,000 sf minimum lot area (per Section 17.093(9)) 
Twin House/Duplex - 10,000 sf per du (per Section 17.093(12)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(g)) 
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(h)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Village House - 5,000 sf lot (per Section 17.093(11)) 
Two-Flat - 5,000 sf per dwelling unit (per Section 17.093(13)) 
Atrium House - 3,600 sf lot (per Section 17.093(14)) 
Weak-Link Townhouse - 2,800 lot (per Section 17.093(15)) 
Townhouse - 2,400 sf lot (per Section 17.093(16)) 
Multiplex - (per Section 17.093(17)) 
Apartment - (per Section 17.093(18)) 
Mobile Home - (per Sections 17.056(1)(c) or (d), and per Section 17.093(20)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 17.056(4)(m)) 
Institutional Residential (per Sections 17.093(19) and 17.056(3)(f) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Homes (per Section 17.056(9)(c)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: 
1)  Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 4.00 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 10,000 sf 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 10,000 sf 
2)  Mobile Home Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 4.00 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 15,000/20,000 sf 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 10 acres 
3)  Mobile Home Park: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 4.00 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 15,000/20,000 sf 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 10 acres 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One-Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .400 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .200 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 2 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
2)  Two-Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .450 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .220 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 2 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  30 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  30 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  60 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(i)  Urban Residential (UR-8) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a high density, urban community character. The land use standards for this district permit multi-family development as a conditional use, as well as a variety of related institutional land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the Urban Residential (UR-8) District shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the urban residential community character of its area. A variety of residential development options are available in this district, with a Maximum Gross Density (MGD) of 8 dwelling units per gross acre. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of an area for those who want to live in a high density residential environment and who retain enough land with their residence, or in their development, to ensure that the urban community character is maintained as long as the Urban Residential (UR-8) District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. As such, it is intended to provide the principal location for multi-family development, including multiplexes and apartments. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) (per Section 17.056(3)(g)) 
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents) (per Section 17.0563)(h)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Two-Flat - 5,000 sf per dwelling unit (per Section 17.093(13)) 
Weak-Link Townhouse - 2,800 lot (per Section 17.093(15)) 
Townhouse - 2,400 sf lot (per Section 17.093(16)) 
Multiplex - (per Section 17.093(17)) 
Apartment - (per Section 17.093(18)) 
Institutional Residential - (per Sections 17.056(3)(f)) and 17.093(19)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Community Living Arrangement (16+ res.) (per 17.056(3)(i)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 17.056(4)(m)) 
Boarding House (per Section 17.056(4)(o)) 
Atrium House - 3,600 sq. ft. lot (per Section 17.093(14)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Family Day Care Home (4-8 children) (per Section 17.056(8)(u)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(w)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equip. Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Model Homes (per Section 17.056(9)(c)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: 
1)  Conventional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 8.00 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 3,600 sf 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 3,600 sf 
2)  Institutional Residential Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 16.00 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): None 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 2 acres 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .250 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .250 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): One acre 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
2)  Two Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .300 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .275 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 1 acre 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  40 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(3)  Nonresidential Districts 
(a)  Estate Office (EO) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit high-quality office and institutional land uses at an intensity compatible with the estate community character of older portions of the Town predominately developed with large homes which are desirable to maintain, where traffic volumes and adjacent land uses dictate the transition of these areas to certain nonresidential uses. A relatively low Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) and significant areas of landscaping are required in this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to adjacent residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of an area which preserves the original estate residential appearance, yet permits office and institutional land uses, and which ensures that the estate community character is maintained as long as the Estate Office (EO) District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
Office (per Section 17.056(4)(a)) 
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 17.056(4)(b)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Institutional Residential (per Sections 17.056(3)(f)) & 17.093(19)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 res.) (per Section 17.0563)(h)) 
Community Living Arrangement (16+ res.) (per Section 17.056(3)(i)) 
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(c)) 
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(g)) 
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(h)) 
Commercial Indoor Lodging (per Section 17.056(4)(k)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 17.056(4)(m)) 
Airport/Heliport (per Section 17.056(6)(b)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Company Cafeteria (per Section 17.056(8)(h)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Commercial Apartment (per Section 17.056(8)(a)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: (per Table 17.074) 
1)  Institutional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 16.00 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): Institutional 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 5 acres 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One or Two Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .500 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .250 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 10,000 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  45 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  20 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  45 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  95 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(b)  Suburban Office (SO) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit high-quality office and institutional land uses at an intensity compatible with the overall suburban community character of the Town. A relatively low Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) and significant areas of landscaping are required in this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide for the permanent protection of an area for those who desire a high quality office environment which maintains the attractiveness of the site and retains enough open land in their development to ensure that the suburban community character is maintained as long as the Suburban Office (SO) District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
Office (per Section 17.056(4)(a)) 
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 17.056(4)(b)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Institutional Residential - (per Sections 17.056(3)(f)) and 17.093(19)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 res.) (per Section 17.056(3)(h)) 
Community Living Arrangement (16+ res.) (per Section 17.056(3)(i)) 
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(c)) 
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(g)) 
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(h)) 
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 17.056(4)(j)) 
Commercial Indoor Lodging (per Section 17.056(4)(k)) 
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 17.056(4)(m)) 
Airport/Heliport (per Section 17.056(6)(b)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Company Cafeteria (per Section 17.056(8)(h)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Commercial Apartment (per Section 17.056(8)(a)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: (per Table 17.074) 
1)  Institutional Development: 
Maximum Gross Density (MGD): 16.00 du/acre 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): Institutional 
Minimum Site Area (MSA): 5 acres 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .250 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .250 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): One acre* 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
2)  Two Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .300 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .275 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 2 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
3)  Three Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .330 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .290 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 3 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4)  Four Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .350 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .300 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 4 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
*20,000 square foot minimum lot area with a conditional use permit and site plan for end use of property demonstrating full compliance with this Ordinance. 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  15 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  80 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(c)  Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit small scale commercial development which is compatible with the desired overall suburban community character of the area in general, and with adjacent residential development in particular. This is accomplished with relatively low maximum Floor Area Ratios (FARs). Significant areas of landscaping are required in this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
Rationale: This district is used to provide both convenience oriented goods and services and for the permanent protection of adjacent residential areas by permitting only a limited range of commercial activities. The desired suburban community character of the development is attained through the Floor Area Ratio (FAR) and Landscape Surface Area Ratio (LSR) requirements, and by restricting the Maximum Building Size (MBS) of all buildings within each instance of this District to 15,000 square feet. Together, these requirements ensure that the desired suburban community character is maintained as long as the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
Office (per Section 17.056(4)(a)) 
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 17.056(4)(b)) 
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(c)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 17.056(4)(e)) 
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(g)) 
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(h)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 17.056(4)(m)) 
Conversion of Existing Residences to Non-Residential Uses 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Commercial Apartment (per Section 17.056(8)(a)) 
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 17.056(8)(k)) 
Light Industrial Incidental to Indoor Sales (per Section 17.056(8)(m)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: (per Table 17.074) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .250 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .250 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 5,000 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): 15,000 sf 
2)  Two Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .300 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .275 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 10,000 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): 15,000 sf 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  15 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  80 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(d)  Suburban Commercial (SC) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit large and small scale commercial development which is compatible with the desired overall suburban community character of the area in general. This is accomplished with relatively low maximum Floor Area Ratios (FARs). Significant areas of landscaping are required in this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. A wide range of office, retail, and lodging land uses are permitted within this district. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
Rationale: This district is intended to provide the principal zoning district for commercial development which occurs after the adoption of this Chapter. The standards of this district are designed to provide a clear distinction from the Urban Commercial (UC) and Central Commercial (CC) Districts in terms of permitted intensity of development, treatment of outdoor sales, and required green space areas. The desired suburban community character of the development is attained through the Floor Area Ratio (FAR) and Landscape Surface Area Ratio (LSR) requirements. Together, these requirements ensure that the desired suburban community character is maintained as long as the Suburban Commercial (SC) District designation is retained, regardless of how much development occurs within that area. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
Office (per Section 17.056(4)(a)) 
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 17.056(4)(b)) 
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(c)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Institutional Residential - (per Sections 17.056(3)(f)) and 17.093(19)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Outdoor Display (per Section 17.056(4)(d)) 
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 17.056(4)(e)) 
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(g)) 
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(h)) 
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 17.056(4)(j)) 
Commercial Indoor Lodging (per Section 17.056(4)(k)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 17.056(4)(m)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Company Cafeteria (per Section 17.056(8)(h)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Commercial Apartment (per Section 17.056(8)(a)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 17.056(8)(k)) 
Light Industrial Incidental to Indoor Sales (per Section 17.056(8)(m)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: (per Table 17.074) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .250 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .250 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 1 acre* 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
2)  Two Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .300 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .275 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 2 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
3)  Three Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .330 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .290 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 3 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4)  Four Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .350 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .300 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 4 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
*20,000 square foot minimum lot area with a conditional use permit and site plan for end use of property demonstrating full compliance with this Ordinance. 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  10 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  80 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(e)  Urban Commercial (UC) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit both large and small scale commercial development at intensities which provide significant incentives for infill development and the continued economic viability of existing development. To accomplish this effect, maximum permitted Floor Area Ratios (FARs) are significantly higher and minimum required Green Space Ratios (GSRs) are lower than those required in the Suburban Commercial (SC) District. A wide range of office, retail, and lodging land uses are permitted within this district. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
Rationale: This district is intended to provide an alternative, primarily infill development, designation for commercial activity to the Suburban Commercial (SC) District. Performance standards for the Urban Commercial (UC) District are designed to ensure the long-term economic health of strip commercial development areas, existing as of the effective date of this Ordinance, by limiting the attraction of the Suburban Commercial (SC) District to those and uses which can afford the relatively higher development costs and rents associated with development in that district. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
Office (per Section 17.056(4)(a)) 
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 17.056(4)(b)) 
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(c)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Off-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(6)(a)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Institutional Residential (per Sections 17.056(3)(f)) and 17.093(19)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Outdoor Display (per Section 17.056(4)(d)) 
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 17.056(4)(e)) 
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(g)) 
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(h)) 
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(i)) 
Commercial Animal Boarding (per Section 17.056(4)(j)) 
Commercial Indoor Lodging (per Section 17.056(4)(k)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 17.056(4)(m)) 
Boarding House (per Section 17.056(4)(o)) 
Personal Storage Facility (per Section 17.056(5)(c)) 
Distribution Center (per Section 17.056(6)(d)) 
Communication Tower (per Section 17.056(7)(c)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Company Cafeteria (per Section 17.056(8)(h)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Commercial Apartment (per Section 17.056(8)(a)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 17.056(8)(k)) 
Light Industrial Incidental to Indoor Sales (per Section 17.056(8)(m)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: (per Table 17.074) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .100 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .300 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 16,000 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
2)  Two Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .150 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .340 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 16,000 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
3)  Three Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .190 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .345 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 16,000 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4)  Four Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .200 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .350 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 16,000 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  5 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  40 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(f)  Central Commercial (CC) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit both large and small scale commercial development at an intensity which provides significant incentives for infill development, redevelopment, and the continued economic viability of existing development. To accomplish this effect, maximum Floor Area Ratios (FARs) permitted in this district are much higher than those allowed in the Suburban Commercial (SC) and Urban Commercial (UC) Districts. A wide range of office, retail, and lodging land uses are permitted within this district. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. This district is strictly limited to the town center locations. 
Rationale: This district is intended to provide an alternative, primarily infill development, designation for commercial activity to the Suburban Commercial (SC) and Urban Commercial (UC) District are designed to assist in maintaining the long-term viability of the Town center. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
Office (per Section 17.056(4)(a)) 
Personal or Professional Services (per Section 17.056(4)(b)) 
Indoor Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(c)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Off-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(6)(a)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Institutional Residential (per Sections 17.056(3)(f)) and 17.093(19)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 17.056(4)(e)) 
In-Vehicle Sales or Service (per Section 17.056(4)(g)) 
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(h)) 
Commercial Indoor Lodging (per Section 17.056(4)(k)) 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)) 
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 17.056(4)(m)) 
Boarding House (per Section 17.056(4)(o) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(g)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Home Occupation (per Section 17.056(8)(s)) 
Company Cafeteria (per Section 17.056(8)(h)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Commercial Apartment (per Section 17.056(8)(a)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (per Section 17.056(8)(k)) 
Light Industrial Incidental to Indoor Sales (per Section 17.056(8)(m)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: (per Table 17.074) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .000 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 1.000 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 2,400 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
2)  Two Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .000 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 2.000 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 2,400 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
3)  Three Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .100 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 2.500 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 2,400 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4)  Four Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .200 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 3.000 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 2,400 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  0 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  0 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  0 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  20 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(g)  Suburban Industrial (SI) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit both large and small scale industrial and office development at an intensity which is consistent with the overall desired suburban community character of the community. Beyond a relatively low maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) and a relatively high minimum Green Space Ratio (GSR), the primary distinguishing feature of this district is that it is geared to indoor industrial activities which are not typically associated with high levels of noise, soot, odors and other potential nuisances for adjoining properties. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
Rationale: This district is intended to provide a location for suburban intensity light industrial land uses such as assembly operations, storage and warehousing facilities, offices, and light manufacturing which are protected from potential nuisances associated with certain development permitted within the Heavy Industrial (HI) District. In addition, land uses shall comply with the minimum performance standards presented in Subchapter 17-IX. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
Office (per Section 17.056(4)(a)) 
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 17.056(4)(e)) 
Indoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 17.056(5)(a)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Active Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(b)) 
Indoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(c)) 
Light Industrial (per Section 17.056(7)(a)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Outdoor Institutional (per Section 17.056(3)(d)) 
Indoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(h)) 
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (per Section 17.056(4)(i)) 
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 17.056(4)(m)) 
Personal Storage Facility (per Section 17.056(5)(c)) 
Airport/Heliport (per Section 17.056(6)(b)) 
Distribution Center (per Section 17.056(6)(d)) 
Communication Tower (per Section 17.056(7)(c)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Company Cafeteria (per Section 17.056(8)(h)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Indoor Sales Incident to Light Industrial Use (per Section 17.056(8)(l)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: (per Table 17.074) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .250 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .700 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): One acre* 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
2)  Two Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .300 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .750 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 2 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
3)  Three Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .330 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .800 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 3 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4)  Four Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .350 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .850 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 4 acres 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
*20,000 square foot minimum lot area with a conditional use permit and site plan for end use of property demonstrating full compliance with this Ordinance. 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  10 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  40 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  80 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(h)  Urban Industrial (UI) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit both large and small scale industrial and office development at an intensity which is consistent with existing transition and urban intensity development. Beyond a relatively high maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) and a relatively high minimum Green Space Ratio (GSR), the primary distinguishing feature of this district is that it is geared to indoor industrial activities which are not typically associated with high levels of noise, soot, odors and other potential nuisances for adjoining properties. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
Rationale: This district is intended to provide a location for urban intensity light industrial land uses such as assembly operations, storage and warehousing facilities, offices, and light manufacturing which are protected from potential nuisances associated with certain development permitted within the Heavy Industrial (HI) District. In addition, uses shall comply with the minimum performance standards presented in Subchapter 17-IX. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
Office (per Section 17.056(4)(a)) 
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 17.056(4)(e)) 
Indoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 17.056(5)(a)) 
Distribution Center (per Section 17.056(6)(d)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Off-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(6)(a)) 
Light Industrial (per Section 17.056(7)(a)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Group Day Care Center (9+ children) (per Section 17.056(4)(m)) 
Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 17.056(5)(b)) 
Personal Storage Facility (per Section 17.056(5)(c)) 
Airport/Heliport (per Section 17.056(6)(b)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Company Cafeteria (per Section 17.056(8)(h)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Indoor Sales Incidental to Light Industrial Use (per Section 17.056(8)(l)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting/ Wood Piles (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional use (per Section 17.905): 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: (per Table 17.074) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .100 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .800 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 10,000 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
2)  Two or More Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .300 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 1.000 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 10,000 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  5 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  40 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
(i)  Heavy Industrial (HI) District 
1.  Description and Purpose. This district is intended to permit both large and small scale industrial and office development at an intensity which provides ample incentive for infill development and redevelopment of industrial areas existing as of the effective date of this Ordinance. This district is designed to permit a very wide variety of industrial uses which may occur both indoors and outdoors, including certain land uses which are permitted in no other zoning district because of their potential to create nuisances for adjoining properties. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
Rationale: This district is intended to provide a location for both light and heavy industrial uses in a zoning district in which the potential for nuisance complaints from nearby properties is minimized. It must be emphasized that this is not a district where virtually any land use is permitted, as all uses shall comply with the minimum performance standards presented in Subchapter 17-IX. In addition, certain land uses such as extraction, junkyards and salvage operations, and freight terminals are permitted within this district only upon the granting of a conditional use permit. 
2.  List of Allowable Land Uses (per Subchapter 17-IV) 
a.  Land Uses Permitted by Right: (per Section 17.052(2)) 
Selective Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(f)) 
Passive Outdoor Public Recreation (per Section 17.056(3)(a)) 
Office (per Section 17.056(4)(a)) 
Indoor Maintenance Service (per Section 17.056(4)(e)) 
Indoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 17.056(5)(a)) 
Distribution Center (per Section 17.056(6)(d)) 
b.  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: (per Section 17.052(3)) 
Cultivation (per Section 17.056(2)(a)) 
Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling (per Section 17.056(5)(b)) 
Off-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(6)(a)) 
Light Industrial (per Section 17.056(7)(a)) 
Heavy Industrial (per Section 17.056(7)(b)) 
c.  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.052(4)) 
Public Services and Utilities (per Section 17.056(3)(e)) 
Agricultural Services (per Section 17.056(2)(d)) 
Clear Cutting (per Section 17.056(2)(g)) 
Outdoor Maintenance Service (per Section 17.056(4)(f)) 
Sexually Oriented Land Use (per Section 17.056(4)(p)) 
Junkyard or Salvage Yard (per Section 17.056(5)(d)) 
Waste Disposal Facility (per Section 17.056(5)(e)) 
Composting Operation (per Section 17.056(5)(f)) 
Airport/Heliport (per Section 17.056(6)(b)) 
Freight Terminal (per Section 17.056(6)(c)) 
d.  Land Uses Permitted as Accessory Uses: (per Section 17.052(5)) 
1)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: 
Private Residential Garage or Shed (per Section 17.056(8)(d)) 
Private Residential Recreational Facility (per Section 17.056(8)(e)) 
Company Cafeteria (per Section 17.056(8)(h)) 
Lawn Care (per Section 17.056(8)(p)) 
Exterior Communication Devices (per Section 17.056(8)(r)) 
2)  Land Uses Permitted as Special Use: 
On-Site Parking Lot (per Section 17.056(8)(b)) 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Indoor Sales Incident to Light Industrial Use (per Section 17.056(8)(l)) 
Drainage Structure (per Section 17.056(8)(n)) 
Filling (per Section 17.056(8)(o)) 
On-Site Composting (per Section 17.056(8)(t)) 
3)  Land Uses Permitted as Conditional Use: (per Section 17.905): 
Company Provided On-Site Recreation (per Section 17.056(8)(i)) 
Septic Systems (per Section 17.056(8)(q)) 
e.  Land Uses Permitted as Temporary Uses: (per Section 17.052(6)) 
Contractor's Project Office (per Section 17.056(9)(a)) 
Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage (per Section 17.056(9)(b)) 
Real Estate Sales Office (per Section 17.056(9)(d)) 
3.  Density and Intensity Requirements (per Subchapter 17-V) 
a.  Residential Uses: (per Table 17.074) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1)  One Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .000 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): .850 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 4,800 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
2)  Two or More Story Buildings: 
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR): .000 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): 1.000 
Minimum Lot Area (MLA): 4,800 sf 
Maximum Building Size (MBS): na 
4.  Bulk Requirements (per Subchapter 17-VI) 
a.  Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.093) 
b.  Non-Residential Uses: (Refer to Table 17.094) 
5.  Landscaping Regulations (per Subchapter 17-VIII) 
a.  Single-Family Residential, Two-Family Uses and Agricultural Uses: None required 
b.  Non-Residential Uses and Multi-Family Uses: 
1)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear ft. of building foundation 
2)  5 landscaping points per 1,000 square ft. of gross floor area 
3)  20 landscaping points per 100 linear feet of street frontage 
4)  40 landscaping points per 10,000 s.f. paved area/20 stalls 
6.  Performance Standards (see Subchapter 17-IX) 
7.  Signage Regulations (see Subchapter 17-X) 
Section 17.036 - Natural Resource Protection Overlay Districts. 
(1)  This Chapter employs overlay zoning districts to identify and regulate areas in which natural resource protection requirements apply. Each type of natural resource regulated by this Chapter is represented by an overlay zoning district bearing its name. 
(2)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay Districts include: 
Floodway Overlay District 
Floodplain Conservancy Overlay District 
Floodway Fringe Overlay District 
Lakeshore Overlay District 
Conservancy Overlay District 
Drainageway Overlay District 
Woodland Overlay District 
Steep Slope/Ridgetop Overlay District 
(3)  For specific Natural Resource Protection Overlay District regulations, see Subchapter 17-VII. 
Section 17.037 - Map of Natural Resource Protection Overlay Districts. 
    Natural Resource Protection Overlay Zoning Districts established by this Chapter are shown on the Detailed Site Analysis required under Section 17.073 and on applicable site Plans required under Section 17.228. For specific Natural Resource Protection Overlay District designation criteria, see Subchapter 17-VII. 
Section 17.038 - Unified Development District. 
    This district is intended to provide for flexible development. This District is designed to forward both aesthetic and economic objectives of the Town by controlling the site design and the appearance, density, or intensity of development within the district in a manner which is consistent with sound land use, urban design, and economic development principles. The application of these standards will ensure long-term progress and broad participation toward these principles. Refer to Section 17.233 for the procedure applicable to proposal review in this overlay district. 
    The purpose of the Unified Development District is also to promote the maximum benefit from coordinated area site planning, diversified location of structures and mixed compatible uses in developments conceived and implemented as comprehensive and cohesive unified projects. It is further intended to encourage and facilitate the conservation of open land and other natural features, such as woods, streams, wetlands, etc., as integral components of a balanced ecology. The intent of these regulations provide for the development of land on the basis of comprehensive and coordinated site plans for a specific project development, regulated by objective criteria rather than through the application of fixed formulae, thereby allowing for greater flexibility and improved quality of environmental design. Such a district may be established only with the consent of the owners of the land affected. 
Section 17.039 - USH 51 and STH 29 Overlay District. 
(1)  This district is intended to ensure that development along the rights-of-way of both USH 51 and STH 29 is accomplished in a manner which recognizes these routes as the primary transportation gateways into the Town, and that the vegetation in these corridors provides the beneficial environmental effects of reducing noise, extraneous light, dust, air pollution, water pollution, and the apparent litter generated by users of these highways. Based upon these objectives, the standards of this overlay zoning district are designed to require the preservation of all vegetation existing as of the adoption date of this ordinance within the wider of either the USH 51 Scenic Easement or within 50 feet of any of the rights-of-way of either USH 51 or STH 29, including the exit and entrance ramps. 
    This district is not shown as a mapped district on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Rib Mountain but is established by the references cited above and is in effect from the date of adoption of this ordinance. 
(2)  Except as provided in paragraph 3 below, as of the effective date of this ordinance, all trees, shrubs and ground cover, except grass, existing within the USH 51 and STH 29 Overlay District, shall be permanently protected, and if removed, diseased or dead following said effective date shall be replaced by the property owner, with a comparable species, to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. The selection of a comparable replacement species shall be from the plant groupings listed in Section 17.151 of this ordinance. The replacement species shall be from the same grouping as the species it is intended to replace. The minimum installation size of such replacement plants shall be per the requirements of Section 17.143(1) of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Removal of vegetation within the USH 51 and STH 29 Overlay District may be allowed for public use activities such as park development and bicycle trail improvement as a conditional use. These activities shalt comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(4)  Removal of vegetation within the USH 51/STH 29 Overlay District may be allowed for building, parking and other private uses provided a conditional use is granted in compliance with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses, and the following criteria or conditions exist: 
(a)  Topographic conditions on the site or on the adjacent freeway significantly reduce the need to maintain some or all of the existing vegetation within the 50-foot overlay district, or 
(b)  The basic purposes of the overlay district will not be significantly weakened by allowing the removal of the vegetation in the proposed area; or 
(c)  A hardship, as determined by the plan commission, would result from strict adherence to the district regulations. Said hardship shall be the result of the strict interpretation of these overlay district regulations and not caused by the actions or activities of any person having an interest in the property. 
(5)  No signs shall be located within the USH 51/STH 29 Overlay District unless a conditional use is granted in compliance with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
Section 17.040 - Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District. 
(1)  Purpose: The Town of Rib Mountain recognizes that consequences of certain land use activities, whether intentional or accidental, can seriously impair groundwater quality. The purpose of the Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District (MW) is to protect municipal groundwater resources from certain land use activities by imposing appropriate restrictions upon lands located within the approximate groundwater recharge area of the Rib Mountain Sanitary District's municipal wells. The restrictions imposed herein are in addition to those of the underlying residential, commercial, or industrial zoning districts or any other provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Overlay Zones: The Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District is hereby divided into Zone MW-A and Zone MW-B as follows: 
(a)  Zone MW-A is identified as the primary source of water for the municipal well aquifer and as the area most likely to transmit groundwater contaminants to the municipal wells. Zone MW-A is more restrictive than Zone MW-B. 
(b)  Zone MW-B is identified as the secondary source of water for the municipal well aquifer and as the area where there is a lower probability of surface contaminants reaching the municipal well fields. 
(3)  Map: The locations and boundaries of the Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District and Zones established by this Ordinance are set forth on the adopted Official Zoning Map. 
(4)  Zone MW-A Land Use Regulations: The following land use regulations are in addition to the land use regulations established in the standard Zoning Districts and elsewhere in this zoning ordinance: 
(a)  Zone MW-A Prohibited Uses: The following land uses are hereby found to have a high potential to contaminate or have already caused groundwater contamination problems in Wisconsin and elsewhere. The following principal or accessory land uses are hereby prohibited within Zone MW-A of the Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District: 
1.  Animal confinement areas. 
2.  Intensive agriculture as defined in Section 17.056(2)(c). 
3.  Use of pesticides, insecticide or fungicides for cultivation as defined in Section 17.056(2)(a). 
4.  Areas for dumping or disposal of garbage, refuse, trash or demolition material. 
5.  Asphalt products manufacturing plants. 
6.  Automobile laundries and car washes. 
7.  Automobile service stations. 
8.  Building materials and products sales 
9.  Cartage and express facilities. 
10.  Cemeteries. 
11.  Chemical manufacturing and bulk fertilizer and or pesticide facilities. 
12.  Commercial exterior storage of any objects containing petroleum or other hazardous fluids. 
13.  Dry cleaning establishments. 
14.  Electronic circuit assembly plants. 
15.  Electroplating facilities. 
16.  Exterminating shops/businesses. 
17.  Fertilizer manufacture plants. 
18.  Foundries and forge plants. 
19.  Garages for repair and servicing of motor vehicles, including body repair, painting or engine rebuilding. 
20.  Highway salt storage areas. 
21.  Industrial liquid waste storage areas. 
23.  Junk yards and auto graveyards. 
24.  Landfills. 
25.  Metal reduction and refinement plants. 
26.  Mining operations. 
27.  Motor and machinery service and assembly shops. 
28.  Motor freight terminals. 
30.  Paint products manufacturing. 
31.  Petroleum products storage or processing. 
32.  Photography studios, including the developing of film and pictures. 
33.  Plastics manufacturing. 
34.  Printing and publishing establishments. 
35.  Pulp and paper manufacturing. 
36.  Recycling facilities. 
37.  Residential dwelling units on lots less than 15,000 square feet in area. However, in any Residence District, on a lot of record on the effective date of this ordinance, a single family dwelling may be established regardless of the size of the lot, provided all other requirements of the Rib Mountain Zoning Ordinance are complied with. 
38.  Sewage disposal sites. 
39.  Septic waste/ Sewage sludge land spreading. 
40.  Sludge disposal sites. 
41.  Storage, manufacturing or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials. 
42.  Underground petroleum products storage tanks for industrial, commercial, residential or other uses. 
43.  Woodworking and wood products manufacturing. 
44.  Solid waste disposal sites for any type of material classified by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources as solid waste. 
45.  Greenhouses. 
(b)  Zone MW-A Conditional Uses: Any other agricultural, commercial, storage or disposal, transportation or industrial land use not listed as a prohibited use may be allowed as a conditional use and shall comply with the Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(5)  Zone MW-B Land Use Regulations: The following land use regulations are in addition to the land use regulations established by the remainder of this Chapter: 
(a)  Zone MW-B Prohibited Uses: The following principal or accessory uses are hereby prohibited within Zone MW-B of the Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District: 
1.  Animal confinement areas. 
2.  Intensive agriculture as defined in Section 17.056(2)(c). 
3.  Landfills. 
4.  Underground petroleum products storage tanks for industrial, commercial, residential or other uses. 
(b)  Zone MW-B Conditional Uses: Any other agricultural, commercial, storage or disposal, transportation or industrial land use not listed as a prohibited use may be allowed as a conditional use and shall comply with the Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(6)  Additional Land Use Regulations for Both MW-A and MW-B: 
1.  Sewered residential uses are allowed to have a maximum area of manicured lawn or grass as shown below. The remainder of the undeveloped portion of the lot shall be wooded: 
Lot Area Manicured Lawn Area (square feet) 16,000 sq. ft. or less  6,000 16,000 sq. ft. to 20,000 sq. ft.  8,000 20,000 sq. ft. to 30,000 sq. ft. 11,000 30,000 sq. ft. to 1 acre 14,000 1 acre to 11/2 acres 20,000 Larger than 11/2 acres 26,000  
2.  Unsewered residential uses (in MW-B only) are allowed to have a maximum area of manicured lawn or grass as shown below. The remainder of the undeveloped portion of the lot shall be wooded: 
Lot area Manicured Lawn Area (square feet) Less than 2 acres  8,000 2 acres to 3 acres 21,000 3 acres to 4 acres 31,000 Larger than 4 acres 44,000  
SUBCHAPTER 17-IV: - LAND USE REGULATIONS 

Section 17.051 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Subchapter is to indicate which land uses may locate in each zoning district and under what requirements; and which land uses may not locate therein. A further distinction is made for land uses which may locate in a given district only upon obtaining a conditional or temporary use permit to do so. Finally, certain land uses may locate in a given district as a matter of right upon compliance with special regulations for such a land use. 
Section 17.052 - Interpretation of Land Use Tables. 
(1)  The land uses listed in Sections 17.053 (Table of Land Uses) and 17.054 (Table of Land Uses Permitted in Permanently Protected Green Space Areas) are specifically designated and refer to the detailed listing of land uses contained in Section 17.056 (Detailed Land Use Descriptions and Regulations). 
(2)  Land Uses Permitted by Right: Land uses listed as permitted by right (designated as a "P" in Sections 17.053 and 17.054) are permitted per the general land use requirements of this Chapter (Section 17.055); per the general requirements of the specific zoning district in which they are located; per any additional requirements imposed by applicable overlay zoning districts as designated on the Official Zoning Map; per the general requirements of this Chapter; and per any and all other applicable Town, County, State, and Federal regulations. 
(3)  Land Uses Permitted as a Special Use: This category of land uses is subject to certain additional controls that apply to land uses permitted by right, while avoiding the public hearing process required of land uses permitted as conditional uses. 
(a)  Land uses listed as permitted as a special use (designated as an "S" in Sections 17.053 and 17.054) are permitted subject to all of the general zoning requirements applicable to land uses permitted by right (Subsection (2), above), plus certain additional requirements applicable to that particular land use specified in Section 17.056. (See also Section 17.224.) 
(b)  If a proposed land use listed as a special use in a particular zoning district cannot, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, meet one or more of the special use regulations listed for the particular use in Section 17.056, the developer may request Plan Commission and Town Board review for approval as a conditional use, per the requirements of Section 17.225. See Subsection (4)(b), below. 
(4)  Land Uses Permitted as a Conditional Use: 
(a)  Land uses listed as permitted as a conditional use (designated as a "C" in Sections 17.053 and 17.054) are permitted subject to all the requirements applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection (2), above, plus any additional requirements applicable to that particular land use as contained in Section 17.056 (Detailed Land Use Descriptions and Regulations), including any additional requirements imposed as part of the conditional use review process. Each application for, and instance of, a conditional use shall be considered a unique situation and shall not be construed as precedence for similar requests. (See also Section 17.225.) 
(b)  Conditional use requirements also apply to proposed special uses when one or more of the special use requirements cannot be met. (See Subsection (3)(b), above.) 
(5)  Land Uses Permitted as an Accessory Use: Land uses permitted as an accessory use are permitted subject to all the requirements applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection (2), above, plus any additional requirements applicable to that particular land use as contained in Section 17.056(8) (Detailed Land Use Descriptions and Regulations). 
(6)  Land Uses Permitted as a Temporary Use: Land uses listed as permitted as a temporary use (designated as a "T" in Sections 17.053 and 17.054) are allowed to be established in the district indicated, through the conditional use procedures of Section 17.225 and subject to all the requirements applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection (2), above, plus any additional requirements applicable to that particular temporary land use as described in Section 17.056(9). These land uses and structures are, by their nautre and description, temporary and shall be removed from the site or converted to a permanent, permitted use in the district in which they are located within the period of time established for each particular temporary use described in Section 17.056(9) or within the period of time established by the Town Board as approved through the conditional use procedures of Section 17.225. 
(7)  Land uses for which a blank space is shown for a specific zoning district are not permitted in such zoning district, except as legal nonconforming uses (see Section 17.057). 
(8)  Although a land use may be indicated as permitted by right, permitted as a special use, or permitted as a conditional use in a particular district, it does not follow that such a land use is permitted or permissible on every parcel in such district. No land use is permitted or permissible on a parcel unless it can be located thereon in full compliance with all of the standards and regulations of this Chapter which are applicable to the specific land use and parcel in question, or unless an appropriate variance has been granted pursuant to Section 17.229. 
Section 17.053 - Tables of Land Uses.(Am. #09-05) 
    This Chapter regulates the location of land uses to specific zoning districts through the use of the Tables of Land Uses contained in this Section. (See the following pages for these Tables.) 
TABLE 17.053(1): TABLE OF LAND USES P = Permitted by Right in a Conventional Development (See 17.056(1)(a). C = Permitted as a Conditional Use per Section 17.225 H = Permitted as a Conditional Use within a Mobile Home Development or Park (See 17.056(1)(c) or (d).) ZONING DISTRICT ABBREVIATIONS R 
A 
- 
1 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c R 
A 
- 
2 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c C 
R 
- 
5 
a 
c E 
R 
- 
1 S 
R 
- 
2 S 
R 
- 
3 S 
R 
- 
4 M 
R 
- 
4 U 
R 
- 
8 E 
O S 
O N 
C S 
C U 
C C 
C S 
I U 
I H 
I TYPE OF LAND USE DWELLING UNIT TYPES (See 17.093()) P P P P P P P P  (1) Single-Family Detached - 35 acre lot P P P P P P  (2) Single-Family Detached - 5 acre lot P P P P P  (5) Single-Family Detached - 40,000 sf lot P P P P  (7) Single-Family Detached - 20,000 sf lot P P P  (8) Single-Family Detached - 15,000 sf lot P P  (9) Single-Family Detached - 10,000 sf lot C (11) Village House - 5,000 sf lot P (12) Twin Hse/Duplex - (10,000 sf per du) C C C (13) Two-Flat - (5,000 sf per du) C C (14) Atrium House - 3,600 sf lot C C (15) Weak-Link Townhouse - 2,800 sf lot C C (16) Townhouse - 2,400 sf lot C C (17) Multiplex C C (18) Apartment C C C C C C C (19) Institutional Residential H (20) Mobile Home - 15,000/20,000 sf lot  
TABLE 17.053(2) and (3): TABLE OF LAND USES P = Permitted by Right (17.052(2)) S = Permitted as a Special Use (17.052(3)) C = Permitted as a Conditional Use (17.052(4)) ZONING DISTRICT ABBREVIATIONS R 
A 
- 
1 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c R 
A 
- 
2 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c C 
R 
- 
5 
a 
c E 
R 
- 
1 S 
R 
- 
2 S 
R 
- 
3 S 
R 
- 
4 M 
R 
- 
4 U 
R 
- 
8 E 
O S 
O N 
C S 
C U 
C C 
C S 
I U 
I H 
I TYPE OF LAND USE NONRESIDENTIAL LAND USES AGRICULTURAL LAND USES (17.056(2)(-)) P P S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S (a) Cultivation C C C C (b) Husbandry C C (c) Intensive Agriculture C C C (d) Agricultural Services S S (e) On-Site Agricultural Retail P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (f) Selective Cutting C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C (g) Clear Cutting INSTITUTIONAL LAND USES (17.056(3)(-)) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (a) Passive Outdoor Public Recreational S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S (b) Active Outdoor Public Recreational C C C C C C C C C S S S S S S S (c) Indoor Institutional C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C (d) Outdoor Institutional C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C (e) Public Services and Utilities C C C C C C C (f) Institutional Residential S S S S S S S S S (g) Community Living Arrangement (1-8 res.) C C C C S S C C (h) Community Living Arrangement (9-15 res.) C C C (i) Community Living Arrangement (16+ res.)  
TABLE 17.053(4): TABLE OF LAND USES P = Permitted by Right (17.052(2)) S = Permitted as a Special Use (17.052(3)) C = Permitted as a Conditional Use (17.052(4)) ZONING DISTRICT ABBREVIATIONS R 
A 
- 
1 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c R 
A 
- 
2 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c C 
R 
- 
5 
a 
c E 
R 
- 
1 S 
R 
- 
2 S 
R 
- 
3 S 
R 
- 
4 M 
R 
- 
4 U 
R 
- 
8 E 
O S 
O N 
C S 
C U 
C C 
C S 
I U 
I H 
I TYPE OF LAND USE COMMERCIAL LAND USES (17.056(4)(-)) P P P P P P P P P (a) Office P P P P P P (b) Personal or Professional Service C C P P P P (c) Indoor Sales or Service C C (d) Outdoor Display C C C C P P P (e) Indoor Maintenance Service C (f) Outdoor Maintenance Service C C C C C C (g) In-Vehicle Sales or Service C C C C C C C (h) Indoor Commercial Entertainment C C C C (i) Outdoor Commercial Entertainment C C C C C (j) Commercial Animal Boarding C C C C C (k) Commercial Indoor Lodging C C C C C C C C C C C C C (l) Bed and Breakfast Establishments C C C C C C C C C C (m) Group Day Care Center (9+ children) C C (n) Campground C C C (o) Boarding House C (p) Sexually-Oriented Land Use C CONVERSION OF EXISTING RESIDENCES TO NON-RESIDENTIAL USES  
TABLE 17.053(5), (6), and (7): TABLE OF LAND USES P = Permitted by Right (17.052(2)) S = Permitted as a Special Use (17.052(3)) C = Permitted as a Conditional Use (17.052(4)) ZONING DISTRICT ABBREVIATIONS R 
A 
- 
1 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c R 
A 
- 
2 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c C 
R 
- 
5 
a 
c E 
R 
- 
1 S 
R 
- 
2 S 
R 
- 
3 S 
R 
- 
4 M 
R 
- 
4 U 
R 
- 
8 E 
O S 
O N 
C S 
C U 
C C 
C S 
I U 
I H 
I TYPE OF LAND USE STORAGE/DISPOSAL LAND USES (17.056(5)(-)) P P P (a) Indoor Storage or Wholesaling C S (b) Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling C C C (c) Personal Storage Facility C C C (d) Junkyard or Salvage Yard C C C (e) Waste Disposal Facility C C C (f) Composting Operation TRANSPORTATION LAND USES (17.056(6)(-)) S S S S (a) Off-Site Parking Lot C C C C C C C (b) Airport/Heliport C (c) Freight Terminal C C P P (d) Distribution Center INDUSTRIAL LAND USES (17.056(7)(-)) S S S (a) Light Industrial S (b) Heavy Industrial C C C C (c) Communication Tower C C (d) Extraction Use  
TABLE 17.053(8): TABLE OF LAND USES P = Permitted by Right (17.052(2)) S = Permitted as a Special Use (17.052(3)) C = Permitted as a Conditional Use (17.052(4)) ZONING DISTRICT ABBREVIATIONS R 
A 
- 
1 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c R 
A 
- 
2 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c C 
R 
- 
5 
a 
c E 
R 
- 
1 S 
R 
- 
2 S 
R 
- 
3 S 
R 
- 
4 M 
R 
- 
4 U 
R 
- 
8 E 
O S 
O N 
C S 
C U 
C C 
C S 
I U 
I H 
I TYPE OF LAND USE ACCESSORY LAND USES (17.056(8)(-)) C C C C C C (a) Commercial Apartment S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S (b) On-Site Parking Lot P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C (d) Private Residential Garage or Shed P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (e) Private Residential Recreational Facility S S C C (f) Private Residential Kennel C C C (g) Private Residential Stable P P P P P P P P (h) Company Cafeteria S/C S/C S/C S/C S/C S/C S/C S/C (i) Company Provided On-Site Recreation C C C C (k) In-Vehicle Sales and Service S S S (l) Indoor Sales Incident to Light Ind. Use C C C C (m) Light Ind. Incidental to Indoor Sales S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S (n) Drainage Structure (See 17.054 also) S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S (o) Filling (See 17.054 also) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (p) Lawn Care (See 17.054 also) P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C (q) Septic Systems (See 17.054 also) P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C (r) Exterior Communication Devices P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C (s) Home Occupation S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S (t) On-Site Composting P P P P P P P P P (u) Family Day Care Home C C (v) Migrant Labor Camp P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S (w) Wood Piles  
TABLE 17.053(9): TABLE OF LAND USES T = Permitted as a Temporary Use (17.052(6)) ZONING DISTRICT ABBREVIATIONS R 
A 
- 
1 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c R 
A 
- 
2 
- 
3 
5 
a 
c C 
R 
- 
5 
a 
c E 
R 
- 
1 S 
R 
- 
2 S 
R 
- 
3 S 
R 
- 
4 M 
R 
- 
4 U 
R 
- 
8 E 
O S 
O N 
C S 
C U 
C C 
C S 
I U 
I H 
I TYPE OF LAND USE TEMPORARY LAND USES (17.056(9)(-)) T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T (a) Contractor's Project Office T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T (b) Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage T T T T T T T T T (c) Model Homes T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T (d) Real Estate Sales Office  
Section 17.054 - Table of Land Uses Permitted in Permanently Protected Green Space Areas. 
    In all developments, certain areas may be required to be set aside as permanently protected green space for the purpose of natural resources protection, to meet a Minimum Green Space Ratio (GSR) requirement, or to meet a Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) requirement (see Subchapter 17-VI: Density and Intensity Regulations and Subchapter 17-VII: Natural Resource Protection Regulations). Where such permanently protected green space is required, and where the land use is also permitted per the land use regulations of the applicable conventional zoning district (see Section 17.053, Table of Land Uses), the following table shall also be employed to establish land use regulations. All land uses listed in Section 17.053 but not listed in this Section are prohibited in permanently protected green spaces. 
(Table 17.054 is presented on the following page.) 
TABLE 17.054: LAND USES PERMITTED IN PERMANENTLY PROTECTED GREEN SPACE AREAS LAND USE PERMANENTLY PROTECTED GREEN SPACE AREAS V 
A 
L 
L 
E 
Y 
  
P 
L 
A 
I 
N 
* W 
E 
T 
L 
A 
N 
D 
* L 
A 
K 
E 
S 
H 
O 
R 
E 
* D 
R 
A 
I 
N 
A 
G 
E 
W 
A 
Y W 
O 
O 
D 
L 
A 
N 
D S 
T 
E 
E 
P 
  
S 
L 
O 
P 
E OTHER 
PERMANENTLY 
PROTECTED 
GREEN 
SPACE (a) Cultivation Refer to Sections 17.113, 17.114 and 17.115 for detailed land use regulations pertaining to these Overlay Zoning Districts 
  
In general, the regulations of Marathon County apply in these areas. C (b) Passive Outdoor Recreational S S S S (c) Active Outdoor Recreational S (d) Outdoor Institutional S (e) Lawn Care (mow-feed-seed-weed) C C C S (f) Golf Course C C C S (g) Any Permitted Temporary Use S, T (h) Drainage Structure C C C C (i) Filling C C C C (j) Septic System C (k) Road, Bridge C C C C (l) Utility Lines & Related Facilities C C C C S: Permitted as a Special Use per 17.056(10), 17.053, 17.111-17.120, and 17.224. C: Permitted as a Conditional Use per 17.056(10), 17.053, 17.111-17.120 and 17.225. T Permitted as a Temporary Use per 17.056(10), 17.053, 17.111-17.120, and 17.226.  
Section 17.055 - Regulations Applicable to All Development. 
    All development, as defined in Section 17.024, initiated within the Town of Rib Mountain on, or following, the effective date of this Chapter shall comply with all of the provisions of this Chapter including: 
(1)  Land Use Regulations and Requirements. All uses of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Subchapter 17-IV, pertaining to the types of uses to which land may be put, and to various requirements which must be met for certain types of land uses within particular zoning districts. Such regulations and requirements address both general and specific regulations which land uses shall adhere to; and which are directly related to the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Rib Mountain and its environs. 
(2)  Density and Intensity Regulations and Requirements. All development of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Subchapter 17-V, pertaining to the maximum permitted density (for residential land uses) and intensity (for nonresidential land uses) of land uses. Such regulations and requirements address issues such as Floor Area Ratios (FARs), Green Space Ratios (GSRs), and Landscape Surface Ratios (LSRs); which are directly related to, and are a critical component of, density or intensity and the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Rib Mountain and its environs. 
(3)  Bulk Regulations and Requirements. All development of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Subchapter 17-VI, pertaining to the maximum permitted bulk of structures and the location of structures on a lot. Such regulations and requirements address issues such as height, setbacks from property lines and rights-of-way, and minimum separation between structures; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the effective bulk of a structure and the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Rib Mountain and its environs. 
(4)  Natural Resources and Green Space Regulations and Requirements. All land use and/or development of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Subchapter 17-VII, pertaining to the protection of sensitive natural resources and required green space areas. Such regulations and requirements address issues such as absolute protection, partial protection, and mitigation; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the protection of natural resources and the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Rib Mountain and its environs. 
(5)  Landscaping and Bufferyards Regulations and Requirements. All development of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Subchapter 17-VIII, pertaining to the provision of landscaping and bufferyards. Such regulations and requirements address issues such as minimum required landscaping of developed land, and minimum required provision of bufferyards between adjoining zoning districts and/or development options; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Rib Mountain and its environs. 
(6)  Performance Standards and Requirements. All development of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Subchapter 17-IX, pertaining to the provision of appropriate access, parking, loading, storage, and lighting facilities. Such regulations and requirements address issues such as maximum permitted access points, minimum required parking spaces, the screening of storage areas, and maximum permitted intensity of lighting, as well as defining acceptable levels of potential nuisances such as noise, vibration, odors, heat, glare and smoke; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Rib Mountain and its environs. 
(7)  Signage Regulations and Requirements. All land use and/or development of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Subchapter 17-X, pertaining to the type and amount of signage permitted on property. Such regulations and restrictions address issues such as the maximum area of permitted signage and the number and types of permitted signage; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Rib Mountain and its environs. 
(8)  Procedural Regulations and Requirements. All land use and/or development of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of Subchapter 17-XI, pertaining to the procedures necessary to secure review and approval of land use and/or development. Such regulations and restrictions address both procedural and technical requirements; and are directly related to, and a critical component of, the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Rib Mountain and its environs. 
(9)  Number of Buildings Per Lot. In the RA-35ac, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-2, and SR-3 Districts, only 1 principal building shall be permitted on any 1 lot. In the MR-4, UR-8, EO, SO, NC, SC, UC, CC, SI, UI, and HI Districts, more than 1 principal building shall be permitted on any 1 lot upon the granting of a conditional use permit for a Group Development in compliance with Section 17.058. 
(10)  Number of Land Uses Per Building. 
(a)  No more than 1 nonresidential land use shall be permitted in any building unless a conditional use permit for a Group Development is granted in compliance with Section 17.058. 
(b)  With the exceptions of a Commercial Apartment or a Home Occupation, no building containing a nonresidential land use shall contain a residential land use. (See Sections 17.056(8)(a) and 17.056(8)(s).) 
(11)  Division or Combining of a Lot. No recorded lot shall be divided into 2 or more lots, and no 2 or more recorded lots shall be combined into one or more lots, unless such division or combination results in the creation of lots, each of which conforms to all of the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which said lot is located (as set forth in this Chapter). (See also the Land Division Regulations.) 
Section 17.056 - Detailed Land Use Descriptions and Regulations. 
    The type of land uses regulated by this Chapter are defined in this Section. Land uses which are not listed in this Chapter are not necessarily excluded from locating within any given zoning district. Section 17.231 empowers the Zoning Administrator to make interpretations on matters regarding specific land use types which are not addressed in this Chapter. 
(1)  Residential Land Uses. Specific residential unit types (such as single-family detached house on a 20,000 square foot lot, duplex, twin house, atrium house, weak-link townhouse, multiplex, apartment, etc.) are defined in Section 17.093 which provides standards for each dwelling unit type. 
(a)  Conventional Residential Development. Description: This type of development includes, but is not limited to, all residential developments which consist of a single residential building located on one lot within a subdivision plat. This is the most common type of development in Rib Mountain. 
(b)  Special Residential Development. Description: This type of development includes, but is not limited to, all residential developments which consist of multiple residential buildings located on one lot such as an apartment complex or a condominium project. This type of development is generally established within a Unified Development District (Section 17.038) or as a Group Development (Section 17.058). 
(c)  Mobile Home Residential Development (Subdivision). Description: This land use is a form of conventional residential development which is exclusively reserved for individually sold lots containing mobile or manufactured home units. Each of the lots and mobile or manufactured home units must meet the requirements for mobile homes listed in Section 17.093(20) of this Chapter. Under this development option, approximately 10% of a development's Gross Site Area (GSA) can contain natural resource areas which must be protected (or other permanently protected green space areas), without a reduction in Maximum Gross Density (MGD). (See note (i) below.) 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {MR-4}: 
a.  Development shall be located so as to blend with adjacent residentially zoned areas to the greatest extent possible. 
b.  Mobile Home Residential Developments shall comply with the same landscaping and bufferyard requirements as apartments and Compact Cluster Developments, as specified in Section 17.150 of this Chapter. 
c.  No access shall be permitted to local residential streets. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(d)  Mobile Home Park Residential Development (Rental/Condo Park). Description: This land use is a form of conventional residential development which is exclusively reserved for individually sold or rented air right pads containing mobile or manufactured home units. Each of the mobile or manufactured home units must meet the requirements for mobile homes listed in Section 17.093(20) of this Chapter. Under this development option, approximately 10% of a development's Gross Site Area (GSA) can contain natural resource areas which must be protected (or other permanently protected green space areas), without a reduction in Maximum Gross Density (MGD). (See note (i) below.) 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {MR-4}: 
a.  Development shall be located so as to blend with adjacent residentially zoned areas to the greatest extent possible. 
b.  Mobile Home Park Residential Developments shall comply with the same landscaping and bufferyard requirements as apartments and Compact Cluster Developments, as specified in Section 17.150 of this Chapter. 
c.  No access shall be permitted to local residential streets. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(2)  Agricultural Land Uses. (Am. #09-05) 
(a)  Cultivation. Description: Cultivation land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site, outdoor raising of plants. This land use includes trees which are raised as a crop to be replaced with more trees after harvesting, such as in nursery or Christmas tree operations. The raising of plants for consumption by farm animals is considered cultivation if said plants are consumed by animals which are located off-site. Establishment of a "landscaped area" as defined in Subchapter II is not considered as a cultivation use. 
1.  Permitted by Right. Cultivation, as defined above, is permitted by right in an RA-35 district. Noncommercial gardens, which include the outdoor raising of fruits, vegetables and flowers on small plots for the grower's private use or enjoyment are permitted in any zoning district provided the gardened area does not exceed 3,000 square feet in area. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {All Districts except RA-35ac}: 
a.  Non-commercial garden areas in excess of 3,000 square feet which the Plan Commission has determined will not impair the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties. 
b.  Commercial gardens which involve the raising of fruits, vegetables or flowers for sale and other cultivation activities provided the Plan Commission has determined that the activity will not impair the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Any building constructed for this agricultural use shall be located in relation to any residentially zoned property and all other lot lines so as to minimize any negative impacts on the abutting property. The distance that these buildings shall be setback from property lines and adjacent structures shall be determined by the Plan Commission on a case-by-case basis. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of Section 17.174(6)(a).) 
(b)  Husbandry. Description: Husbandry land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals at an intensity of less than one animal unit (as defined in Section 17.024) per acre. Apiaries are considered husbandry land uses. Private residential stables are regulated in Section 17.056(8)(g). 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-35ac, CR-5ac, ER-1}: 
a.  Any building constructed for this agricultural use, including structures housing animals, shall be located in relation to any residentially zoned property and all other lot lines so as to minimize any negative impacts on the abutting property. The distance that these buildings shall be set back from property lines and adjacent structures shall be determined by the Plan Commission on a case-by-case basis. 
b.  All outdoor animal containments (pasture) shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of Section 17.174(6)(a).) 
(b-1)  Husbandry, low density. (Cr. #09-05) Description: Husbandry land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals at an intensity of less than one animal unit (as defined in Section 17.024) per acre, and less than 500 animal units total. Apiaries are considered husbandry land uses. Private residential stables are regulated in Section 17.056(8)(g). 
1.  Permitted by Right: RA-1-35ac. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {CR-5ac, ER-1}: 
a.  Any building constructed for this agricultural use, including structures housing animals, shall be located in relation to any residentially zoned property and all other lot lines so as to minimize any negative impacts on the abutting property. The distance that these buildings shall be set back from property lines and adjacent structures shall be determined by the Plan Commission on a case-by-case basis. 
b.  All outdoor animal containments (pasture) shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of Section 17.174(6)(a).) 
(b-2)  Husbandry, high density. (Cr. #09-05) Description: Husbandry land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals at an intensity of less than one animal unit (as defined in Section 17.024) per acre, and 500 or more animal units total. Apiaries are considered husbandry land uses. Private residential stables are regulated in Section 17.056(8)(g). 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not Applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-2-35ac}: 
a.  Any building constructed for this agricultural use, including structures housing animals, shall be located in relation to any residentially zoned property and all other lot lines so as to minimize any negative impacts on the abutting property. The distance that these buildings shall be set back from property lines and adjacent structures shall be determined by the Plan Commission on a case-by-case basis. 
b.  All outdoor animal containments (pasture) shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
c.  Shall comply with Marathon County licensing regulations. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of Section 17.174(6)(a).) 
(c)  Intensive Agriculture. Description: Intensive agricultural land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals at an intensity equal to or exceeding one animal unit (as defined in Section 17.024) per acre and/or agricultural activities requiring large investments in structures. Examples of such land uses include feed lots, hog farms, poultry operations, fish farms, commercial greenhouse operations and certain other operations meeting this criterion. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-2-35ac}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  Shall not be located in, or adjacent to, an existing or platted residential subdivision. 
b.  Shall be completely surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum intensity of 1.00. (See Section 17.150.) 
c.  All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor animal containments shall be located in relation to any residentially zoned property and all other lot lines so as to minimize any negative impacts on the abutting property. The distance that these buildings shall be set back from property lines and adjacent structures shall be determined by the Plan Commission on a case-by-case basis. 
d.  Shall be located in an area which is planned to remain commercially viable for agricultural land uses. 
e.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of Section 17.174(6)(a).) 
(d)  Agricultural Service. Description: Agricultural service land uses include all operations pertaining to the sale, handling, transport, packaging, storage, or disposal of agricultural equipment, products, by-products, or materials primarily used by agricultural operations. Examples of such land uses include agricultural implement sales, storage, or repair operations; feed and seed stores; agricultural chemical dealers and/or storage facilities; animal feed storage facilities; commercial dairies; food processing facilities; canning and other packaging facilities; and agricultural waste disposal facilities (except commercial composting uses, see Section 17.056(5)(f)). 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-2-35ac, HI}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  Shall not be located in, or adjacent to, an existing or platted residential subdivision. 
b.  All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor animal containments shall be located in relation to any residentially zoned property and all other lot lines so as to minimize any negative impacts on the abutting property. The distance that these buildings shall be set back from property lines and adjacent structures shall be determined by the Plan Commission on a case-by-case basis. 
c.  If within the RA-35ac District, shall be located in an area which is planned to remain commercially viable for agricultural land uses. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of Section 17.174(6)(a).) 
(e)  On-Site Agricultural Retail. Description: On-site agricultural retail land uses include land uses solely associated with the sale of agricultural products grown exclusively on the site. The sale of products grown or otherwise produced off-site shall not be permitted within on-site agricultural retail operations and such activity constitutes retail sales as a commercial land use. Packaging and equipment used to store, display, package or carry products for the convenience of the operation or its customers (such as egg cartons, baskets, containers, and bags) shall be produced off-site. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {RA-1-35ac, RA-2-35ac}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  No structure or group of structures shall exceed 500 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No structure shall exceed 12 feet in height. 
c.  All structures shall meet all required setbacks for nonresidential land uses. (See Section 17.094.) 
d.  Signage shall be limited to one on-site sign which shall not exceed 30 square feet in area. 
e.  Such land use shall be served by no more than one driveway. Said driveway shall require a valid driveway permit. 
f.  A minimum of one parking space shall be required for every 200 square feet of product display area. 
g.  The sale of products which are grown or otherwise produced on non-adjacent property under the same ownership, or on property under different ownership, shall be prohibited. 
h.  Said structure and fencing shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
i.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per employee on the largest work shift. (Note: Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing requirements of Section 17.174(6)(a).) 
(f)  Selective Cutting. Description: Selective cutting land uses include any operation associated with the one-time, continuing, or cumulative clearing, cutting, harvesting, or other destruction of trees (including by fire) where the extent of such activity is limited to an area (or combined areas) of less than or equal to 40% of the woodlands on the property (or up to 100% for developments approved prior to the effective date of this Ordinance). Selective cutting activity shall be limited to areas located within development pads which are designated on recorded Plats or Certified Survey Maps (see Section 17.120). The destruction of trees in an area in excess of this amount of the woodlands on the property shall be considered clear cutting, (see (g), below). 
1.  Permitted by Right {All Districts} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
(g)  Clear Cutting. Description: Clear cutting land uses include the one-time, continuing, or cumulative clearing, cutting, harvesting, or other destruction (including by fire) of trees in an area (or combined areas) of more than 40% of the woodlands on a property (or up to 100% for developments approved prior to the effective date of this Ordinance). Clear cutting is permitted only as a conditional use within the jurisdiction of this Chapter. Areas which have been clear cut as a result of intentional action following the effective date of this Chapter without the granting of a conditional use permit are in violation of this Chapter and the property owner shall be fined for such violation (in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.256) and shall be required to implement the mitigation standards required for the destruction of woodlands solely at his/her expense, including costs associated with site inspection to confirm the satisfaction of mitigation requirements. Areas which have been clear cut unintentionally as a result of fire shall not subject the owner of the property to fines associated with the violation of this Chapter, but shall require the satisfaction of mitigation requirements at the owner's expense, including cost associated with site inspection to confirm the satisfaction of mitigation requirements. (See Section 17.149.) 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable, except for Federal, State, or County owned lands. (Am. #08-06) 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {All Districts}: 
a.  Applicant shall demonstrate that clear cutting will improve the level of environmental protection on the subject property. 
b.  Areas of the subject property which are clear cut beyond the limitations established above, shall be replanted per the requirements of Section 17.117. (Referenced section requires the replanting of trees in other portions of the subject property-thereby freeing the currently wooded area for development while ensuring that the amount of required wooded area on the subject property remains constant.) 
c.  Clear cutting shall not be permitted within a required bufferyard or landscaped area (see Section 17.150), or within an area designated as permanently protected green space (see Subchapter VII). 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(3)  Institutional Land Uses. 
(a)  Passive Outdoor Public Recreational. Description: Passive outdoor public recreational land uses include all recreational land uses located on public property which involve passive recreational activities. Such land uses include arboretums, natural areas, wildlife areas, hiking trails, bike trails, cross country ski trails, horse trails, open grassed areas not associated with any particular active recreational land use (see (b), below), picnic areas, picnic shelters, gardens, fishing areas, and similar land uses. 
1.  Permitted by Right {All Districts} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
4.  Parking Requirements: One space per 4 expected patrons at maximum capacity for any use requiring over 5 spaces. 
(b)  Active Outdoor Public Recreational. Description: Active outdoor public recreational land uses include all recreational land uses located on public property which involve active recreational activities. Such land uses include playcourts (such as tennis courts and basketball courts), playfields (such as ball diamonds, football fields, and soccer fields), tot lots, outdoor swimming pools, swimming beach areas, fitness courses, public golf courses, and similar land uses. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {OR-35ac, RR-35ac}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  Facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially zoned property shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see Section 17.150). Said bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said residentially zoned property. 
b.  All structures and active recreational areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
c.  Facilities which serve a community-wide function shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or arterial street. 
d.  Facilities which serve a regional or community-wide function shall provide off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the users will be children. 
e.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
4.  Parking Regulations: Active Outdoor Public Recreation: one space per 4 expected patrons at maximum capacity for any use requiring over 5 spaces. 
(c)  Indoor Institutional. Description: Indoor institutional land uses include all indoor public and not for profit recreational facilities (such as gyms, swimming pools, libraries, museums, and community centers), schools, churches, nonprofit clubs, nonprofit fraternal organizations, convention centers, hospitals, jails, prisons, and similar land uses. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {EO, SO, NC, SC, UC, CC, SI}: 
a.  Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or arterial street. 
b.  Shall provide off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the users will be children (as in the case of a school, church, library, or similar land use. 
c.  All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {OR-35ac, RR-35ac, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-2, SR-3, SR-4, MR-4, UR-8}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  Shall meet all regulations for special uses listed in 2., above. 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: Generally, one space per 3 expected patrons at maximum capacity. However, see additional specific requirements below: 
Church: one space per five seats at the maximum capacity. 
Community or Recreation Center: One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area, or one space per 4 patrons to the maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift. 
Funeral Home: one space per 3 patron seats at the maximum capacity, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift. 
Hospital: two spaces per 3 patient beds, plus one space per staff doctor and each other employee on the largest work shift. 
Library or Museum: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area or one space per 4 seats to the maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift. 
Schools: 
Elementary and Junior High: one space per teacher and per staff member, plus one space per 2 classrooms. 
Senior High: one space per teacher and staff member on the largest work shift, plus one space per 5 non-bused students. 
College: one space per staff member on the largest work shift, plus one space per 2 students of the largest class attendance period. 
Commercial or Trade: one space per 3 students, plus one space per employee (including faculty) at capacity class attendance period. 
(d)  Outdoor Institutional. Description: Outdoor institutional land uses include public and private cemeteries, privately held permanently protected green space areas, country clubs, non-public golf courses, and similar land uses. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {All Districts except UI and HI}: 
a.  Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or arterial street. 
b.  Shall provide off-street passenger loading area if a significant proportion of the users will be children. 
c.  All structures and actively used outdoor recreational areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
d.  Facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially zoned property shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see Section 17.150). Said bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said residentially zoned property. 
e.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: Generally, one space per 3 expected patrons at maximum capacity. However, see additional specific requirements below: 
Cemetery: one space per employee, plus one space per 3 patrons to the maximum capacity of all indoor assembly areas. 
Golf Course: 36 spaces per 9 holes, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift, plus 50% of spaces otherwise required for any accessory uses (e.g., bars, restaurant). 
Swimming Pool: one space per 75 square feet of gross water area. 
Tennis Court: 3 spaces per court. 
(e)  Public Service and Utilities. Description: Public service and utilities land uses include all of the following: Town, County, State and Federal buildings which are not regulated elsewhere in this Chapter; emergency service facilities such as fire departments and rescue operations; wastewater treatment plants; electric utility substations; municipal water reservoirs; municipal water booster stations; municipal water wells and treatment facilities; telephone exchanges; wastewater lift stations; natural gas distribution facilities; and related utility and public service land uses. 
Due to the unusual nature of these activities and the need to frequently establish these uses in unique locations for the benefit of the public, all public service and utility uses are treated as conditional uses and may be established in any location which is reasonably necessary for the public convenience and public welfare provided these uses are located and will be operated in a manner that will not be detrimental to the use and enjoyment of adjoining or nearby property. 
Where deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission, these uses may be established as part of a group development in accordance with Section 17.058. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: {All Districts}: 
a.  All outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any lot line in a residential zoning district. 
b.  All outdoor storage areas adjoining a lot line in a residential zoning district shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 (see Section 17.150). Said bufferyard shall be located along the lot line adjacent to said residentially zoned property. 
c.  All structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from a lot line in a residential zoning district. 
d.  The exterior of all buildings shall be compatible with the exteriors of surrounding buildings or buildings that are likely to be located in the general area of the proposed use. 
e.  The proposed utility use shall not be located on a lot smaller than the minimum lot size required in the district for a conventional residential development option unless the use is proposed as part of a group development. For example, in an SR-2 District the minimum lot size for a public service and utility use would be 20,000 square feet. 
f.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: Parking shall be provided as determined by the Plan Commission. 
(f)  Institutional Residential. Description: Institutional residential land uses include group homes, convents, monasteries, nursing homes, convalescent homes, limited care facilities, rehabilitation centers, and similar land uses not considered to be community living arrangements under the provisions of §60.63, Wis. Stats. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {MR-4, UR-8, EO, SO, SC, UC, CC}. 
4.  Parking Regulations: 
Monastery or Convent: one space per 6 residents, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per 5 chapel seats if the public may attend. 
Nursing Home: one space per 6 patient beds, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per staff member and per visiting doctor. 
(g)  Community Living Arrangement (1-8 residents) Description: Community living arrangement land uses include all facilities provided for in §46.03(22), Wis. Stats., including child welfare agencies, group homes for children, and community based residential facilities. Community living arrangements do not include day care centers (see separate listing); nursing homes (an institutional residential land use); general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons, or jails (all indoor institutional land uses). Community living arrangement facilities are regulated depending upon their capacity as provided for in §60.63, Wis. Stats. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {OR-35ac, RR-35ac, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-2, SR-3, SR-4, MR-4, UR-8}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  No community living arrangement shall be established within 2,500 feet of any other such facility regardless of its capacity. 
b.  The total capacity of all community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the Town shall not exceed 1% of the Town's population (unless specifically authorized by the Town Board following a public hearing). 
c.  Foster homes housing 4 or fewer children and licensed under §48.62, Wis. Stats., shall not be subject to a., above; and shall not be subject to, or count toward, the total arrived at in b., above. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. State Law Reference: §60.63, Wis. Stats. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
4.  Parking Regulations: 3 spaces. 
(h)  Community Living Arrangement (9-15 residents). Description: See (g), above. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {MR-4, UR-8}: 
a.  No community living arrangement shall be established within 2,500 feet of any other such facility, regardless of capacity. 
b.  The total capacity of all community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the Town shall not exceed 1% of the Town's population (unless specifically authorized by the Town Board following a public hearing). 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. State Law Reference: §60.63, Wis. Stats. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-2, SR-3, EO, SO}: 
a.  Shall meet all regulations for special uses in b., above. 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: 4 spaces. 
(i)  Community Living Arrangement (16+ residents). Description: See (g), above. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {UR-8, EO, SO}: 
a.  No community living arrangement shall be established within 2,500 feet of any other such facility, regardless of capacity. 
b.  The total capacity of all community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the Town shall not exceed 1% of the Town's population (unless specifically authorized by the Town Board following a public hearing). 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. State Law Reference: §60.63, Wis. Stats. 
4.  Parking Regulations: 5 spaces. 
(4)  Commercial Land Uses. 
(a)  Office. Description: Office land uses include all exclusively indoor land uses whose primary functions are the handling of information or administrative services. Such land uses do not typically provide services directly to customers on a walk-in or on-appointment basis. 
1.  Permitted by Right {EO, SO, NC, SC, UC, CC, SI, UI, HI} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Personal or Professional Service. Description: Personal service and professional service land uses include all exclusively indoor land uses whose primary function is the provision of services directly to an individual on a walk-in or on-appointment basis. Examples of such land uses include professional services, insurance services, realty offices, financial services, medical offices and clinics, veterinary clinics, barber shops, beauty shops, and related land uses. 
1.  Permitted by Right {EO, SO, NC, SC, UC, CC} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  Indoor Sales or Service. Description: Indoor sales and service land uses include all land uses which conduct business activities or display sales or rental merchandise or equipment, or non-personal or non-professional services, entirely within an enclosed building. This includes self-service facilities such as coin-operated laundromats. These land uses may display or store products outside of an enclosed building or engage in outside sales activities if a conditional use is granted according to the standards set forth below. Artisan craft production such as consumer ceramics, custom woodworking, or other production activities directly associated with retail sales are regulated as "light industrial uses incidental to retail sales" (see Section 17.056(8)(m). 
1.  Permitted by Right {NC, SC, UC, CC} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {EO, SO}: 
a.  Allowable conditional uses shall be limited to only those indoor sales and personal services which primarily support office tenants such as office supply stores, copy centers and travel agencies. 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Conditional Use Regulations {EO, SO, NC, SC, UC, CC}: 
a.  To help maintain aesthetically pleasing, uncluttered and safe indoor sales or service areas, any outdoor display, storage or sales activities at the site of an indoor sales or service use may only be established as a conditional use. 
b.  The combined area allowed to be used for outdoor display, storage and sales shall not exceed 15% of the floor area of the building occupied by the indoor sales or service use except in the SC and UC where the area shall not exceed 25%. 
c.  The location, type and height of the material or products stored, displayed or sold outdoors, the location, type and height of any fencing, the type and location of exterior lighting and other elements related to the outdoor display, storage or sales activities shall be determined by the plan commission. 
d.  The request shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
5.  Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(d)  Outdoor Display. Description: Outdoor display land uses include all land uses which conduct sales, display sales or rental merchandise or equipment outside of an enclosed building. Example of such land uses include vehicle sales, vehicle rental, manufactured housing sales and monument sales. The area of outdoor sales shall be calculated as the area which would be enclosed by a fence installed and continually maintained in the most efficient manner which completely encloses all materials displayed outdoors. Such land uses do not include the storage or display of inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other materials typically associated with a junkyard or salvage yard. (See Subsection (5), below, also.) (Land uses which conduct or display only a limited amount of product outside of an enclosed building, are listed separately in Sections 17.056(8)(j) as "Outdoor Display Incidental to Indoor Sales".) 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {SC, UC}: 
a.  The display of items shall not be permitted in permanently protected green space areas, required landscaped areas, or required bufferyards. 
b.  The display of items shall not be permitted within required setback areas for the principal structure. 
c.  In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or number of parking stalls provided on the property below the requirement established by the provisions of Section 17.174. If the number of provided parking stalls on the property is already less than the requirement, such display area shall not further reduce the number of parking stalls already present. 
d.  Display areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters, or by a clearly marked paved area. 
e.  Signs, screenage, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/pedestrian conflicts. 
f.  Outdoor display shall be permitted during the entire calendar year, however, if goods are removed from the display area all support fixtures used to display the goods shall be removed within 10 calendar days of the removal of the goods. 
g.  Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored or displayed in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be displayed under the provisions of this land use. 
h.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all borders of the display area abutting residentially zoned property, except per e., above (see Section 17.150). 
i.  Shall comply with Section 17.225 regarding conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(e)  Indoor Maintenance Service. Description: Indoor maintenance services include all land uses which perform maintenance services (including repair) and contain all operations (except loading) entirely within an enclosed building. Because of the noise, odor, dust, and outside storage associated with certain types of vehicle and other repair businesses, all indoor maintenance service and repair activities are a conditional use in the commercial zoning districts listed below: 
1.  Permitted by Right {SI, UI, HI} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: {NC, SC, UC, CC} 
a.  Outside vehicle storage shall be restricted to licensed vehicles waiting to be repaired. Junk vehicles or vehicles which are being used for parts are not allowed to be stored outside. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(f)  Outdoor Maintenance Service. Description: Outdoor maintenance services include all land uses which perform maintenance services, including repair, and have all, or any portion, of their operations located outside of an enclosed building. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {HI}: 
a.  All outdoor activity areas shall be completely enclosed by a minimum 6 feet high fence. Such enclosure shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property and shall be screened from such property by a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 (see Section 17.150). 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(g)  In-Vehicle Sales or Service. Description: In-vehicle sales and service land uses include all land uses which perform sales and/or services to persons in vehicles, or to vehicles which may be occupied at the time of such activity. Such land uses often have traffic volumes which exhibit their highest levels concurrent with peak traffic flows on adjacent roads. Examples of such land uses include drive-in, drive-up, and drive-through facilities, vehicular fuel stations, and all forms of car washes. If performed in conjunction with a principal land use (for example, a convenience store, restaurant or bank), in-vehicle sales and service land uses shall be considered an accessory use (see Section 17.056(8)(k)). 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {EO, SO, NC, SC, UC, CC}: 
a.  Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided for each walk-in customer access to the facility adjacent to the drive-through lane(s). 
b.  The drive-through facility shall be designed so as to not impede or impair vehicular and pedestrian traffic movement, or exacerbate the potential for pedestrian/vehicular conflicts. 
c.  In no instance shall a drive-through facility be permitted to operate which endangers the public safety, even if such land use has been permitted under the provisions of this Section. 
d.  The setback of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall be a minimum of 10 feet from all street rights-of-way lines, a minimum of 20 feet from all residentially-zoned property lines, and shall be a minimum of 5 feet from all other property lines. The total height of any overhead canopy of similar structure shall not exceed 20 feet as measured to the highest part of the structure. 
e.  All vehicular areas of the facility shall provide a surface paved with concrete or bituminous material which is designed to meet the requirements of a minimum 4 ton axle load. 
f.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
g.  Interior curbs shall be used to separate driving areas from exterior fixtures such as fuel pumps, vacuums, menu boards, canopy supports and landscaped islands. Said curbs shall be a minimum of 6 inches high and be of a non-mountable design. No curb protecting an exterior fixture shall be located closer than 25 feet to all property lines. 
h.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space for each employee on the largest shift. 
5.  In-Vehicle Waiting and Drive-Up Lanes: 
a.  Banks: A minimum of 80 feet of queuing space shall be provided for each drive-up window. 
b.  Car washes: A minimum of 80 feet shall be provided in front of the entrance to each washing stall for self-service and coin-operated car washes and 120 feet in front of the entrance to each washing stall for an automatic car wash facility. An on-premise drip area shall be provided at the car wash exit to minimize the amount of water transported onto streets near the car wash. 
c.  Drive-in restaurants for food pick-up: A minimum of 80 feet shall be provided in front of each drive-up window where food is ordered. 
d.  Drive-in restaurants where food is delivered to and eaten in the vehicle: Minimum of 15 spaces. 
e.  Other drive-up and drive-in uses: As determined by the Plan Commission. 
(h)  Indoor Commercial Entertainment. Description: Indoor commercial entertainment land uses include all land uses which provide entertainment services entirely within an enclosed building. Such activities often have operating hours which extend significantly later than most other commercial land uses. Examples of such land uses include restaurants, taverns, theaters, health or fitness centers, all forms of training studios (dance, art, martial arts, etc.) bowling alleys, arcades, roller rinks, and pool halls. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {EO, SO, NC, SC, UC, CC, SI}: 
a.  If located on the same side of the building as abutting residentially zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be permitted within 100 feet of a residentially zoned property. 
b.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per every 3 patron seats or lockers (whichever is greater); or one space per 3 persons at the maximum capacity of the establishment; (whichever is greater). 
(i)  Outdoor Commercial Entertainment. Description: Outdoor commercial entertainment land uses include all land uses which provide entertainment services partially or wholly outside of an enclosed building. Such activities often have the potential to be associated with nuisances related to noise, lighting, dust, trash and late operating hours. Examples of such land uses include outdoor commercial swimming pools, driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, amusement parks, drive-in theaters, go-cart tracks, and racetracks. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {OR-35ac, UC, SI}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  Activity areas shall not be located closer than 300 feet to a residentially zoned property. 
b.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .80 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
c.  Activity areas (including drive-in movie screens) shall not be visible from a public street or from any residentially-zoned property. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space for every 3 patron seats at the maximum capacity of the establishment. 
(j)  Commercial Animal Boarding. Description: Commercial animal boarding facility land uses include land uses which provide short-term and/or long-term boarding for animals. Examples of these land uses include commercial kennels and commercial stables. Exercise yards, fields, training areas, and trails associated with such land uses are considered accessory to such land uses and do not require separate consideration. Animal boarding facilities and activities which, except for parking are completely and continuously contained indoors, are subject to a separate set of regulations (see 4., below). 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {OR-35ac}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  A maximum of one animal unit per acre of fully enclosed outdoor area (and a maximum of 5 dogs, cats or similar animals) shall be permitted. 
b.  The minimum permitted size of horse or similar animal stall shall be 100 square feet. 
c.  The following setbacks shall be required in addition to those of the zoning district: 
i.  No activity area, including pastures or runs, shall be located closer than 10 feet to any property line. 
ii.  Any building housing animals shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
iii.  A vegetative strip at least 100 feet wide shall be maintained between any corral, manure pile, or manure application area and any surface water or well in order to minimize runoff, prevent erosion, and promote nitrogen absorption. 
d.  Special events such as shows, exhibitions, and contests shall only be permitted when a temporary use permit has been secured. (See Section 17.226.) 
e.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Conditional Use Regulations {SO, SC, UC}: 
a.  All activities, except vehicle parking, shall be completely and continuously contained indoors-including animal exercising and display areas. 
b.  Subsections 3.b., 3.d., and 3.e., above, shall be complied with. 
5.  Parking Regulations: One space per every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(k)  Commercial Indoor Lodging. Commercial indoor lodging facilities include any use of property for rental purposes specifically used by transient guests, which provide overnight housing in individual rooms or suites of rooms, each room or suite having a private bathroom. Such land uses may provide in-room or in-suite kitchens, and may also provide indoor recreational facilities for the exclusive use of their customers. Transient guests typically include people whose length of stay is less than 30 days. Lodging may include any type of dwelling, including the use of one-family and two-family homes, where the lodger does not take up residency. Restaurant, arcades, fitness centers, and other on-site facilities available to nonlodgers are not considered accessory uses and therefore require review as a separate land use. (Am. #02-01) 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {EO, SO, SC, UC, CC}: 
a.  If located on the same side of a building as abutting residentially zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be permitted within 100 feet of a residentially zoned property. 
b.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
c.  Within the EO and SO District, each and every room must take primary access via an individual interior door, and may not be accessed via an external balcony, porch or deck, except for emergency purposes. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per bedroom, plus one space for each employee on the largest work shift. 
(l)  Bed and Breakfast Establishment. Description: Bed and breakfast establishments are exclusively indoor lodging facilities which provide meals only to paying lodgers. Such land uses may provide indoor recreational facilities for the exclusive use of their customers. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {OR-35ac, RR-35ac, CR-5ac, ER-1, SR-2, SR-3, MR-4, UR-8, EO, NC, SC, UC, CC}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  All such facilities shall be required to obtain a permit to serve food and beverages. They shall be inspected annually at a fee as established by a separate ordinance, to verify that the land use continues to meet all applicable regulations. 
b.  1 sign, with a maximum area of 20 square feet, shall be permitted on the property. 
c.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
d.  No premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast operation unless there are at least 2 exits to the outdoors from such premises. Rooms utilized for sleeping shall have a minimum size of 100 square feet for 2 occupants with an additional 30 square feet for each additional occupant to a maximum of 4 occupants per room. Each sleeping room used for the bed and breakfast operation shall have a separate operational smoke detector alarm, as required in the Rib Mountain Building Code. One lavatory and bathing facility shall be required for every 10 occupants, in addition to the owner/occupants personal facilities. 
e.  The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast takes place shall be the principal residence of the operator/owner and said operator/owner shall live on the premises when the bed and breakfast operation is active. 
f.  Only the meal of breakfast shall be served to overnight guests. 
g.  Each operator shall keep a list of names of all persons staying at the bed and breakfast operation. This list shall be kept on file for a period of one year. Such list shall be available for inspection by Town officials at any time. 
h.  The maximum stay for any occupants of a bed and breakfast operations shall be 14 days. 
i.  It shall be unlawful for any persons to operate a bed and breakfast operation as defined and as permitted in the Municipal Code of the Town of Rib Mountain without first having obtained a conditional use permit and a license. The fee for issuance of a license required under this Ordinance shall be in accordance with Section 17.255 and collected by the office of the Town Clerk. The amount of such fee shall be established by the Town Board and shall be in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of inspections and supervision necessary for the implementation and enforcement of this Ordinance. The fees shall be paid at the office of the Town Clerk, who shall issue the license in January of each year. 
j.  Application Requirements. Applicants for a license to operate a bed and breakfast shall submit a floor plan of the single-family dwelling unit illustrating that the proposed operation will comply with the Town Zoning Ordinance as amended, other applicable Town codes and Ordinances, and within the terms of this Ordinance. 
k.  Consideration of Issuance. After application duly filed with the Town Clerk for a license under this division, Plan Commission review and recommendation for a conditional use permit, the Town Board shall hold a public hearing and determine whether any further license shall be issued based upon the pubic convenience and necessity of the people in the Town. In the determination by the Town Board of the number of bed and breakfast operations required to provide for such public convenience and necessity, the Town Board shall consider the effect upon residential neighborhoods, conditions of existing holders of licenses, and the necessity of the issuance of additional licenses for public service. 
l.  Public Nuisance Violations. Bed and breakfast operations shall not be permitted whenever the operation endangers, or offends, or interferes with the safety or rights of others so as to constitute a nuisance. 
m.  Suspension, Revocation and Renewal. Any license issued under the provisions of this Ordinance may be revoked by the Town Board for good cause shown after investigation and opportunity to the holder of such license to be heard in opposition thereto; in such investigation the compliance or non-compliance with the state law and local ordinances, the conduct of the licensee in regard to the public, and other consideration shall be weighed in determination of such issue. 
n.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per each bedroom. 
(m)  Group Day Care Center (9 or More Children). Description: Group day care centers are land uses in which qualified persons provide child care services for 9 or more children. Examples of such land uses include day care centers and nursery schools. Such land uses shall not be located within a residential building. Such land uses may be operated on a for profit or a not for profit basis. Such land uses may be operated in conjunction with another principal land use on the same environs, such as a church, school, business, or civic organization. In such instances, group day care centers are not considered as accessory uses and therefore require review as a separate land use. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {MR-4, UR-8, EO, SO, NC, SC, UC, CC, SI, UI} 
a.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .50 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
c.  Property owner's permission is required as part of the conditional use permit application. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per 5 students, plus one space for each employee on the largest work shift. 
(n)  Campground. Description: Campgrounds include any facilities designed for overnight accommodation of persons in tents, travel trailers, or other mobile or portable shelters or vehicles. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-35ac}: 
a.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .70 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: 1.5 spaces per campsite. 
(o)  Boarding House. Description: Boarding Homes include any residential use renting rooms which do not contain private bathroom facilities (with the exception of approved bed and breakfast facilities). 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {UR-8, UC, and CC}: 
a.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
b.  Shall provide a minimum of one on-site parking space for each room for rent. 
c.  Shall be located in an area of transition from residential land uses to nonresidential land uses. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per room for rent, plus one space per each employee on the largest work shift. 
(p)  Sexually-Oriented Land Use. Description: Sexually-oriented land uses include any facility oriented to the display of sexually-oriented materials such as videos, movies, slides, photos, books, or magazines; or actual persons displaying and/or touching sexually specified areas. For the purpose of this Chapter, "sexually specified areas" includes any one or more of the following: genitals, anal area, female areola or nipple; and "sexually-oriented material" includes any media which displays sexually specified area(s). NOTE: The incorporation of this Subsection into this Chapter is designed to reflect the Town Board's official finding that sexually-oriented commercial uses have a predominant tendency to produce certain undesirable secondary effects on the surrounding community, as has been demonstrated in other, similar jurisdictions. Specifically, the Town Board is concerned with the potential for such uses to limit: the attractiveness of nearby locations for new development, the ability to attract and/or retain customers, and the ability to market and sell nearby properties at a level consistent with similar properties not located near such facilities. It is explicitly not the intent of this Subsection to suppress free expression by unreasonably limiting alternative avenues of communication, but rather to balance the need to protect free expression opportunities with the need to implement the Town's Comprehensive Master Plan and protect the character and integrity of its commercial and residential neighborhoods. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {HI}: 
a.  Shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any agriculturally zoned property or residentially zoned property; and shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any school, church, or outdoor recreational facility. 
b.  Exterior building appearance and signage shall be designed to ensure that use does not detract from the ability of businesses in the vicinity to attract customers, nor affect the marketability of properties in the vicinity for sale at their assessed values. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, or one space per person at the maximum capacity of the establishment (whichever is greater). 
(q)  Convenient Cash Businesses and Similar Establishments. (Cr. #08-12) 
A.  Description/Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation of convenient cash and other similar establishments as conditional uses within the Town of Rib Mountain. It is recognized that convenient cash businesses have the potential to be harmful to the public welfare, both in regards to the community harmony and with respect to potential effects on the quality, aesthetics and functional aspects of the community. The purpose of regulating convenient cash services is to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and properties and to avoid an unchecked proliferation of convenient cash services that may result in the displacement of other necessary commercial and financial services. 
Such businesses tailor their services to make them attractive to persons experiencing unfavorable economic circumstances, often aggravating those circumstances. Additionally, it has been found that through their business practices, convenient cash businesses are susceptible to attracting criminals seeking to commit robberies. Finally, when clustered in an area or strung out along an arterial street, such concentration creates an unwarranted negative impression regarding the economic vitality of a commercial district and the community at large. Based on their proliferation, their susceptibility to crime and the negative effects of their proliferation, the Town Board finds that the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Rib Mountain should be protected by legislation limiting the geographic proliferation of convenient cash businesses. It is therefore the intent of this title to regulate the locations and hours of operation of convenient cash businesses within the Town of Rib Mountain. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: SC, UC, CC. 
B.  Definition. "Convenient cash business" is a business licensed pursuant to §218.05 or 138.09, Wis. Stats., engaged in the "payday loan business," "title loan business," "currency exchange business" (also known as "check cashing"), or any other substantially similar business. Convenient cash businesses do not include financial institutions as defined below. For purposes of this Code, the following definitions apply: 
1.  "Business" includes an individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company or any other business entity. 
2.  "Currency exchange business" means in accordance with §218.05, Wis. Stats., any business except banks incorporated under the laws of this state and national banks organized pursuant to the laws of the United States and any credit union operating under Ch. 186, Wis. Stats., pursuant to a certificate of authority from the Wisconsin Commissioner of Credit Unions, engaged in the business of and providing facilities for cashing checks, drafts, money orders and all other evidences of money acceptable to such community currency exchange for a fee, service charge or other consideration. This term does not include any person engaged in the business of transporting for hire, bullion, currency, securities, negotiable or nonnegotiable documents, jewels or other property of great monetary value nor any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail nor any person licensed to practice a profession or licensed to engage in any business in this state, who in the course of such business or profession and, as an incident thereto, cashes checks, drafts, money orders or other evidences of money. 
3.  "Financial institutions" means any business authorized to do business under state or federal laws relating to financial institutions, including, without limitation, banks and trust companies, savings banks, building and loan associations, savings and loan associations and credit unions. This term does not include a currency exchange, payday loan business or a title loan business. 
4.  "Payday loan business" means a business that provides unsecured loans with an initial term of 91 days or less in which the amount borrowed does not exceed $2,000.00 and is usually for a period from the time of the loan until the borrower's next payday for which the lender charges either fees or interest for the loan. 
5.  "Title loan business" means any business providing loans to individuals in exchange for receiving title to the borrower's motor vehicle as collateral. 
C.  Location and Operation of Convenient Cash Businesses. 
1.  Convenient cash businesses shall not be located within 2,500 feet of any other convenient cash business. 
2.  Convenient cash businesses shall not be located within 250 feet from a residential district as measured by the shortest line between the parcel to be occupied by the proposed convenient cash facility and the property line of the nearest residential property. 
3.  Hours of Operation. Convenient cash businesses shall not operate between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
4.  Business shall keep glass entrance and exit doors with all windows clear of any signs or advertisements. 
5.  The building or portion thereof that is dedicated to the check cashing use shall have a minimum size of 1,500 square feet of building floor area. 
6.  Applicant must provide a security plan that addresses the following: 
a.  Limits on amount of cash immediately available for withdrawal; 
b.  Lighting plan for the business showing both exterior and interior lighting; 
c.  Plans for maintaining visibility into the interior of the check cashing facility; 
d.  Plans for security of the check cashing area of the facility; 
e.  A program for graffiti and litter abatement; 
f.  Hours of operation; and 
g.  Use of security guards and cameras plan. 
7.  It is strongly recommended that the convenient cash business work with the local law enforcement authority to allow specific access to interior security cameras in the event of an emergency. 
8.  Conditional use permit application fees for businesses regulated pursuant to this section shall be listed in the zoning fee schedule, Section 17.255. The applicant shall also be responsible for any other consulting and/or notice fees incurred in the processing of their application. 
D.  Parking Regulations. One space per 300 square feet of floor area plus one space for every employee. 
(5)  Storage or Disposal Land Uses. 
(a)  Indoor Storage or Wholesaling. Description: Indoor storage and wholesaling land uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single group of businesses. With the exception of loading and parking facilities, such land uses are contained entirely within an enclosed building. Examples of this land use include conventional warehouse facilities, long-term indoor storage facilities, and joint warehouse and storage facilities. Retail outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory uses per Subsection 17.056(8)(m), below. 
1.  Permitted by Right: {SI, UI, HI}. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per 2,000 sf of gross floor area. 
(b)  Outdoor Storage or Wholesaling. Description: Outdoor storage and wholesaling land uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single group of businesses. Such a land use, in which any activity beyond loading and parking is located outdoors, is considered an outdoor storage and wholesaling land use. Examples of this land use include contractors' storage yards, equipment yards, lumber yards, coal yards, landscaping materials yard, construction materials yards, and shipping materials yards. Such land uses do not include the storage of inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other materials typically associated with a junkyard or salvage yard. (See Subsection (4), below.) 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {HI}: 
a.  All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls and fencing. Such walls and fencing shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height and shall be designed to completely screen all stored materials from view at an elevation of 5 feet above the grade of all adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Said walls or fencing shall be screened from residentially zoned property by a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .80. 
b.  The storage of items shall not be permitted in permanently protected green space areas (see Section 17.148). 
c.  The storage of items shall not be permitted in required frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas. 
d.  In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use or number of parking stalls provided on the property below the requirement established by the provisions of Subchapter 17.174. If the number of provided parking stalls on the property is already less than the requirement, such storage area shall not further reduce the number of parking stalls already present. 
e.  Storage areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters, or by a clearly marked paved area. 
f.  Materials being stored shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/pedestrian conflicts. 
g.  Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be stored under the provisions of this land use. 
h.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
i.  All outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer to a residentially zoned property than the required minimum setback for buildings on the subject property. 
j.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {UI}: 
i.  Shall comply with all regulations for special uses in b., above. 
ii.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space for every 10,000 square feet of gross storage area, plus one space per each employee on the largest work shift. 
(c)  Personal Storage Facility. Description: Personal storage facilities are land uses oriented to the indoor storage of items entirely within partitioned buildings having an individual access to each partitioned area. Such storage areas may be available on either a condominium or rental basis. Also known as "mini-warehouses". 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {UC, SI, UI}: 
a.  Facility shall be designed so as to minimize adverse visual impacts on nearby developments. The color, exterior materials, and orientation of proposed buildings and structures shall complement surrounding development. 
b.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .80 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space for each employee on the largest work shift. 
(d)  Junkyard or Salvage Yard. Description: Junkyard or salvage yard facilities are any land or structure used for a salvaging operation including but not limited to: the above-ground, outdoor storage and/or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, and any other discarded materials intended for sale or recycling; and/or the collection, dismantlement, storage, or salvage of 2 or more unlicensed and/or inoperative vehicles. Recycling facilities involving on-site outdoor storage of salvage materials are included in this land use. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-35ac, HI}: 
a.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
b.  All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines. 
c.  In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas. 
d.  Shall not involve the storage, handling or collection of hazardous materials, including any of the materials listed in Section 17.189. 
e.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space for every 20,000 square feet of gross storage area, plus one space for each employee on the largest work shift. 
(e)  Waste Disposal Facility. Description: Waste disposal facilities are any areas used for the disposal of solid wastes including those defined by §144.01(15), Wis. Stats., but not including composting operations (see Subsection (f), below). 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-35ac, HI}: 
a.  Shall comply with all County, State and Federal regulations. 
b.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property (see Section 17.150). 
c.  All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines. 
d.  Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage or disposal of hazardous materials (as defined by Section 17.189) in any manner. 
e.  Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans, which shall include at minimum, detailed grading and revegetation plans, and a detailed written statement indicating the timetable for such restoration. A surety bond, in an amount equivalent to 110% of the costs determined to be associated with said restoration (as determined by a third party selected by the Town), shall be filed with the Town by the Petitioner (subject to approval by the Town Administrator), and shall be held by the Town for the purpose of ensuring that the site is restored to its proposed condition. (The requirement for said surety is waived for waste disposal facilities owned by public agencies.) 
f.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. State Law Reference: Ch. 144, Subchapter IV, Wis. Stats. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space for each employee on the largest work shift. 
(f)  Composting Operation. Description: Composting operations are any land uses devoted to the collection, storage, processing and or disposal of vegetation. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-1-35ac, RA-2-35ac, OR-35ac, RR-35ac, HI}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  Shall comply with all County, State and Federal regulations. 
b.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property occupied by nonagricultural land uses (see Section 17.150). 
c.  All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines. 
d.  No food scraps or other vermin-attracting materials shall be processed, stored or disposed of on-site. 
e.  Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage or disposal of hazardous wastes as defined by State Statutes in any manner. 
f.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space for each employee on the largest work shift. 
(6)  Transportation Land Uses. 
(a)  Off-Site Parking Lot. Description: Off-site parking lots are any areas used for the temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed and operative. See also Section 17.174 for additional parking regulations. 
1.  Permitted Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {UC, CC, UI, HI}: 
a.  Access to an off-site parking lot shall only be permitted to a nonresidential collector or arterial street. 
b.  Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to discourage cut-through traffic. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
4.  Parking Regulations: No requirement. 
(b)  Airport/Heliport. Description: Airports and heliports are transportation facilities providing takeoff, landing, servicing, storage and other services to any type of air transportation. The operation of any type of air vehicle (including ultralight aircraft, hang gliders, parasails, and related equipment, but excepting model aircraft) within the jurisdiction of this Chapter shall occur only in conjunction with an approved airport or heliport. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-1-35ac, RA-2-35ac, OR-35ac, RR-35ac, EO, SO, SI, UI, HI}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  All buildings, structures, outdoor airplane or helicopter storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines. 
b.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property not otherwise completely screened from activity areas by buildings or structures (see Section 17.150). 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per every 5 passengers based on average daily ridership. 
(c)  Freight Terminal. Description: Freight terminals are defined as land and buildings representing either end of one or more truck carrier line(s) which may have some or all of the following facilities: yards, docks, management offices, storage sheds, buildings and/or outdoor storage areas, freight stations, and truck maintenance and repair facilities, principally serving several or many businesses and always requiring trans-shipment. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {HI}: 
a.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
b.  All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting residentially zoned property. 
c.  In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift. 
(d)  Distribution Center. Description: Distribution centers are facilities oriented to the short-term indoor storage and possible repackaging and reshipment of materials involving the activities and products of a single user. Retail outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory uses per Subsection 17.056(8)(m), below. 
1.  Permitted by Right {UI, HI} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {UC, SI}: 
a.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property (see Section 17.150). 
b.  All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting residentially zoned property. 
c.  In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift. 
(7)  Industrial Land Uses. 
(a)  Light Industrial Land Use. Description: Light industrial land uses are industrial facilities at which all operations (with the exception of loading operations): 1) are conducted entirely within an enclosed building; 2) are not potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and radiation which are detectable at the property line; 3) do not pose a significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion); and 4) comply with all of the performance standards listed for potential nuisances in Subchapter 17-IX. Light industrial land uses may conduct retail sales activity as an accessory use provided that the requirements of Subsection (8)(m), below, are complied with. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {SI, UI, HI}: 
a.  All activities, except loading and unloading, shall be conducted entirely within the confines of a building. 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift. 
(b)  Heavy Industrial Land Use. Description: Heavy industrial land uses are industrial facilities which do not comply with 1 or more of the following criteria: 1) are conducted entirely within an enclosed building; 2) are not potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and radiation which are detectable at the property line; and 3) do not pose a significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion). More specifically, heavy industrial land uses are industrial land uses which may be wholly or partially located outside of an enclosed building; may have the potential to create certain nuisances which are detectable at the property line; and may involve materials which pose a significant safety hazard. However, in no instance shall a heavy industrial land use exceed the performance standards listed in Subchapter 17-IX. Examples of heavy industrial land uses include meat product producers; alcoholic beverage producers; paper, pulp or paperboard producers; chemical and allied product producers (except drug producers) including poison or fertilizer producers; petroleum and coal product producers; asphalt, concrete or cement producers; tanneries; stone, clay or glass product producers; primary metal producers; heavy machinery producers; electrical distribution equipment producers; electrical industrial apparatus producers; transportation vehicle producers; commercial sanitary sewage treatment plants; railroad switching yards; and recycling facilities not involving the on-site storage of salvage materials. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {HI}: 
a.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property abutting properties which are not zoned (HI) (see Section 17.150). 
b.  All outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from residentially zoned property. No materials shall be stacked or otherwise stored so as to be visible over bufferyard screening elements. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift. 
(c)  Communication Tower. (Am. #2014-01) Description: A communication tower includes all free-standing broadcasting, receiving, or relay structures, and similar principal land uses and any equipment shelter directly related to the function of the tower. Communication towers include lattice towers, guyed towers and monopole towers. Communication towers shall be located so as to reduce the safety hazard and potential damage to adjacent properties from structural failure of the tower. All new communication towers must be engineered for purposed built communication or constructed to pre-engineered standards. Towers shall not be constructed at sites within the town where the proposed tower height, design, operation or location of the structure on the lot will have an adverse impact on the scenic quality of the community or be detrimental to the value, use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby property. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Requirements {RA-l-35ac, RA-2-35ac, OR-35ac, RR-35ac, UC, SI}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  Towers may be located on a lot owned by the firm that owns the communication tower or the tower may be located on property which the owner of the tower has a leasehold interest or an easement on the property. 
b.  The minimum lot width requirements of Section 17.094 shall be met for a communication tower located in a UC or SI zoning district. In RA-35ac, OR-35ac, and RR-35ac Districts there is no minimum lot width requirement but the communication tower site shall be accessible by an easement or street having a width of at least 33 feet. 
c.  Minimum Lot Area: 
1.  For all zoning districts permitted as a conditional use, an area that is sufficient in size and shape so that the complete, horizontal collapse of the entire tower and any antennae plus 20 feet shall be contained within the boundaries of the parcel where the tower is located. 
2.  For UC and SI Districts: In addition to the minimum lot area requirements above, UC and SI Districts shall comply with minimum lot area standards in Section 17.036; 16,000 square feet in a UC District and 20,000 square feet in a SI District. 
d.  Minimum Setbacks: 
1.  A communication tower is not considered to be a building and therfore the building height and building setback provisions of Section 17.094 do not apply to the construction of a communication tower. At a minimum, a communication tower shall be set back a distance of 50 feet from any public street right-of-way; 100 feet from a lot line located in a residential zoning district and 25 feet from a lot line located in a nonresidential zoning district. For setback purposes, any guy wires shall be considered a part of the tower and the wires shall meet the same minimum setback requirements as the main structure of the tower. Setbacks shall be measured from the communication tower base or guy wire closest to the particular lot line being considered but no portion of a communication tower base or guy wire foundation may be closer than 25 feet to a lot line. 
2.  A communication tower base shall be positioned on the lot so that the complete, horizontal collapse of the entire tower and any antennae plus 20 feet shall be contained within the boundaries of the parcel where the tower is located. 
3.  The provisions of Section 17.094 apply to any equipment shelter or other building located on the lot. 
e.  The provisions of Section 17.056(8)(x) - Detached Energy Systems, shall apply to any detached energy system associated with the communication tower. 
f.  No signs shall be located on any communication tower and only lighting required by the Federal Aviation Administration for aviation safety purposes may be permitted on a tower. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) shall be the determining entity for appropriate required lighting. 
g.  The design of a communication tower and associated equipment shelters shall permit the placement of future antennas and equipment. A petitioner for a communication tower shall demonstrate a willingness to allow other companies to locate antenna equipment on the proposed tower. The intent of this provision is to reduce the unnecessary proliferation of communication towers in the community by encouraging the placement of multiple antennas on each tower. 
h.  The design of any equipment shelter shall be compatible with adjacent buildings and any equipment shelter shall be landscaped in accordance with the applicable provisions of Subchapter 17-VIII. 
i.  The petitioner shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Exemptions: 
a.  Mobile Service Towers. Purpose: The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate by zoning permit: (1) the siting and construction of any new mobile service support structure and facilities; (2) with regard to a class 1 collocation, the substantial modification of an existing support structure and mobile service facilities; and (3) with regard to a class 2 collocation, collocations on an existing support structure which does not require the substantial modification of an existing support structure and mobile service facilities. 
1.  Definitions: 
a.  All definitions contained in Wisconsin State Statute § 66.0404(1) are hereby incorporated by reference. 
2.  New Construction or Substantial Modification of Facilities and Support Structures, which includes the following activities: 
a.  The siting and construction of a new mobile service support structure and facilities. 
b.  With regard to class 1 collocation, the substantial modification of an existing support structure and mobile service facilities: 
1.  All requirements, processes and procedures contained in Wisconsin State Statute § 66.0404(2) are hereby incorporated by reference. 
2.  Fee: The fee for a permit shall be pursuant with the Town of Rib Mountain adopted Annual Fee Schedule. Not to exceed $3,000.00 per Wisconsin State Statute § 66.0404(4)(d). 
3.  Collocation on Existing Support Structures with regard to Class 2 Collocation. 
a.  All requirements, processes and procedures contained in Wisconsin State Statute § 66.0404(3) are hereby incorporated by reference. 
b.  Fee: The fee for a permit shall be the same as "Commercial Tenant Remodel/Build-Out" as referenced in the Town of Rib Mountain adopted Annual Fee Schedule. 
4.  Limitations. 
a.  All limitations, regulations and conditions imposed by the Town Planning Commission and/or Town Board shall be pursuant to Wisconsin State Statute § 66.0404(4). 
(d)  Extraction Use. Description: Extraction uses include any land uses involving the removal of soil, clay, sand, gravel, rock, minerals, peat, or other material in excess of that required for approved on-site development or agricultural activities. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-1-35ac, RA-2-35ac}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  Shall receive approval from Marathon County prior to action by the Town of Rib Mountain, and shall comply with all County, State and Federal regulations. 
b.  Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property (see Section 17.150). 
c.  All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines. 
d.  Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans, which shall include at minimum, detailed grading and revegetation plans, and a detailed written statement indicating the timetable for such restoration. A surety bond, in an amount equivalent to 110% of the costs determined to be associated with said restoration (as determined by a third party selected by the Town), shall be filed with the Town by the Petitioner (subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator), and shall be held by the Town for the purpose of ensuring that the site is restored to its proposed condition. (The requirement for said surety is waived for waste disposal facilities owned by public agencies.) 
e.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
4.  Parking Regulations: One space per each employee on the largest work shift. 
(8)  Accessory Land Uses. (Am. #11-02) Accessory uses are land uses which are incidental to the principal activity conducted on the subject property. Only those accessory uses listed in Table 17.053 shall be permitted within the Town of Rib Mountain. No cellar, basement, tent or recreational trailer shall be used as a residence. A commercial apartment (see (a), below) is the only residential use that may be established as an accessory use. Accessory buildings located within a residential district shall be constructed or finished in a complimentary architectural style and with complimentary materials to the principal residential buildings in the neighborhood. Variations from this standard may be approved as conditional uses. 
With the exception of fences (see Section 17.190) and drainage structures, no accessory structure shall be permitted within any portion of a front yard or street yard. The following accessory uses may be located in a front yard or street yard provided the location and operation of these uses does not present a safety hazard or otherwise have a detrimental impact on the public health and welfare: On-Site Parking Lot, Outdoor Display Incidental to Indoor Sales and Service, In-Vehicle Sales and Services, Filling, Lawn Care, and Individual Septic Disposal System. 
(a)  Commercial Apartment. Description: Commercial apartments are dwelling units which are located above the ground floor of a building used for a commercial land use (as designated in Subsection (4), above) - most typically an office or retail establishment. The primary advantage of commercial apartments is that they are able to share required parking spaces with nonresidential uses. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {NC, SC, UC, CC, EO, SO}: 
a.  The gross floor area devoted to commercial apartments shall be counted toward the floor area of a nonresidential development. 
b.  A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for each bedroom within a commercial apartment. Parking spaces provided by nonresidential land uses on the site may be counted for this requirement with the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(b)  On-Site Parking Lot. Description: On-site parking lots are any areas located on the same site as the principal land use which are used for the temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed and operative. Refer also to Section 17.174. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {All Districts}: 
a.  Access to an off-site parking lot shall only be permitted to a collector or arterial street. 
b.  Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to discourage cut-through traffic. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Detached Private Residential Garage, Carport, or Utility Shed. (Rep. & recr. #00-03) Description: A private residential garage, carport or utility shed is a structure which primarily accommodates the sheltered parking of motorized and nonmotorized passenger and recreation vehicles, the storage of recreation equipment, the storage of residential maintenance equipment and the storage of other household items. It shall be located on the same lot as a residential unit or units and the general requirements for all accessory uses as described in Section 17.056(8) shall be met. (See Section 17.099 for requirements applicable to legal, nonconforming garages.) 
1.  Permitted by Right in All Districts provided: 
a.  Only one of each type of the 3 structures listed above (garage, carport and utility shed) is constructed; 
b.  The total floor area of the garage, carport and utility shed, when added together, does not exceed 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; and 
c.  The sidewall of any detached garage, carport or utility shed shall not exceed 12 feet in height nor shall any door opening exceed 10 feet in height. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations in All Districts: 
a.  Construction of more than one of each type of the 3 structures listed above (garage, carport and utility shed) may be approved as a conditional use; 
b.  Construction of garages, carports and utility sheds when the total floor area of all of the structures will exceed 1,000 square feet of gross floor area may be approved as a conditional use; but said structure shall not exceed 1,500 square feet, unless it is an agricultural use located in an agricultural district; (Am. #08-11) 
c.  In all Districts, detached residential garages, carports or utility sheds with a sidewall height in excess of 12 feet and/or a door opening exceeding 10 feet in height may be approved as a conditional use; 
d.  The request shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(e)  Private Residential Recreational Facility. Description: This land use includes all active outdoor recreational facilities located on a private residential lot which are not otherwise listed in Table 17.053. Facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially zoned property shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60. Materials and lighting shall limit light levels at said property line are to be equal to or less than 0.5 footcandles (see Section 17.177). All private residential recreation facilities and their attendant structures shall comply with the bulk requirements for accessory structures. (See Subchapter 17-IV.) Common examples of these accessory uses include basketball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools, and recreation-type equipment. 
1.  Permitted by Right: {All districts} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
(f)  Private Residential Kennel. (Am. #09-05) Description: A maximum of any combination of 3 dogs and/or cats (over 6 months of age) are permitted by right for any one residential unit. A maximum of any combination of 6 dogs and/or cats (over 6 months of age) are permitted by right for any 1 residential unit, in an ER, CR, RA-1, RA-2, OR-35ac, or RR-35ac District. Any residential property maintaining a number of dogs and or cats exceeding this number shall be considered a private residential kennel. Such a kennel shall require licensing by the Town of Rib Mountain. In addition to those requirements, a private residential kennel shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Permitted by Right: All Districts for any combination of 3 (or fewer) dogs and/or cats over 6 months of age. ER, CR, and RA-1, RA-2, OR-35ac, or RR-35ac District for any combination of 6 (or fewer) dogs and/or cats over 6 months of age. (Am. #09-05) 
2.  Special Use Regulations {RA-35ac}: 
a.  For any number over 3 animals, a maximum of one additional animal per 5 acres shall be permitted. 
b.  Outdoor containments for animals shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any residentially zoned property and shall be screened from adjacent properties. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {CR-5ac, ER-1}: 
a.  Shall comply with regulations in 2., above. 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(g)  Private Residential Stable. Description: A private residential stable is a structure facilitating the keeping of horses (or similar animals) on the same site as a residential dwelling. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-1-35ac, RA-2-35ac, OR-35ac, RR-35ac, CR-5ac}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  A minimum lot area of 217,000 square feet (5 acres) is required for a private residential stable. 
b.  A maximum of one horse per 5 acres of fully enclosed, by fencing and/or structures, area is permitted. 
c.  The fence for outdoor containments for animals shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from the lot line of any adjacent residentially zoned property. 
d.  Any private residential stable shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from the lot line of any adjacent residentially zoned property and 100 feet from all other lot lines, 
e.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(h)  Company Cafeteria. Description: A company cafeteria is a food service operation which provides food only to company employees and their guests, which meets State food service requirements, and is located on the same property as a principal land use engaged in an operation other than food service. 
1.  Permitted by Right: {EO, SO, SC, UC, CC, SI, UI, HI} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
(i)  Company Provided On-Site Recreation. Description: A company provided on-site recreational facility is any active or passive recreational facility located on the same site as a principal land use, and which is reserved solely for the use of company employees and their guests. Facilities using activity night lighting shall be a conditional use. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {EO, SO, SC, UC, CC, SI, UI, HI}: 
a.  All structures and actively used outdoor areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {EO, SO, SC, UC, CC, SI, UI, HI}: 
a.  Outdoor recreation facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially zoned property shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60 (see Section 17.150). Said bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said residentially zoned property. 
b.  All structures and actively used outdoor areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
(j)  Reserved. 
(k)  In-Vehicle Sales and Services Incidental to On-Site Principal Land Use. Description: See Subsection 17.056(4)(g), above. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {NC, SC, UC, CC}: 
a.  Shall comply with all conditions of Subsection (4)(g), above. 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(l)  Indoor Sales Incidental to Storage or Light Industrial Land Use. Description: These land uses include any retail sales activity conducted exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal land use such as warehousing, wholesaling or any light industrial land use, on the same site. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {SI, UI, HI}: 
a.  Adequate parking, per the requirements of Section 17.174, shall be provided for customers. Said parking shall be in addition to that required for customary light industrial activities. 
b.  The total area devoted to sales activity shall not exceed 15% of the total area of the buildings on the property or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
c.  Shall provide restroom facilities directly accessible from retail sales area. 
d.  Retail sales area shall be physically separated by a wall from other activity areas. 
e.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
(m)  Light Industrial Activities Incidental to Indoor Sales or Service Land Use. Description: These land uses include any light industrial activity conducted exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal land use such as indoor sales or service, on the same site. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: {SC, NC, UC, CC}: 
a.  The total area devoted to light industrial activity shall not exceed 15% of the total area of the buildings on the property, or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  Production area shall be physically separated by a wall from other activity areas and shall be soundproofed to the level required by Section 17.179 for all adjacent properties. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(n)  Drainage Structure. Description: These include all improvements including, but not limited to ponds, swales, ditches, culverts, drains, tiles, gutters, levees, basins, detention or retention facilities, impoundments, and dams intended to effect the direction, rate and/or volume of stormwater runoff, snow melt, and/or channelized flows across, within and/or away from a site. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {All Districts}: 
a.  Shall comply with Section 17.056(10) for the placement of drainage structures in permanently protected green space areas. 
b.  Shall comply with Section 17.056(10) regarding protection measures for drainageways. 
c.  Any drainage improvement shall not increase the rate or volume of discharge from the subject property onto any adjacent properties, except where regional stormwater management facilities such as storm sewers and retention or detention facilities are in place to serve the subject property. 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
(o)  Filling. Description: Filling includes any activity in an area over 4,000 square feet or greater than 500 cubic yards of fill, involving the modification of the earth's surface above that in its undisturbed state. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {All Districts}: 
a.  Shall comply with Section 17.054 regarding filling activities in permanently protected green space areas. 
b.  Shall comply with Subchapter 17-VII regarding protection measures for natural resources. 
c.  Shall not create drainage onto other properties. 
d.  Shall not impede on-site drainage. 
e.  Shall comply with provisions of the Subdivision and Platting Ordinance. 
f.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
(p)  Lawn Care. Description: Lawn care includes any activity involving the preparation of the ground, installation and maintenance of vegetative ground cover (including gardens) which complies with the Town of Rib Mountain Code of Ordinances. Lawn care is not permitted in certain permanently protected green space areas, see Section 17.119. 
1.  Permitted by Right {All Districts} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
(q)  Individual Septic Disposal System. Description: This land use includes any State-enabled, County-approved septic disposal system. 
1.  Permitted by Right: {All Districts, except within the Sanitary District, per County/ILHR 83.} 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: {All Districts within the Sanitary District} 
a.  Minimum lot size of 0.5 acres. 
b.  Shall comply with Subchapter 17-VII regarding protection measures for natural resources. 
c.  Subject property shall not be located in a Sanitary District. 
d.  Development shall attach to public sewage disposal system within one year of its availability (as determined by the Sanitary District Director) to the subject property. Each building shall install and continually maintain a conventional sewage system tap-in line upon development, so as to facilitate hook-up to the public system upon its availability. 
e.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, standards and procedures applicable to all special uses. 
(r)  Exterior Communication Devices. Description: In order to protect the aesthetic character of residential areas and to reduce the potential wind related safety hazards, satellite dishes, ham radio towers, t.v. antennas and similar exterior communication devices are regulated as follows: 
1.  Permitted by Right in all districts: 
a.  Any satellite dish with a diameter of 3 feet or less. 
b.  Any other exterior communication device which is attached to a building and does not extend more than 5 feet above the building roof immediately adjacent to where the device projects above said roof and the device and related supports cover an area of less than 9 square feet. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: {Not Applicable}. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: {All Districts}. 
a.  Devices that do not meet the permitted use criteria. 
b.  The proposed use shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(s)  Home Occupation. Description: It is the intent of this Section to provide a means to accommodate a small home-based family or professional business without the necessity of rezoning a property from a residential to a commercial district. Approval of an expansion of a home occupation beyond the limits established in this Section is not anticipated; the business should instead relocate to an area that is appropriately zoned for the business use. Home occupations are economic activities performed within any single-family detached residence which comply with the following requirements. Examples include personal and professional services and handicrafts, which comply with all of the following requirements: 
1.  Permitted by right in all Districts except SI, Ul and HI provided the following are met: 
a.  A permitted home occupation is restricted to service-oriented businesses and the manufacturing of handicrafts provided the activity meets all of the requirements of this section. The sale of items or products on the premises is prohibited. Examples of service-oriented businesses are computer programming, accounting, insurance agency and computer based consulting and clerical services. 
b.  Under no circumstances shall a vehicular repair or body work business qualify as a home occupation. 
c.  The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling unit or an attached garage and not in any accessory building or detached garage or on any porch, deck, patio or other unenclosed or partially enclosed portion of the dwelling unit. 
d.  There shall be no exterior alterations which change the character of the dwelling unit nor shall there be any exterior evidence of the home occupation other than the sign permitted below. 
e.  No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment related to the operation of the home occupation shall be visible outside any structures located on the premises. 
f.  No home occupation use shall create smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire hazard, electrical interference or any other nuisance not generally associated with the average residential use in the district. 
g.  Only one sign, not to exceed 2 square feet, non-illuminated and flush, wall mounted only, may be used to advertise a home occupation. Said sign shall not be located within a right-of-way, and shall be of an appearance which is harmonious with nearby residential areas. 
h.  The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for more than occasional delivery of materials to or from the premises. 
i.  The home occupation shall not involve the use of construction or other heavy equipment such as dump trucks, backhoes, graders, semi trailer trucks and front end loaders. 
j.  A permitted home occupation shall not occupy more than 30% of the floor area of the dwelling. 
k.  Persons employed by a permitted home occupation shall be limited to the resident family members and no more than one nonresident employee. 
l.  In no instance shall a home occupation create a nuisance for neighboring properties. Said nuisance includes excessive traffic generated by the home occupation and excessive parking. The Zoning Administrator shall use his discretion in identifying and terminating any nuisances. 
2.  Special Use Regulation: Not Applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: 
a.  The Plan Commission may approve home occupations in residential districts which do not meet the requirements in subsection 1., above, as a conditional use. The proposed use shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
b.  Sale or transfer of the property, unauthorized expansion of the home occupation or failure to operate the home occupation according to the approved plan shall cause the conditional use to be null and void. 
(t)  On-Site Composting. Description: Includes all collection, storage, and processing of vegetation wastes between 5 and 10 cubic yards. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable to facilities less than five cubic yards. 
2.  Special Use Regulations {All Districts} 
a.  Shall be limited to no more than 10 cubic yards of total collection, storage and processing area, all of which shall be located a minimum of 5 feet from all property lines. 
b.  Shall not involve food scraps or other vermin-attracting materials. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
(u)  Family Day Care Home (4 to 8 Children). Description: Family day care homes are occupied residences in which a qualified person or persons provide child care for 4 to 8 children. The care of less than 4 children is not subject to the regulations of this Chapter. 
1.  Permitted by Right: All districts. (Am. #09-05) 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
State Law Reference: §66.304(b)(2), Wis. Stats. 
(v)  Migrant Labor Camp. Migrant labor camps include any facility subject to the regulation of §103.90, Wis. Stats. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations {RA-1-35ac, RA-2-35ac}: (Am. #09-05) 
a.  Shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of .60 along all property lines adjacent to all properties in residential, office or commercial zoning districts (see Section 17.150). 
b.  Migrant labor camp shall be an accessory use to an active principal use, under the same ownership, which is located within the Town of Rib Mountain. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(w)  Wood Piles. Description: The following regulations are intended to protect the aesthetic character of the residential areas in the town: 
Wood piles include all outdoor collections and piles of wood. 
1.  Permitted by Right: Cut and neatly stacked piles of wood less than 5 face cords are permitted in any zoning district. A single face cord measures 4 feet high by 8 feet long by 16 inches wide. Thus, the length of each individual cut piece of wood on these permitted piles shall not exceed 16 inches. Said piles shall be neatly stacked and shall not be located in the front yard and shall be located a minimum of 5 feet from all lot lines. 
2.  Special Use Regulations: {All Residential Districts} 
a.  Wood piles shall be limited to no more than 10 full cords of total collection and storage area, all of which shall be located a minimum of 5 feet from all lot lines. A single cord measures 8 feet by 4 feet high by 4 feet wide. Wood piles larger than 10 full cords are not considered an accessory use and are not allowed except in association with certain agricultural, commercial or industrial land uses. 
b.  The wood piles shall not contain rotted wood. 
c.  The proposed use shall comply with Section 17.224, procedures applicable to all special uses. 
3.  Conditional Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
(x)  Detached Energy Systems. (Am. #13-01; Am. #2014-02) Any detached energy system, such as wood or other solid fuel burners, liquid fuel burners, boilers or furnaces, windmills, or generators, associated with the production of useable heat or energy, which are not located within the primary structure. All such uses shall be considered as an accessory use, under Section 17.225, conditional uses, due to the potential for undesirable impacts on nearby properties. 
1.  Outdoor Wood Burning Unit (OWU) or other solid fuel burners, boilers, or furnaces: 
a.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
b.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
c.  Conditional Use Regulations: {CR-5ac, RA-l-35ac, RA-2-35ac, OR-35ac, RR-35ac}: 
1.  Minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
d.  OWU Setbacks and Minimum Requirements: 
1.  Minimum setbacks to side and rear yards shall be 200 feet. 
2.  Minimum setback to an adjacent front yard or street residence shall be 200 feet. 
3.  Minimum chimney stack height shall be 20 feet. 
e.  All OWU's are required to meet emission standards currently required by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Underwriters Laboratories (UL) listing. 
2.  Windmill structures, or similar freestanding poles, towers, or structures associated with energy production: 
a.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
b.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
c.  Conditional Use Regulations: (All Districts). 
d.  Any windmill tower, pole or similar structure shall be erected at a setback distance equal or greater to the height of the tower plus 20 feet, from any property line. 
e.  Wind Energy Systems are also governed by Wis. Stats. § 66.0401, and shall conform to its regulations in addition to this section. 
3.  Permanently placed generators, or similar energy producing devices: (Am. #2016-09) 
a.  Permitted by Right in All Districts provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Generators shall meet the nuisance noise regulations as described in Rib Mountain Municipal Code Sections 9.21 and 17.179. 
2.  All equipment shall be screened from visibility of adjacent property through the use of fences and/or landscaping. 
3.  Weekly test run periods may only occur between the hours of 8:00 am and 8:00 pm Monday through Friday. 
4.  Generators shall not be located in the required Front or Street Side yards. 
b.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
c.  Conditional Use Regulations: (All Districts). 
1.  Any request falling outside the conditions identified in 17.056(8)(x)(3)(a). 
d.  Exemptions: 
1.  Conditional use exemptions are granted for any demonstrated medical need for emergency power as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  The Town may not prohibit the placement of emergency power systems for Mobile Service Towers per Wisconsin State Statute § 66.0404 - Mobile Tower Siting Regulations. Also see Rib Mountain Municipal Code Section 17.056(7)(c)(4)(a). 
4.  Roof-Mounted or Building Integrated Photovoltaic Systems: (Cr. #2016-09) 
Photovoltaic System: A device or power system designed to collect and convert useable solar energy to electricity. 
Roof-Mounted, Photovoltaic System: A photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted to the roof of a building or structure. 
Building Integrated, Photovoltaic System: A photovoltaic system that serves the dual function of building envelope material and energy collector. Ex: roofing, window glazing, or siding. 
a.  Permitted by Right: (All Districts). 
1.  The collector face shall primarily face the side or rear yard. 
2.  Roofing material color shall be similar to that of the solar energy system. 
3.  Building structure must be designed to support the additional imposed loads. 
4.  Panels shall not extend beyond the edges of the building or roof upon which it is mounted. 
5.  Solar Collector must be mounted parallel to the structural surface of the roof or wall in which it is attached and shall not extend above or behind the structural surface more than the thickness of the solar panel plus any manufacturer required air gap. 
6.  Neighboring Property owners must be notified of intended to exercise solar access rights, per Wis. Stats. § 66.0403. 
b.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
c.  Conditional Use Regulations: (All Districts). 
1.  When the request falls outside the conditions of 17.056(8)(x)(4)(a). 
5.  All Other Detached Energy Systems: (Cr. #2016-09) 
a.  Permitted by Right: Not applicable. 
b.  Special Use Regulations: Not applicable. 
c.  Conditional Use Regulations: (All Districts). 
In reviewing any conditional use application, the Plan Committee shall consider: 
1.  Impacts: No detached energy system shall create an undesirable impact upon adjacent property or otherwise create a public nuisance. 
(9)  Temporary Land Uses. The following land uses may be established as conditional uses for the maximum period of time as specified below for each use unless this time period is extended by the Town Board through the conditional use procedures of Section 17.225. 
(a)  Contractor's Project Office {All Districts}. Description: This use includes any structure used as an on-site construction management office for an active construction project. 
1.  Temporary Use Regulations: 
a.  Any structure used as a contractor's project office shall not exceed 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
b.  The structure shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of an occupancy permit for the structure or completion of the construction project as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
c.  The structure shall not be used for sales activity. (See subsection (c), below.) 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(b)  Contractor's On-Site Equipment Storage Facility {All Districts}. Description: This use includes any structure used for the on-site storage of construction equipment and/or materials for an active construction project. 
1.  Temporary Use Regulations: 
a.  The structure shall be removed within 30 days of issuance of an occupancy permit for the structure under construction or completion of the construction project as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
b.  The structure shall be limited to a maximum area not exceeding 10% of the property's Gross Site Area. 
c.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(c)  Model Homes {All Residential Districts}. Description: Includes residential structures which serve as a sales office and display model for a residential development project. 
1.  Temporary Use Regulations: 
a.  The model home shall be converted to a residential dwelling unit use within 2 years of the issuance of the conditional use permit. 
b.  A temporary sales office may be located in the model home but shall not exceed 20% of the gross floor area of the stucture. 
c.  Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in Section 17.217(2). 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(d)  Real Estate Sales Office {All Districts}. Description: This use includes any structure which serves as a sales office for a development project. 
1.  Temporary Use Regulations: 
a.  The structure shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
b.  The structure shall be removed or converted to a permitted land use within 365 days of approval of establishment of this use or within 10 days of the completion of the sales activity, whichever occurs first. 
c.  Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in Section 17.217(2). 
d.  Shall comply with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(e)  Unclassified Uses. (Cr. #05-02) In case of a question as to the classification of a proposed use, the question may be submitted to the Planning Commission for consideration as a conditional use. Uses already classified in any district are not eligible for a determination. The Planning Commission shall consider the impacts of the proposed temporary use, and specify the permitted length of time for any approvals recommended. 
(10)  Natural Resource Disruption and Required Mitigation Standards. For all land uses, disruption to natural resource areas shall comply with the requirements of the Subdivision and Platting Ordinance pertaining to drainage, grading and erosion control. All land uses located within Permanently Protected Green Space Areas shall comply with the following regulations: 
(a)  Cultivation. 
1.  Permitted as a Conditional Use: {Other permanently protected green space areas}: 
a.  Permitted only if designated on the submitted site plan, and/or the recorded Plat or Certified Survey as an "Area which may be used for cultivation". 
(b)  Passive Outdoor Public Recreational Area. 
1.  Permitted as a Special Use: {All permanently protected green space areas}: 
a.  limited to a 20-foot wide area in permanently protected natural resource areas. Permitted in other permanently protected green space areas without restriction. 
b.  Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into permanently protected natural resource areas beyond said 20-foot wide area 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use: Not applicable. 
(c)  Active Outdoor Public Recreational Area. 
1.  Permitted as a Special Use {Other permanently protected green space areas}: 
a.  Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into permanently protected natural resource areas. 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use: {Floodway Fringe} 
(d)  Outdoor Institutional 
1.  Permitted as a Special Use {Other permanently protected green space areas}: 
a.  Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into permanently protected natural resource areas. 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use: Not applicable. 
(e)  Lawn Care. 
1.  Permitted as a Special Use {Other permanently protected green space areas}: 
a.  Non-native ground cover shall not be permitted to spread into permanently protected natural resource areas. Clearance of understory growth shall be permitted. 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use {All permanently protected natural resource areas except wetlands}: 
a.  Only disturbance associated with the care of native vegetation is permitted, with the exception of a 20-foot wide access path which may be cleared for passive recreation purposes. 
b.  Each property abutting a natural resource area shall be limited to one such access path. 
c.  Non-native vegetation (such as domestic lawn grasses) shall not be introduced into natural resource areas beyond said 20-foot wide access path. 
(f)  Golf Course. 
1.  Permitted as a Special Use {All permanently protected green space areas except wetlands}: 
a.  Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into permanently protected natural resource areas. 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use {All permanently protected natural resource areas}: 
a.  Only disturbance associated with the care of native vegetation is permitted. Natural resource areas which are located within or adjacent to golf play areas shall be incorporated into the course design as out-of-bounds play hazards, and shall be maintained in their natural state. 
(g)  Any Permitted Temporary Use. 
1.  Permitted as a Special Use: {Other permanently protected green space areas} 
a.  Activity shall in no manner encroach upon permanently protected natural resources areas. Party securing the temporary use permit shall be responsible for restoring all such natural resource areas to an undamaged state, or shall be considered in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. (See Section 17.226. 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use: Not applicable. 
(h)  Drainage Structure. 
1.  Permitted as a Special Use: Not applicable. 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use {All permanently protected green space areas}: 
a.  Structure shall be deemed necessary by the Town Engineer. 
b.  Natural vegetation shall be restored in disturbed areas. 
(i)  Filling. 
1.  Permitted as a Special Use: Not applicable. 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use {All permanently protected green space areas}: 
a.  Filling in the floodway shall be done only as required by a necessary road, bridge, utility, or other infrastructure facility which has been deemed necessary by the Department of Public Works. 
b.  Natural vegetation shall be restored in disturbed areas. 
c.  In no instance shall filling raise the base flood elevation. 
(j)  Individual Septic Disposal System. 
1.  Permitted as a Permitted Use: {All Districts, per County/ILHR 83, except within the Sanitary District} 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use {All Districts within the Sanitary District, only within Other Permanently Protected Open Space}: 
a.  Shall not locate closer than 30 feet to any other permanently protected natural resource area. 
(k)  Road and/or Bridge. 
1.  Permitted as a Special Use: Not applicable. 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use {All permanently protected green space areas}: 
a.  May locate in or across a natural resource areas only in conjunction with a boat landing, or when deemed essential by the Department of Public Works. 
b.  May locate in other permanently protected green space areas if designed to provide an essential service to an activity area located within the green space area which cannot be efficiently reached from another point. 
c.  In general, road networks shall be designed to circumvent permanently protected green space areas, thereby eliminating the need for intrusions and crossings. 
(l)  Utility Lines and Related Facilities. 
1.  Permitted as a Special Use: Not applicable. 
2.  Permitted as a Conditional Use {All permanently protected green space areas}: 
a.  May locate in or across a natural resource areas only when deemed essential by the Department of Public Works. 
b.  May locate in other permanently protected green space areas if designed to provide an essential service to an activity area located within the green space area which cannot be efficiently reached from another point. 
c.  In general, utility lines shall be designed to circumvent permanently protected green space areas, thereby eliminating the need for intrusions and crossings. 
Section 17.057 - Nonconforming Use Regulations. 
(1)  Definition: A nonconforming use is an active and actual use of land or use of a structure, or both; legally established prior to the effective date of this Chapter, February 1, 1994, or subsequent amendments thereto and which would not be permitted under the current terms of this Chapter. 
(2)  Continuance of a Nonconforming Use: Any nonconforming use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Chapter may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing upon such date, except as specified in this Section. Such nonconforming use shall not be expanded beyond the bulk of the structure it currently occupies. Where a conforming use and a nonconforming use occupy the same structure, the nonconforming use shall not be extended to occupy a larger proportion of the structure than it currently occupies. The nonconforming use of land may not be expanded beyond the area used prior to the effective date of this Chapter or subsequent amendments thereto. 
(3)  Change in a Nonconforming Use: A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use, unless the new nonconforming use would have a more desirable effect in terms of implementing the purpose of this Chapter as determined by the Zoning Administrator. If such a modification is allowed by the Zoning Administrator, said new use shall still be considered a nonconforming use and shall not be modified back to the original nonconforming use or to any other nonconforming use which does not better implement the purpose of this Chapter as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(4)  Discontinuance of a Nonconforming Use: When any nonconforming use of any structure or land is discontinued for a period of 12 months, or is changed to a conforming use, any future use of said structure or land shall be in complete conformity with the provisions of this Chapter including the performance standards established in Subchapter IX. 
(5)  Maintenance and Repair of a Structure Used for a Nonconforming Use: Structural repairs or alterations of a nonconforming structure or a conforming structure, either of which contains a nonconforming use or is used in association with a nonconforming use, are regulated in Section 17.099. 
(6)  Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Signs: See Sections 17.098, 17.099 and 17.219. 
Section 17.058 - Group Developments. 
(1)  Definition: A group development is any development containing either of the following: 
(a)  Two or more buildings on the same lot with each building containing one or more principal land uses. For any group development of this type, all of the buildings on the lot must be developed for the same broad land use type such as residential land use, institutional land use, commercial land use, storage/disposal land use, transportation land use, or industrial land use; or 
(b)  Any single structure on a single lot which contains 5 or more dwelling units; or 
(c)  Any single structure on a single lot which contains either 2 or more different types of institutional land uses as listed in Section 17.056(3), or 2 or more different types of commercial land uses as listed in Section 17.056(4), or 2 or more different types of storage/disposal land uses as listed in Section 17.056(5), or 2 or more different types of transportation land uses as listed in Section 17.056(6), or 2 or more different types of industrial land uses as listed in Section 17.056(7). Common examples of group developments include 6-unit apartment buildings, apartment complexes, condominium complexes, a single building shopping center with different types of commercial land uses within the center, and a multiple-building office center. (One-building office structures, one-building indoor sales centers, and a 4-unit apartment building are not group developments.) Mixing different types of land uses such as residential and commercial or commercial and industrial uses on the same lot is not allowed as a group development but may be allowed through the establishment of a Unified Development District. 
(2)  Regulation of Group Developments: Group developments are allowed as a conditional use in all zoning districts. Any land use that is allowed as a permitted or conditional use within the applicable zoning district in which the group development is proposed to be located may be allowed to locate within the proposed group development. If a group development is proposed to be located in more than one standard zoning district, only those uses which are allowed within each particular zoning district may be considered for establishment in the respective portion of the proposed group development. Uses within each zoning district must conform to the allowable uses for the district. The land use regulations of this Section, as well as Section 17.056 and all other applicable provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the group development. The requirements of Section 17.225 shall apply to the review of proposals for group developments. 
(3)  Specific Development Standards for Group Developments. 
(a)  All required off-street parking spaces and access drives shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the group development. 
(b)  Each individual land use shall have a rear or side entrance that is accessible to a loading or service drive. Said service drive shall have a minimum width of 26 feet. Said service drive shall not be part of the vehicle circulation network used by customers. 
(c)  The development shall contain a sufficient number of waste bins to accommodate all trash and waste generated by the land uses in a convenient manner. 
(d)  No group development shall take access to a local residential street. 
(e)  All development located within a group development shall be located so as to comply with the intent of this Chapter regarding setbacks of structures and buildings from lot lines. As such, individual principal and accessory structures and buildings located within group developments shall be situated within building envelopes which serve to demonstrate complete compliance with said intent. Said building envelopes shall be depicted on the site plan required for review of group developments. The use of this approach to designing group developments will also ensure the facilitation of subdividing group developments in the future, (if such action is so desired). 
(4)  Discrimination Against Condominium Forms of Ownership. It is not the intent of this Section, nor any other provision of this Chapter, to discriminate against condominium forms of ownership in any manner which conflicts with §703.27, Wis. Stats. As such, the provisions of this Section are designed to ensure that condominium forms of ownership are subject to the same standards and procedures of review and development as other physically identical forms of development. 
Section 17.059 - Minimum Standards for Single-family Detached Dwellings and Duplexes. 
(1)  Residential Design. To protect and enhance the quality of Rib Mountain's residential living environment a minimum level of residential design comparability is hereby established. The standards set forth in this section shall apply to all single-family detached dwellings and duplexes constructed after the effective date of this section of the zoning ordinance. 
(a)  Roof. All dwellings shall have a roof with a pitch of at least 3 inches in height for each foot of width and an eave which extends at least 6 inches from the wall which supports the roof. All dwellings, accessory garages and carports shall have a roof surfaced with any of the following: 
(1)  Wood shakes; 
(2)  Asphalt; 
(3)  Composition or wood shingles; 
(4)  Clay, concrete or metal tiles; 
(5)  Slate; 
(6)  Built-up gravel materials. 
(7)  Architectural standing seam metal roofing. (Cr. #2007-04) 
(b)  Siding. The exterior sides of all dwellings, and accessory garages and carports, shall be covered with siding made of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, vinyl or metal lap. The exterior siding shall extend to the top of the foundation. If the top of the foundation is below grade, the siding shall extend to the ground. 
(c)  Foundation. All dwellings shall be placed on an enclosed permanent foundation which does not extend more than 24 inches above the exterior finished grade of the lot. Exception: When the grade of the lot slopes, only that portion of the foundation which is on the highest point of the lot must meet the requirements of this subsection. 
(d)  Minimum Width. The side of any dwelling facing the front yard shall not be less than 24 feet in width. Attached garages, carports and open decks shall not be included in the measurement of the width of the front yard side of a dwelling. 
(e)  Ratio of Length to Width. The ratio of a dwelling's length to its width shall be no greater than 5 to 2. A 24 foot long dwelling must be at least 9 feet 7 inches wide. 
(f)  Minimum Gross Floor Area. Every dwelling shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not less than 800 square feet. 
(g)  Garage Construction Required. All single-family detached dwellings and duplexes shall have constructed on the same lot as the dwelling, a garage, as defined in Section 17.024, of at least 400 square feet of floor area for each dwelling unit. 
(2)  Waivers for New Construction and Building Additions. One or more of the minimum design standards set forth herein may be waived through the conditional use process in Section 17.225 upon a finding that the architectural style of the proposed structure provides compensating design features and that the proposed dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with other dwellings in the vicinity. 
(3)  Canopy/Tent-Like Structures. (Cr. #2007-04) Canopy/tent-like structures are specifically prohibited, as not meeting the design standards of this section. 
SUBCHAPTER 17-V: - DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS 

Section 17.071 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Subchapter is to indicate the maximum permitted density (for residential projects) and maximum permitted intensity (for nonresidential projects) of development on any given site. The development potential of any site is determined by a variety of factors, including but not limited to: 1) the area of the site; 2) the proportion of the site not containing sensitive natural resources; 3) the zoning district(s) in which the site is located; 4) the development option(s) the site is developed under; and 5) the use(s) considered for development. 
    Rationale: This Subchapter regulates the development potential of all property within the Town. This Subchapter is designed to ensure the implementation of many goals and objectives of the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan. (See also, Section 17.005 of this Chapter.) Many of these are extremely difficult to address using conventional zoning techniques, particularly those which rely on minimum lot area requirements to establish maximum permitted residential densities, and maximum floor area ratios to establish the character of nonresidential developments. Such approaches provide for a minimum flexibility of site design options, which in turn results in land use inefficiencies, forced site planning, and/or the needless destruction of sensitive natural resources. The approach employed by this Subchapter, relying on Maximum Gross Densities (MGDs) and minimum Green Space Ratios (GSRs) for residential development, and minimum required Landscape Surface Ratios (LSRs) in combination with maximum permitted Floor Area Ratios (FARs) for nonresidential development, (both in conjunction with a variety of development options available in every zoning district) results in a very high degree of site design flexibility and the protection and implementation of desired community character and adopted community goals and objectives. 
Section 17.072 - How to Use this Subchapter. 
    This Subchapter contains the standards which determine the maximum amount of development permitted on any given site. Prior to using the provisions of this Subchapter to determine the development potential of a given property, the guidelines provided by Section 17.076(1) through (3) should be reviewed. This Subchapter recognizes inherent differences between residential and nonresidential land uses, and thus regulates their development in slightly different manners. The description of the process addressing residential development in Section 17.076(1) and (2) refers to the requirements of Section 17.074, Residential Density Standards. The description of the process addressing nonresidential development in Section 17.076(1) and (3) refers to the requirements of Section 17.075, Nonresidential Intensity Standards. 
Section 17.073 - Required Natural Resources Site Evaluation. 
(1)  Purpose. An important goal of the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan is the protection of natural resources which are sensitive to disruption caused by development and/or other land use activities. These resources include: Floodways, Floodway Fringes, Floodplain Conservancy Areas, Wetlands, Drainageways, Lakeshores, Steep Slopes, and Woodlands. (These resources are defined in Subchapter 17-VII.) These resources serve important functions which are lost when these areas are subject to development and/or other land use activities, in the absence of correct mitigation approaches. In many instances, these functions cannot be provided by other natural or man-made features. Specific broad categories of such functions include the: protection and enhancement of air, surface water, ground water, and soil quality; habitat provision and diversification; aesthetic diversification; and buffering effects. 
(2)  Mitigation. In certain instances, natural features can accommodate development and/or other land use activities without a significant loss of their functional benefits if proper mitigation practices are employed. (Subchapter 17-VII Natural Resource Protection Regulations, provides detailed standards regarding permitted mitigation techniques and requirements.) 
Section 17.073(3) continues with the Natural Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet on the following page. 
(3)  Natural Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet. 
(a)  Determine the Gross Site Area (GSA) of the Site: 
1.  Total Site Area as determined by actual on-site survey:       _______ acres 
2.  Subtract area located within proposed expanded rights-of-ways of existing roads, and within proposed boundaries of public facilities designated within the Town's Comprehensive Master Plan and/or required for dedication per Subdivision regulations:       -_______ acres 
3.  Subtract land which although part of the same parcel is not contiguous to, or is not accessible from, the proposed road network serving the project. _____ - acres 
4.  Subtract land which is proposed for a different development option or a different zoning district.       -_______ acres 
5.  Subtract area of navigable waters (lakes & streams).       -_______ acres 
6.  Equals Gross Site Area (GSA)       =_______ acres 
(b)  Determine the Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) of the Site: 
1.  Portion of Gross Site Area containing Floodways.       _______ acres 
2.  Portion of Gross Site Area containing Floodway Fringes.       +_______ acres 
3.  Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Wetlands.       +_______ acres 
4.  Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Drainageways.       +_______ acres 
5.  Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Lakeshores.       +_______ acres 
6.  Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Woodlands.       +_______ acres 
7.  Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Steep Slopes.       +_______ acres 
8.  Portion of Gross Site Area containing Recharge Areas.       +_______ acres 
9.  Subtract portions of natural resource areas ((b)1. through (b)8., above) to be made developable by using approved environmental mitigation techniques presented in Subchapter 17-VII, below.       -_______ acres 
10.  Equals Required Resource Protection Area (RPA).       =_______ acres 
(c)  Determine the Net Developable Area (NDA) of the Site: 
1.  Enter Gross Site Area (GSA) {from (1)f., above}       _______ acres 
2.  Subtract Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) {from (b)10., above}.       -_______ acres 
3.  Equals Net Developable Area (NDA).       =_______ acres 
Section 17.074 - Residential Density Standards. 
KEY TO TABLE 17.074 
ZONING DISTRICT MAXIMUM GROSS 
DENSITY MINIMUM LOT 
AREA Regulates the type of uses permitted on the site. Section 17.035 describes each Zoning District. Table 17.053 provides a detailed listing of all uses permitted in each Zoning District. Sections 17.055 and 17.056 provide detailed regulations applying to specific land uses. Zoning Districts are depicted on the Official Zoning Map. (See Section 17.033). Is the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on one acre of Gross Site Area in the specific Zoning District and Development Option. Gross Site Area is calculated in Subsection 17.073(3)(a). is the minimum size lot permitted within the specified Zoning District and Development Option. This requirement limits the type of dwelling unit permitted. (Refer to Section 17.053 to match minimum lot sizes with dwelling unit types.) Specific dwelling unit regulations are given in Section 17.093.  
ZONING 
DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT 
OPTION MAXIMUM 
GROSS 
DENSITY MINIMUM 
LOT AREA 
(MLA) MINIMUM 
SITE AREA 
(MSA) RURAL AG 
(RA-35ac) Conventional .03 35 acres 35 acres COUNTRY- 
SIDE 
RESIDENTIAL 
(CR-5ac) Conventional .20 5 acres 5 acres  
DEVELOPMENT OPTION MINIMUM SITE AREA Describes the maximum level of clustering and the minimum proportion of permanently protected green space area permitted on the site. Is the minimum Gross Site Area (GSA) in which the specified Development Option is allowed. (Refer to Subsection 17.056 for a full description of each development option and specific regulations which apply to its use.) (Refer to Table 17.053 to determine how each development option is regulated.)  
TABLE 17.074 TOWN OF RIB MOUNTAIN RESIDENTIAL DENSITY STANDARDS ZONING 
DISTRICT DEVELOP- 
MENT 
OPTION MAXIMUM 
GROSS 
DENSITY 
(MGD) MINIMUM 
LOT AREA 
(MLA) MINIMUM 
SITE AREA 
(MSA) RURAL AG (RA-35ac) Conventional .03 35 acres 35 acres COUNTRY- 
SIDE 
RESIDENTIAL 
(CR-5ac) Conventional .20 5 acres 5 acres ESTATE 
RESIDENTIAL 
(ER-1) Conventional 1.00 40,000 sf 40,000 sf SUBURBAN 
RESIDENTIAL 
(SR-2) Conventional 2.00 20,000 sf 20,000 sf SUBURBAN 
RESIDENTIAL 
(SR-3) Conventional 2.60 15,000 sf 15,000 sf SUBURBAN 
RESIDENTIAL 
(SR-4) Conventional 4.30 10,000 sf 10,000 sf MIXED 
RESIDENTIAL 
(MR-4) Conventional 4.00 10,000 sf 10,000 sf Mobile Home Dev. 4.00 15,000/ 
20,000 sf 10 acres Mobile Home Park 4.00 15,000/ 
20,000 sf 10 acres URBAN 
RESIDENTIAL 
(UR-8) Conventional 8.00 3,600 sf 3,600 sf  
Section 17.075 - Nonresidential Intensity Standards. 
KEY TO TABLE 17.075 
ZONING DISTRICT MAXIMUM FLOOR 
AREA RATION 
(FAR) MAXIMUM 
BUILDING SIZE Regulates the type of uses permitted on the site. Section 17.035 describes each Zoning District. Table 17.053 provides a detailed listing of all uses permitted in each Zoning District. Sections 17.055 and 17.056 provide detailed regulations applying to specific land uses. Zoning Districts are depicted on the Official Zoning Map. (See Section 17.033.) Is the maximum permitted ratio calculated by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a site by the Gross Site Area (GSA). "Gross Floor Area" is defined in Section 17.024. The maximum total Gross Floor Area which a building is permitted to contain. "Gross Floor Area" is defined in Section 17.024  
ZONING DISTRICT MAX. 
NUMBER 
OF 
FLOORS 
(F) MIN. 
LAND- 
SCAPE 
SURFACE RATIO 
(LSR) MAX. 
FLOOR 
AREA 
RATIO 
(FAR) MIN. 
LOT AREA 
(MLA) MAX. 
BLDG 
SIZE 
(MBS) NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC) 1 .250 .250  5,000 sf 15,000 sf 2 .300 .275 10,000 sf 15,000 sf SUBURBAN COMMERCIAL (SC) 1 .250 .250 1 acre* na 2 .300 .275 2 acres na 3 .330 .290 3 acres na 4 .350 .300 4 acres na  
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FLOORS MINIMUM LANDSCAPE SURFACE AREA RATIO MINIMUM LOT AREA Is the maximum number of habitable floors a building is permitted to contain. 
"Full floors" is defined in Section 17.024. Is the minimum permitted portion of the Gross Site Area (GSA) which must be preserved as permanently protected landscaped area. LSR is calculated by dividing the landscaped area of the site by the Gross Site Area (GSA). GSA is calculated in Section 17.073(3)(a). "Landscaped area" is defined in Section 17.024. Is the minimum size floors a lot permitted in the specified Zoning District for a building with the listed number of floors.  
TABLE 17.075 TOWN OF RIB MOUNTAIN NONRESIDENTIAL INTENSITY STANDARDS ZONING DISTRICT MAX. NUMBER 
OF FLOORS (F) MIN. LANDSCAPE 
SURFACE RATIO (LSR) MAX. 
FLOOR 
AREA RATIO 
(FAR) MIN. 
LOT AREA 
(MLA) MAX. BLDG 
SIZE (MBS) RURAL AG (RA-35ac) 1 .700 .100 5 acres na COUNTRYSIDE RES. (CR-5ac) 1 .700 .100 5 acres na ESTATE RES. (ER-1) 1 .700 .100 5 acres na SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL (SR-2) 1 .550 .150 3 acres na SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL (SR-3) 1 .550 .150 3 acres na MIXED RESIDENTIAL (MR-4) 1 .400 .200 2 acres na 2 .450 .220 2 acres na URBAN RESIDENTIAL (UR-8) 1 .250 .250 1 acre na 2 .300 .275 1 acre na ESTATE OFFICE (EO) 1 or 2 .500 .250 10,000 sf na SUBURBAN OFFICE (SO) 1 .250 .250 1 acre* na 2 .300 .275 2 acres na 3 .330 .290 3 acres na 4 .350 .300 4 acres na NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC) 1 .250 .250 5,000 sf 15,000 sf 2 .300 .275 10,000 sf 15,000 sf SUBURBAN COMMERCIAL (SC) 1 .250 .250 1 acre* na 2 .300 .275 2 acres na 3 .330 .290 3 acres na 4 .350 .300 4 acres na URBAN COMMERCIAL (UC) 1 .100 .300 16,000 sf na 2 .150 .340 16,000 sf na 3 .190 .345 16,000 sf na 4 .200 .350 16,000 sf na CENTRAL COMMERCIAL (CC) 1 .000 1.000 2,400 sf na 2 .000 2.000 2,400 sf na 3 .100 2.500 2,400 sf na 4 .200 3.000 2,400 sf na SUBURBAN INDUSTRIAL (SI) 1 .250 .700 1 acre* na 2 .300 .750 2 acres na 3 .330 .800 3 acres na 4 .350 .850 4 acres na URBAN INDUSTRIAL (UI) 1 .100 .800 10,000 sf na 2+ .200 1.000 10,000 sf na HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (HI) 1 .000 .850 4,800 sf na 2+ .000 1.000 4,800 sf na *Reduction in Lot Area from one acre to 20,000 square feet is permitted as a Conditional Use per Section 17.225 with site plan for end use of the property demonstrating full compliance with all of the requirements of this Chapter.  
Section 17.076 - Detailed Instructions for Intensity and Density Regulations. 
(1)  For Both Residential, and Nonresidential, Development: 
(a)  Check Planning Recommendations for the Subject Property. 
1.  Check Comprehensive Plan Recommendations. The Town's Comprehensive Plan should be checked for implications related to the subject property, particularly the: Land Use and Transportation Plan Map. (Copies of the Comprehensive Plan are available at the Town's Zoning Administrator.) From time to time, the Comprehensive Plan may be amended. The Town's Zoning Administrator should be consulted regarding changes to the Comprehensive Plan which may effect the subject property or its environs. 
2.  Check Official Map Recommendations. The Town's Official Map should be checked for proposed capital facilities and dedication requirements including schools, parks, stormwater management facilities and street improvements) which may effect the subject property. The Official Map is on display at the Town's Zoning Administrator. From time to time the Official Map may be amended. The Town's Zoning Administrator should be contacted regarding changes to the Map which may effect the subject property or its environs. 
(b)  Check the Zoning of the Subject Property. The potential amount and type of development any given site may contain is directly related to the zoning district in which the site is located. The subject property should be identified on the Town's Official Zoning Map (See Section 17.033.), and the current zoning designation should be compared with the description of that district provided in Section 17.035. The Official Zoning Map is on display at the Town Hall. From time to time, the Official Zoning Map may be amended. The Zoning Administrator should be contacted regarding potential changes in the Official Zoning Map which may effect the subject property or its environs. 
(c)  Complete a Natural Resources Site Evaluation for the Site. The effect of protected natural resources on the development potential of the subject property should be evaluated. All resources listed in Section 17.073, Required Natural Resources Site Evaluation, should be identified on the subject property, located on a map (or air photo) of the subject property, and the total area of the property (in acres) covered by those resources, known as Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) should be determined, as should the Gross Site Area (GSA) and the Net Developable Area (NDA) of the subject property. (Subsection 17.073(3) contains a worksheet to simplify these calculations.) The Zoning Administrator should be contacted if assistance is desired in completing these calculations. 
(2)  For Residential Development. (For Steps (a) through (c), see (1), above.) 
(d)  Determine What Types of Dwelling Units are Permitted. Page 1 of the Table of Land Uses (Section 17.053) should be checked to determine which types of dwelling units are permitted within the zoning district for the subject property. (Section 17.093 describes each dwelling unit type.) 
(e)  Identify the Desired Permitted Development Option. Page 1 of the Table of Uses (Section 17.053) should also be checked to determine which types of development options are permitted within the zoning district for the subject property. Each development option is described in detail in Subsection 17.056(1). The selection of a particular development option may be related to the preponderance of sensitive natural resource areas on the site, or may reflect current or projected residential market conditions and the dwelling unit types they call for. After the desired permitted development option is identified, Section 17.074, Residential Density Standards, should be referred to for the selected development option in the identified zoning district(s). 
(f)  Check Minimum Site Area Requirement Against the Gross Site Area. The required Minimum Site Area (MSA), given in Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards) for the development option selected in (e), and in the zoning district identified in (b), should be compared with the Gross Site Area (GSA) required on the subject property as determined under the Natural Resources Site Evaluation in Step (c), above. If the GSA is less than the MSA required by the selected development option, then a different development option must be selected, or additional property should be acquired. 
(g)  Determine Maximum Gross Density Permitted on the Site. The Maximum Gross Density (MGD), given in Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards) for the development option selected in (e) and the zoning district identified in (b), above, should be noted. This number is used in Step (h), below. 
(h)  Determine the Maximum Number of Units Permitted on the Site The Maximum Gross Density (MGD), identified in (g), above, multiplied by the Gross Site Area (GSA) calculated in Step (c), above, equals the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on the subject property under the selected development option within the selected zoning district. The ability to actually develop this number of dwelling units on the subject property is not guaranteed by the provisions of this Chapter. Inefficient site design, poor property configuration, and other factors may result in a lower number of units actually fitting on the site. 
(i)  Check the Minimum Permitted Lot Area Against Table 17.053. The Minimum Lot Area (MLA) requirement given in Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards), is the smallest size lot permitted within the selected development option within the selected zoning district. The MLA must equal or be less than the lot size requirement for the type of dwelling unit proposed for the project in Step (d), above. If the MLA given in Section 17.053 is larger than the lot size requirement given in Step (d), then a dwelling unit type with a larger lot size must be selected (in which case, it may be advantageous to repeat Steps (d) through (i) using a different dwelling unit type and a different development option). 
(3)  Nonresidential Development. For Steps (a) through (c), see (1), above. Section 17.075 contains a key to assist with the procedure described below. 
(d)  Determine What Types of Land Uses are Permitted. The Table of Uses (Section 17.053) should be checked to determine which types of land uses are permitted within the zoning district present on, or proposed for, the subject property. A complete description of each land use is presented in Section 17.056. 
(e)  Identify the Desired Development Option (Number of Floors). Section 17.075 (Nonresidential Intensity Standards) presents a detailed listing of the development options available for nonresidential development in each zoning district. Each development option is based on a particular combination of Maximum Number of Floors (#F), Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR), and Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The selection of a particular development option may be related to the presence of sensitive natural resource areas on the site, or may reflect current or projected nonresidential market conditions and the types of buildings they call for. 
(f)  Check Minimum Lot Area Requirement Against Gross Site Area Present on the Subject Property. The required Minimum Lot Area (MLA), given in Section 17.075 (Nonresidential Intensity Standards) for the development option selected in (e), and in the zoning district identified in (b), should be compared with the Gross Site Area (GSA) required on the subject property as determined under the Natural Resources Site Evaluation in Step (c), above. If the GSA is less than the MLA required by the selected development option, then additional property should be acquired. In other words, the GSA (from (c)) must be greater than or equal to the MLA (from (e)). 
(g)  Check Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio Requirement Against the Required Resource Protection Area Present on the Subject Property. The required Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR), given in Section 17.075 (Nonresidential Intensity Standards) for the development option selected in (c), and in the zoning district identified in (b), should be multiplied by the Gross Site Area (GSA) used in Step (f), above. The resulting product is the area of the site which must be permanently protected as green space. This area should be compared with the Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) required on the subject property as determined under the Natural Resource Site Evaluation in Step (c), above. If the area of the site containing sensitive natural resources exceeds the area of permanently protected landscape surface required in the selected development option, then a development option requiring more floors may have to be used in order to approach maximum development potential on the site. In other words, if the RPA (from (c)) is greater than the LSR (from (5)), a taller development option may permit the development of more floor area on the subject property. 
(h)  Determine Maximum Floor Area Ratio Permitted on the Site. The Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR), given in Section 17.075 (Nonresidential Intensity Standards) for the development option selected in (e) and the zoning district identified in (b), above, should be noted. This number will be used in Step (i), below. 
(i)  Determine the Maximum Floor Area Permitted on the Site. The Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR), identified in (h), above, multiplied by the Gross Site Area (GSA) calculated in Step (c), above, equals the maximum square footage of gross floor area permitted on the subject property under that development option within that zoning district. The ability to actually develop this amount of floor area is not guaranteed by the provisions of this Chapter. Inefficient site design, poor property configuration, and other factors may result in a smaller amount of area actually fitting on the site. 
(j)  Check the Maximum Building Size Requirement (NC District). The Maximum Building Size (MBS) requirement given in Section 17.075, Nonresidential Intensity Standards, is the largest size building permitted within the selected development option within the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District. The MBS must equal or be greater than the building size proposed for the project in Step (i), above. If the MBS given in Section 17.075 is smaller than the proposed building size calculated in Step (i) above, then a smaller building must be built, or the use of additional buildings should be considered. 
    Rationale: Each nonresidential zoning district permits a slight variation in maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) depending upon the type of development option used. As the minimum required Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) increases within each zoning district (based on the development option selected), the FAR increases. This intensity incentive is based on 2 principles: First, the combinations of FAR and LSR requirements for the various development options within each zoning district are designed to result in a consistent community character of development within that district; second, the intensity incentive is designed to compensate for potential per square foot price reductions associated with smaller FARs in developments providing significant amounts of required green space. The Minimum Lot Area (MLA) requirements for each development option within each zoning district are used to ensure that a consistency of neighborhood character within each development option is maintained and that maximum permitted Floor Area Ratios (FARs) are approachable, if not completely attainable, under efficient site design practices. Finally, the Maximum Building Size (MBS) requirements ensure that development within the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District retains a neighborhood function and maintains a scale which is compatible with nearby residential development. 
SUBCHAPTER 17-VI: - BULK REGULATIONS 

Section 17.091 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Subchapter is to indicate the requirements for building location and bulk in both residential and nonresidential developments. The provisions of this Subchapter interact closely with the provisions of Subchapter 17-V, Density and Intensity Regulations. 
Section 17.092 - How to Use this Subchapter. 
    This Subchapter contains the standards which determine the location and height of buildings on any given site. Prior to using the provisions of this Subchapter to determine the potential layout of a given project, the recommendations provided below should be reviewed. This Subchapter recognizes inherent differences between residential and nonresidential projects, and thus regulates their development in slightly different manners. The description of the process addressing residential property in Subsections (1) and (2) below, refers to the requirements of Section 17.093, Residential Bulk Standards. The description of the process addressing nonresidential property in Subsections (1) and (3) below, refers to the requirements of Section 17.094, Nonresidential Bulk Standards. 
(1)  For Both Residential, and Nonresidential, Development. 
(a)  Identify the Zoning District and Development Option to Govern Development of the Subject Property. For buildable lots, the Official Zoning Map should be consulted to determine the zoning of the subject property. For proposed developments, the operations required in Subchapter 17-V should be performed in order to identify the applicable zoning district and development option. Section 17.076 contains a detailed step-by-step description of the recommended procedure for determining the applicable zoning district and development option. 
(b)  Note the Identified Zoning District and Development Option Applicable to the Subject Property. The applicable zoning district and development option identified for the subject property per Subsection (a), above, should be noted. The development option for residential development determines the Minimum Lot Area (MLA) permitted within the development. This is the key item of information for determining residential bulk regulations. The development option for nonresidential development determines the Maximum Number of Floors (#F) permitted within the development. This is the key item of information for determining nonresidential bulk regulations. 
(2)  For Residential Development. For Steps (a) and (b), see (1), above. 
(c)  Determine the Dwelling Unit Type(s) to be Used. Data for residential bulk standards are presented in a series of illustrations in Section 17.093, with each illustration pertaining to a specific dwelling unit type and its minimum lot size. The type(s) of dwelling unit(s) identified for use in Subsection (a), above, should be used to identify the pertinent subsections of Section 17.093. 
(d)  Identify the Bulk Standards for Each Dwelling Unit Type. Each page of Section 17.093 contains information for all bulk standards applicable to each dwelling unit type. All residential development within a proposed project must conform to the standards of Section 17.093, unless a variance is granted in accordance with Section 17.230 of this Chapter. 
(3)  For Nonresidential Development. For Steps (a) and (b), see (1), above. 
(c)  Determine the Type(s) of Development Options to be Used. Data for all nonresidential bulk standards are presented in Table 17.094, with each row of the Table pertaining to a specific zoning district and development option. The type(s) of development option(s) identified for use in Subsection (a), above, should be used to identify the pertinent portions of Section 17.094. 
(d)  Identify the Bulk Standards for Each Development Option. Each row of Table 17.094 contains information for all bulk standards applicable to each development option. All nonresidential development within a proposed project must conform to the standards of Section 17.094, unless a variance is granted in accordance with Section 17.230 of this Chapter. 
Section 17.093 - Residential Bulk Standards. 
    All residential lots created and dwellings constructed or expanded on these lots shall comply with the minimum standards of this Section. These minimum standards are related to the land uses allowed in each of the Standard Zoning Districts as described in Section 17.035. For purposes of enforcing the residential bulk standards, a story does not include a basement, cellar nor any other portion of a structure having all or part of its floor below the grade of the adjoining ground. (Continued on the next page.) 
TABLE 17.093: SUMMARY OF TOWN OF RIB MOUNTAIN RESIDENTIAL BULK STANDARDS RESI- 
DEN- 
TIAL 
DISTRICT DWELLING 
UNIT 
TYPE MIN 6 
LOT 
AREA 
(sq ft) MIN 
LOT 
WIDTH 
(ft) MINIMUM SETBACKS MIN 7 
DWEL- 
LING 
SEP- 
ARA- 
TION 
(ft) MAX BUILDING 
HEIGHT (ft) BLDG. TO 
FRONT/ 
STREET 5 
(ft) BLDG. to SIDE 
LOT LINE 
abutting 1 BLDG. to REAR 
LOT LINE 
abutting 2 LOT 
LINE 
to 
PAVE- 
MENT 
(ft) 6 HOME 7 
(ft) ACCES- 
SORY 
BLDG. 
(ft) HOME 7 
(ft) ACCES- 
SORY 
BLDG. 
(ft) HOME 
(ft) ACCES- 
SORY 
BLDG. 
(ft) RA-35 Single-Family 35 acres 150 35 40 10 35 10 5/10 80 50 25 CR-5 Single-Family 5 acres 150 35 35 10 35 10 5/10 70 50 25 ER-1 Single-Family  40,000 125 35 20 10 35 10 5/10 40 35 18 SR-2 Single-Family  20,000 100 35 10 or 15 10 35 10 5/10 20 to 30 35 18 SR-3 Single-Family  15,000 100 35 8 10 or 12 10 35 10 5/10 20 to 24 35 18 SR-4/MR-4 Single-Family  10,000 66 35 8 10 or 12 10 25 10 5/10 20 to 24 35 18 MR-4 Village House   5,000 50 35 10 or 12 10 25 10 5/10 20 to 24 35 18 MR-4 Twin/Duplex Hse (10,000) 4 (50) 4 35 0 10 or 12 10 35 10 5/10 0 20 to 24 35 18 MR-4/UR-8 Two-Flat (5,000) 4 100 35 10 or 12 10 35 10 5/10 20 to 24 35 18 MR-4/UR-8 Atrium House   3,600 35 35 0 or 10 10 35 10 5/10 0 or 10 18 18 MR-4/UR-8 Weak Link TH   2,800 30 35 0 or 12 10 35 10 5/10 0 or 24 18 3 35 18 MR-4/UR-8 Townhouse   2,400 20 35 0 or 12 10 35 10 5/10 0 or 24 35 18 MR-4/UR-8 Multiplex na 60 35 0 10 or 12 10 35 10 5/10 0 20 to 24 35 18 MR-4/UR-8 Apartment na 50 35 0 10 or 12 10 35 10 5/10 0 20 to 24 35 18 MR-4 Mobile Home 20,000/ 
15,000 100 35 10 or 12 10 35 10 5/10 20 to 24 35 18 1 Refer also to the requirements for bufferyards for the specific land use in Section 17.056 and for zoning districts in Section 17.150. 2 Refer also to the requirements for bufferyards for the specific land use in Section 17.056 and for zoning districts in Section 17.150. 3 Each Weak-Link Townhouse Unit must have a one-story section. 4 Parentheses () indicate minimum lot area or minimum lot width per dwelling unit. 5 Measured from existing or officially mapped r-o-w line, whichever is farthest from the center line of the street. For lots located adjacent to a street with an officially mapped or existing r-o-w equal to 100 feet, an additional 10 feet of setback is required. (See Section 17.095(1)(a).) 6 Minimum of 5 feet from a side or rear yard (check bufferyard requirements also), minimum of 10 feet from a public street, except where driveway intersects public street. 7 As measured from a 1-story portion/or a 2-story portion of the structure. See standards for individual development types. 8 See Section 17.095(2) for adjustments.  
(1)  Single-Family Detached House 35 acre lot. This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached, single-family residence which is located on an individual lot or within a building envelope. This dwelling unit type may not be split into 2 or more residences. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 35 acres 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 150 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .02 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .90 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 and 17.150.) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially-Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially-Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 40 feet 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 80 feet 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback not applicable 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation 80 feet 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 50 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 25 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 
4 spaces if located on street with standard pavement width 
8 spaces if located on street with reduced pavement width 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
(2)  Single-Family Detached House 5 acre lot. This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached, single-family residence, which is located on an individual lot or within a group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into 2 or more residences. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 5 Acres 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 150 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .06 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .85 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 & 17.150) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 70 ft. 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback not applicable 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation 70 feet 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 50 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 25 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 
4 spaces if located on street with standard pavement width 
8 spaces if located on street with reduced pavement width 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Single-Family Detached House 40,000 square foot lot. This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached, single-family residence, which located on an individual lot or within a group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into 2 or more residences. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 40,000 square feet 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 125 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .15 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .75 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 & 17.150) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 20 feet 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 40 feet 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback not applicable 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation 40 feet 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 
4 spaces if located on street with standard pavement width 
6 spaces if located on street with reduced pavement width 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Single-Family Detached House 20,000 square foot lot. This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached, single-family residence, which is located on an individual lot or within a group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into 2 or more residences. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 20,000 square feet 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 100 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .20 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .65 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146, 17.150 and 17.095(2) for adjustments) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 10 feet for one story or 15 feet for 2 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 20 to 30 feet, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback not applicable 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation 20 to 30 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces): 4 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
(8)  Single-Family Detached House 15,000 square foot lot. This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached, single-family residence, which is located on an individual lot or within a group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into 2 or more residences. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 15,000 square feet 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 100 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .28 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .50 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 and 17.150.) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 10 feet for one story or 12 feet for 2 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 20 to 24 feet, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback not applicable 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation 20 to 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
Includes garage, drives, & all designated parking surfaces): 4 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
(9)  Single-Family Detached House 10,000 square foot lot. This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached, single-family residence, which is located on an individual lot or within a group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into 2 or more residences. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 10,000 square feet 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 66 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .30 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .50 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146, 17.150 and 17.095(2) for adjustments.) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 10 feet for one story or 12 feet for 2 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 20 to 24 feet, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 25 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback not applicable 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation 20 to 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 3 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
  
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED HOUSE - General Illustrative Graphic for All Lot Sizes 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Village House 5,000 square foot lot. This dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached, single-family residence, which is located on an individual lot or within a group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into 2 or more residences. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 5,000 square feet 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 50 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .40 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .50 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 and 17.150.) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 10 feet for one story or 12 feet for 2 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 20 to 24 feet, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 25 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback 30 feet 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation 20 to 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 3 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
  
VILLAGE HOUSE - 5,000 square foot lot 
(12)  Twin House 10,000 square foot lot (with each dwelling unit on its own lot) and Duplex House 20,000 square foot lot (10,000 per each dwelling unit). These dwelling unit types consist of a single-family residence, which is attached on one side to another single-family residence. A minimum one-hour fire rated wall assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest level to flush against the underside of the roof, and individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals, are required between each dwelling unit. The 2 residences may or may not be located on individual lots. The Twin House is distinguished from the Duplex House merely by having each unit located on an individual lot or within a group development. These dwelling unit types may not be split into additional residences. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 10,000 square feet per dwelling unit 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 50 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .40 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .50 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 & 17.150) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot Adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 0 feet for zero lot line, 10 feet for one story or 12 feet for 2 stories 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 20 to 24 feet, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback 10 feet 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation (separate buildings) 0 feet, 20 to 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required per Dwelling Unit 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 3 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
  
TWIN HOUSE - 10,000 square foot lot and DUPLEX HOUSE - 20,000 square foot lot 
(13)  Two-Flat House 10,000 square foot lot (5,000 square feet per unit.) This dwelling unit type consists of a single-family residence, which has been converted into a two-family residence. The 2 residences are both located on the same lot or within the same group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences. Where permitted, this use is a conditional use and must be approved through the procedures of Section 17.225. 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 10,000 square feet (5,000 square feet per unit) 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 100 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .40 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .50 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 and 17.150) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 10 feet for one story or 12 feet for 2 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 20 to 24 feet, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback not applicable 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation 20 to 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required per Dwelling 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 2.5 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
  
TWO-FLAT HOUSE - 10,000 square foot lot (5,000 square feet per unit) 
(14)  Atrium House 3,600 square foot lot. This dwelling unit type consists of an attached, one-story, single-family residence, which has a private, individual access and is located on its own lot or within a group development. This dwelling unit can be considered a one-story townhouse. This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences. A minimum one-hour fire rated wall assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest level through the roof, and individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals, are required between each dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall enclose its entire rear yard by an opaque fence which shall be a minimum of 6 feet high. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). No more than 6 and no less than 3 atrium house dwelling units may be attached per group. All atrium house units within a development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the development. 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 3,600 square feet 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 35 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .50 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .40 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 and 17.150) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 0 feet for zero lot line or 10 feet 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 0 feet or 10 feet, per G if unit located at end of attached row 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback 30 feet 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation (separate buildings) 0 feet or 20 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 18 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 3 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
  
ATRIUM HOUSE - 3,600 square foot lot 
(15)  Weak-Link Townhouse 2,800 square foot lot. This dwelling unit type consists of an attached, one-story and two-story, single-family residence which has a private, individual access and is located on its own lot or within a group development. This dwelling unit can be considered a townhouse with both a one-story, and a two-story, components. The one-story side of the unit shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide, or 30% of the lot width, (whichever is greater). This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences. A minimum one-hour fire rated wall assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest level through the roof, and individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals, are required between each dwelling unit. No more than 6 and no less than 3 weak-link townhouse dwelling units may be attached per group. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). All weak-link townhouse units within a development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the development's boundary. 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 2,800 square feet 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 30 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .55 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .50 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 & 17.150) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 0 feet for zero lot line or 12 feet 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 0 feet, or 12 feet if unit is located at end of attached row, per G above 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback 30 feet 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation (separate buildings) 0 feet or 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 18/35 feet (each Weak-Link Townhouse must have a one-story section) 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 3 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
  
WEAK-LINK TOWNHOUSE - 2,800 square foot lot 
(16)  Townhouse 2,400 square foot lot. This dwelling unit type consists of an attached, two-story, single-family residence which has a private, individual access and is located on its own lot or within a group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences. A minimum one-hour fire rated wall assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest level through the roof, and individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals, are required between each dwelling unit. No more than 8 and no less than 3 townhouse dwelling units may be attached per group. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). All townhouse units within a development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the development. 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 2,400 square feet 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 20 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .60 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .50 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 and 17.150) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 0 feet for zero lot line or 12 feet 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 0 feet, or 12 feet if located at end of attached row, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback 30 feet 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation (separate buildings) 0 feet or 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 3 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
  
TOWNHOUSE - 2,400 square foot lot 
(17)  Multiplex. This dwelling unit type consists of an attached, multi-family residence which has a private, individual access. A minimum one-hour fire rated wall assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest level through the roof, is required between each dwelling unit. No more than 6 and no less than 3 multiplex dwelling units may be attached per group. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). All multiplex units within a development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the development. 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area not applicable 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 60 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .70 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .40 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 and 17.150) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot Adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 0 feet for zero lot line, 10 feet for one story or 12 feet for 2 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 0 feet, 20 to 24 feet, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback 30 feet 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation (separate buildings) 0 feet or 20 to 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required per Dwelling Unit: 
(Includes garage and all designated parking surfaces): 
Efficiency Unit: 1.5 spaces 
One-Bedroom Unit: 2.0 spaces 
Two-Bedroom+ Unit: 2.5 spaces 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
  
MULTIPLEX 
(18)  Apartment. This dwelling unit type consists of an attached, multi-family residence which takes access from a shared entrance or hallway. A minimum one-hour fire rated wall assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest level through the roof, is required between each dwelling unit. No more than 8 dwelling units and no less than 3 dwelling units, may be located in a building. As part of the conditional use requirements for group developments, any development comprised of one or more buildings which contain 4 or more dwelling units shall provide additional site design features such as: underground parking, architectural elements, landscaping, and/or on-site recreational facilities. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). All apartment units within a development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the development. 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area not applicable 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 50 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .70 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .40 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 and 17.150) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 0 feet for zero lot line, 10 feet for one story or 12 feet for 2 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 0 feet or 20 to 24 feet, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback 30 feet 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation (separate buildings) 0 feet or 20 to 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required per Dwelling Unit: 
(Includes garage and all designated parking surfaces): Efficiency Unit: 1.5 spaces 
One-Bedroom Unit: 2.0 spaces 
Two-Bedroom+ Unit: 2.5 spaces 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
  
APARTMENT 
(19)  Institutional Residential. This dwelling unit type consists of an attached, multi-family residence which takes access from a shared entrance or hallway. All units must be located within a development which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). All institutional residential units within a development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the development. 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area not applicable 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 60 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .70 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .40 
Minimum Setbacks: 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to street with and officially mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Attached Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 10 feet for one story 12 feet for 2 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Attached Garage 20 to 24 feet, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Attached Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback 30 feet 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation (separate buildings) 20 to 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 50 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage and all designated parking surfaces): 
Varies, see Section 17.174 for detailed parking requirements 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
(20)  Mobile Home. (Also see Section 17.024, Definitions.) All units must be located within a Mobile Home Residential Development (See Section 17.056(1)(c)) or in a Mobile Home Park Residential Development (See Section 17.056(1)(d)) which conforms to the requirements of Section 17.074 (Residential Density Standards). Within 30 days of occupancy, the owner shall remove the axle and install skirting approved by the Building Inspector. 
Bulk Standards (See Table 17.093) 
A:  Minimum Lot Area 15,000 square feet on public sewer, 20,000 sf without 
B:  Minimum Lot Width 100 feet 
C:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) .25 
D:  Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) .50 
Minimum Setbacks: (See also Sections 17.146 & 17.150) 
E:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to House 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
F:  Front or Street Side Lot Line to Garage 35 feet, add 10 more feet for a lot adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet 
G:  Side Lot Line to House or Garage 10 for one story or 12 feet for 2 stories 
H:  Total of Both Sides, Lot Lines to House/Garage 20 to 24 feet, per G 
I:  Rear Lot Line to House or Garage 35 feet 
J:  Side Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
K:  Rear Lot Line to Accessory Structure 10 feet 
L:  Peripheral Setback not applicable 
M:  Minimum Paved Surface Setback 5/10 feet; also see Section 17.172(9) 
N:  Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation 20 to 24 feet, per G 
O:  Maximum Height of Dwelling Unit 35 feet 
P:  Maximum Height of Accessory Structure 18 feet 
Q:  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required on the Lot 
(Includes garage, drives, and all designated parking surfaces): 3 
Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line except those established in compliance with Section 17.174(7)(e). 
Section 17.094 - Nonresidential Bulk Standards. 
    All nonresidential lots created and buildings constructed or expanded on these lots shall comply with the standards of this Section unless other bulk standards for the specific use are provided in Subchapter IV or in other provisions of this Chapter. The standards of this Section are related to the specific zoning district and development option used. Table 17.053 and Table 17.075 relate each use with each zoning district and development option. 
    The following table, 17.094, presents the standards for nonresidential bulk regulations. 
    Rationale: The maximum permitted height restriction of 35 feet is based upon the fire-fighting equipment available to the Fire Department as of the effective date of this Chapter. Should fire fighting equipment be made available to effectively fight fires in structures over 35 feet tall, this maximum limit could be raised. 
    Prior to such time, if a structure is proposed to exceed this maximum (under the provisions of Section 17.097), it should be equipped with internal fire fighting mechanisms which are approved by the Fire Department as part of the required Conditional Use review process. 
TABLE 17.094: TOWN OF RIB MOUNTAIN NONRESIDENTIAL BULK STANDARDS ZONING DISTRICT MAX 
NUM 
FLOORS 
(#F) MIN 
LOT 
WIDTH 
(ft) MINIMUM SETBACKS 1 MIN 
BLDG 
SEP. 
(ft) MAX 
BLDG 
HEIGHT 
(ft) BLDG. to 
FRONT/ 
STREET 3 
(ft) BLDG. to SIDE LOT LINE 
abutting BLDG. to REAR 
LOT LINE abutting LOT 
LINE to 
PAVE- 
MENT 2 
(ft) RES 
(ft) NON- 
RES (ft) RES 
(ft) NON- 
RES (ft) RURAL AG (RA-35ac) 300 100 100 50 100 50 5/10 50 35 C'SIDE RES. (CR-5ac) 1 200 100 100 50 100 50 5/10 50 35 ESTATE RES. (ER-1) 1 200 50 50 25 50 25 5/10 50 35 SUBURBAN 
RES. (SR-2) 1 200 50 50 25 50 25 5/10 50 35 SUBURBAN 
RES. (SR-3) 1 200 50 50 25 50 25 5/10 50 35 MIXED RES. (MR-4) 1 150 50 50 25 50 25 5/10 50 35 2 150 50 60 25 60 25 5/10 50 35 URBAN RES. (UR-8) 1 130 50 50 25 50 25 5/10 50 35 2 130 50 60 25 60 25 5/10 50 35 ESTATE OFFICE (EO) 1 or 2 80 35 10 10 25 25 5/10 20 35 SUBURBAN OFFICE 
(SO) 1 150 35 25 10 25 25 5/10 20 35 2 150 35 30 10 30 25 5/10 20 35 3 150 35 35 10 35 25 5/10 20 35 4+ 150 35 40 10 40 25 5/10 20 35 NEIGHBORHOOD 
COMMERCIAL (NC) 1 50 35 25 10 25 25 5/10 20 35 2 50 35 30 10 30 25 5/10 20 35 SUBURBAN 
COMMERCIAL (SC) 1 150 35 25 10 25 25 5/10 20 35 2 150 35 30 10 30 25 5/10 20 35 3 150 35 35 10 35 25 5/10 20 35 4+ 150 35 40 10 40 25 5/10 20 35 URBAN 
COMMERCIAL (UC) 1 50 35 10 10 25 25 5/10 20 35 2 50 35 15 10 30 25 5/10 20 35 3 50 35 20 10 35 25 5/10 20 35 4+ 50 35 25 10 40 25 5/10 20 35 CENTRAL 
COMMERCIAL (CC) 1 25 0 0 0 20 20 0* 0 35 2 25 0 0 0 20 20 0* 0 35 3 25 0 0 0 20 20 0* 0 35 4+ 25 0 0 0 20 20 0* 0 35 SUBURBAN 
INDUSTRIAL (SI) 1 150 35 25 10 25 25 5/10 20 35 2 150 35 30 10 30 25 5/10 20 35 3 150 35 35 10 35 25 5/10 20 35 4+ 150 35 40 10 40 25 5/10 20 35 URBAN INDUSTRIAL 
(UI) 1 100 35 25 10 25 25 5/10 20 35 2 100 35 30 10 30 25 5/10 20 35 3+ 100 35 35 10 35 25 5/10 20 35 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL 
(HI) 1 40 35 10 10 25 25 5/10 20 35 2+ 40 35 15 10 30 25 5/10 20 35 1 Setback requirements may be increased by required Street Frontage Landscaping and/or Bufferyards. (See Sections 17.146 and 17.150.) 2 Minimum of 5 feet from a side or rear yard (check bufferyard requirement also), minimum of 10 feet from a public street, except where a driveway intersects a public street. 3 Add 10 feet to setback if lot is adjacent to 100 foot wide existing or officially mapped right-of-way (see Section 17.095).  
Section 17.095 - Yard Setback Adjustments. 
(1)  Front Yard Setback Adjustment. 
(a)  For lots located adjacent to a street with an Officially Mapped or existing right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet, an additional 10 feet of setback is required to address anticipated future conditions of noise and air quality. 
(b)  The required front yard setback for any use may be reduced for a principal structure on any lot where more than 50 percent of the same type of principal structure on the same block face or street face do not meet the required front yard setback. In such instances, the required front yard setback for the proposed structure shall be the average of all same type principal structures on said block face or street face. 
(2)  Side Yard Setback Adjustment. (Am. #10-01) The minimum required side yard setback listed for Single-Family Detached Houses of 20,000 and 15,000 square feet (Sections 17.093(7) and (8), respectively) are hereby reduced for lots of record existing as of the effective date of this Chapter. For existing lots of record for either dwelling unit type, required minimum side yards shall be 10 feet for both one-story dwellings and for two-story dwellings; and for both dwelling unit types, required side yards from streets shall be 25 feet for both one-story and two-story dwellings. Table 17.093, Minimum Dwelling Unit Separation, shall not apply to existing lots of record, adjacent to structures nonconforming due to a setback less than the required minimum interior side yard setback. 
Section 17.096 - Intrusions into Required Yards. 
    The minimum setback requirements of Sections 17.093 and 17.094 establish the minimum required yards for all uses, except those exempted by the provisions of this Section. 
(1)  No yard shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard less than the minimum required by this Chapter. If an existing yard is less than the minimum required, it shall not be reduced further, except where exempted by the provisions of this Section. 
(2)  No required yard or lot area allocated to satisfy the minimum yard or lot area requirements for one building or structure shall be used to satisfy the minimum yard or lot area requirement for another building or structure. 
(3)  In instances where the required bufferyard width (per Section 17.150) exceeds the minimum required setback width, the minimum required bufferyard width shall prevail. Absolutely no intrusions of a building or structure are permitted within the required bufferyard. 
(4)  Permitted Intrusions Into Required Yards. The following intrusions by buildings and structures are permitted into the specified required yards: 
(a)  Permitted Intrusions Into Required Front or Street Yards: 
1.  Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, and gutters for residential buildings; provided they do not extend more than 21/2 feet into the required yard. 
2.  Statues, ornamental landscaping features, yard lights, ornamental lights, and nameplate signs for residential lots provided that they comply with the illumination requirements of Section 17.177 and provided they are not located closer than 5 feet from the front or street property line. 
3.  Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, detached decks, stoops, or similar appurtenances to residential buildings which do not extend above the floor level of the adjacent building entrance; provided they do not locate closer than 15 feet from any street right-of-way. 
4.  Fences on residential or nonresidential lots which do not exceed 4 feet in height; provided they do not locate closer than 2 feet to any street right-of-way. Permitted fence types shall comply with the provisions of Section 17.190(3). 
(b)  Permitted Intrusions Into Required Rear or Side Yards: 
1.  Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, and gutters for residential buildings; provided they do not extend more than 21/2 feet into the required yard. 
2.  Fences may locate on the property line. Permitted fence types shall comply with the provisions of Sections 17.149(4)(b) and 17.190. 
3.  Fire escapes and stoops (on residential buildings) which do not extend more than 3 feet into the required yard. 
4.  Exit platforms that do not extend more than 4 feet into the required yard and are no longer than 6 feet in length. 
(c)  Permitted Intrusions Into Required Rear Yards: 
1.  Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, detached decks, stoops, or similar appurtenances to residential buildings which do not extend more than 3 feet above grade; provided they do not locate closer than 8 feet to the rear lot line. 
2.  Balconies or similar appurtenances to residential buildings provided they do not extend more than 6 feet into the required rear yard. 
(5)  All Front Yard and Street Yard Areas. With the exception of fences, no accessory structures shall be permitted within any portion of a front yard or street yard. 
Section 17.097 - Exceptions to Maximum Height Regulations. 
(1)  Permitted Exceptions to Maximum Height Regulations. 
(a)  The maximum permitted number of floors listed for nonresidential uses in Section 17.075 and the maximum height regulations listed for residential uses and residential accessory structures in Section 17.093, and for nonresidential uses and nonresidential accessory structures in Section 17.094, are the maximum permitted number of floors and maximum heights for all buildings and structures, except those exempted by this Section, below. 
(b)  The following are permitted to exceed the maximum height regulations by 10 feet, within any district where permitted: church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes which do not contain useable space, public monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, flag poles, chimneys, smokestacks, cooling towers, and elevator penthouses. Such uses may exceed said maximum by more than 10 feet with the approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
(c)  Any building or structure not otherwise accounted for by (b), above, may exceed said maximum number of floor regulations and/or said maximum height regulations with the granting of a Conditional Use Permit which specifically states the maximum permitted number of floors and/or maximum permitted height of the proposed building or structure. 
(2)  Required Procedure for Exceeding Maximum Height Regulations. In order to secure permission to exceed the maximum height regulations of Sections 17.093 and/or 17.094, and/or the maximum number of floors regulations of Section 17.075, per (1)(c) above; the petitioner shall be granted a Conditional Use Permit per the standards and procedures of Section 17.225. 
Section 17.098 - Nonconforming Lot Regulations. 
(1)  Upon and after the effective date of this Chapter, no lot shall be created which does not meet the Minimum Lot Area (MLA) requirements of Section 17.093 or 17.075 or which does not meet the lot dimension requirements of Section 17.093 or 17.094. The size and shape of a lot shall not be altered so as to create or increase the degree of nonconformity of a structure or use. (Am. #04-06) 
(2)  A lot of record existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance in a Residential District (see Section 17.032), which does not meet the Minimum Lot Area (MLA) requirements of Section 17.074 or which does not meet the lot dimension requirements of Section 17.093 may be utilized for a detached single-family dwelling unit, provided the measurements of such area and dimensions are equal to or greater than 70% of the requirements of this Chapter. Said lot shall not be more intensively developed (with multi-family or nonresidential uses) unless combined with one or more abutting lots (or portions thereof) so as to create a lot which meets the requirements of this Chapter. 
(3)  A lot of record existing upon the effective date of this Chapter and located in a nonresidential zoning district (see Section 17.032), which does not meet the Minimum Lot Area (MLA) requirements of Section 17.075 or which does not meet the lot dimension requirements of Section 17.094 shall not be developed for building purposes unless the lot is combined with an adjacent lot or the appropriate variances are approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Section 17.099 - Nonconforming Structures.(Rep. & recr. #04-06) 
    The following regulations and any applicable County, State and Federal regulations, as administered by those units of government, apply to all nonconforming structures. Local regulation of nonconforming signs are governed by the provisions in Section 17.219. Nonconforming use regulations are covered in Section 17.057. 
Description of intent of this Section : When many of the provisions in this Chapter were adopted in February 1994, it was recognized that there were a substantial number of dwellings in the community that were located on lots that did not meet the new minimum lot area, minimum lot width, minimum dwelling setback, minimum dwelling separation and other bulk requirements of this newly adopted Chapter. In adopting this Chapter, it was the intention of the Town Board to also establish regulations for the existing residential dwellings that would not meet the new bulk requirements of this Chapter. An explanation of the intention of these regulations is provided here to help clarify how the provisions of this Chapter are to be applied to dwellings that existed prior to February 1994 which do not meet the bulk regulations of this Chapter or amendments which have been adopted thereto. The provisions of this Chapter are intended: 
a)  To allow all dwellings existing prior to February 1994 to continue to exist. 
b)  To allow all dwellings existing prior to February 1994 to be expanded under the following circumstances: 
1.  The dwelling must be located in an agricultural zoning district or in a residential zoning district, the dwelling cannot be located in a nonresidential district. Dwellings which are located in a nonresidential district shall not be expanded. 
2.  The expansion must meet all applicable requirements of any County, State, or Federal regulation. 
c)  To allow for the reconstruction of a residential dwelling on an existing lot that does not meet the minimum lot area and/or lot width requirements of this Chapter. The proposed reconstruction must also meet all of the applicable requirements of any County, State, or federal regulations as determined by the unit of government that has jurisdiction. 
(1)  Any structure lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Chapter or applicable amendment thereto, may be continued at the size existing upon such date, except as hereafter specified. 
(2)  Any structure lawfully existing, prior to its becoming nonconforming, such nonconformity due to a taking by the municipality, county, State, or Federal Government, may be continued at the size existing upon such date, except as hereafter specified. 
(3)  Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the Zoning Administrator from remedial or enforcement actions when a nonconforming structure is declared unsafe. 
(4)  When any lawful nonconforming structure in any zoning district is modified so as to be in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter, any future modification of said structure shall be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Whenever a lawful nonconforming structure has been damaged by fire, flood, wind, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, unlawful act, or Act of God, it may be reconstructed and used as before if it be reconstructed within one year after such calamity, unless the damage to said structure equals or exceeds 50% of its assessed value. In such cases, the use shall be limited to uses permitted by the provisions of this Chapter. 
(6)  Normal maintenance and repairs of a nonconforming structure including structural repairs or alterations are permitted under the following conditions: 
(a)  If the structure is used for a purpose that is a permitted use in the district in which it is located, there is no dollar limit on the value of the structural repairs or alterations that may be made to the structure. 
(b)  If the structure is used for a purpose that is not a permitted use in the district in which the structure is located the total value of the structural repairs or alterations shall not, during the life of the nonconforming use, exceed 50% of the assessed value of the structure unless the use of the structure is permanently changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. Where a nonconforming use occupies multiple structures on one lot, the structural repairs or alterations to each individual structure shall not exceed 50% of the assessed value of the particular structure in question. 
(c)  If the structure is used for a purpose that is a special use or a conditional use in the district in which it is located, the use shall be treated as a nonconforming use under paragraph (b), unless a conditional use for the activity was approved by the Town Board after February 1, 1994 under the provisions of Section 17.225. If a conditional use was approved, the amount of structural repairs or alterations made to the structure shall be regulated under paragraph (a), above or as specifically authorized by the Town board when the conditional use was granted. 
(7)  Alterations, additions and expansions which change the exterior dimensions of the structure and which conform to the dimensional rules of this chapter and other applicable regulations are allowed. Alterations, additions and expansions which change the exterior dimensions of the structure and which do not conform to this chapter, but which do not increase the dimensional nonconformity beyond what currently exists may be allowed provided that the improvements do not exceed 50% of the gross floor area of the existing structure over the life of the structure. No alterations, additions, or expansions may occur which will increase the dimensional nonconformity. 
(8)  A legal, nonconforming garage may be expanded or replaced provided the following requirements are met: 
(a)  That the proposed garage replacement or expansion does not encroach farther into required setback(s) than the current legal, nonconforming structure; 
(b)  That the proposed garage replacement or expansion is not located closer to an existing dwelling on an adjacent parcel than the sum of the required garage setback (on the subject property) and the required dwelling setback (on said adjacent parcel); 
(c)  That the proposed garage replacement or expansion meets the provisions of Section 17.056(8)(d)(1) unless a conditional use is granted in accordance with the provisions of 17.056(8)(d)(3); and 
(d)  That precautions, as determined on a case-by-case basis by the Zoning Administrator, are taken to reduce the possibility of fire damage to nearby structures. 
SUBCHAPTER 17-VII: - NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION REGULATIONS 

Section 17.111 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Subchapter is to set forth the requirements for the mandatory protection of natural resources and permanently protected green space areas within the Town of Rib Mountain. The provisions of this Subchapter interact closely with the provisions of Section 17.054 (Uses Permitted in Other Permanently Protected Green Space Areas), Subsection 17.056(10) (Natural Resource Disruption and Required Mitigation Standards), Section 17.073 (Required Natural Resources Site Evaluation), and Sections 17.074 and 17.075 which provide residential and nonresidential development standards. Section 17.076 provides a complete overview of the interrelationship between the above-listed Sections. In part, the provisions of this Subchapter are designed to ensure the implementation of the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan and State of §60.61, Wis. Stats. 
Section 17.112 - How to Use this Subchapter. 
    This Subchapter contains the standards which govern the protection, disturbance, and mitigation of disruption of all natural resource and other permanently protected green space areas. The provisions of this Subchapter are intended to supplement those of the Town of Rib Mountain, Marathon County, the State of Wisconsin, and the Federal Government of the United States which pertain to natural resource protection. Prior to using the provisions of this Subchapter to determine the permitted disruption of such areas, the requirements provided below should be reviewed. This Subchapter recognizes the important and diverse benefits which natural resource features provide in terms of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Each of the following sections is oriented to each natural resource type, and is designed to accomplish several objectives: 
(1)  First, a definition of the natural resource is provided. 
(2)  Second, the specific purposes of the protective regulations governing each natural resource type are provided. 
(3)  Third, the required method of identifying and determining the boundaries of the natural resource area is given. 
(4)  Fourth, mandatory protection requirements are identified. 
NOTE: Protection requirements for specific land uses and natural resource types designed to minimize disruption of natural resource functions are presented in Subsection 17.056(10). 
Section 17.113 - Flood Plain Zoning. 
    Staff of the Marathon County Zoning Department establish and administer flood plain zoning in the Town of Rib Mountain. 
Section 17.114 - Wetland Overlay District.(Am. #2009-01) 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the Wetland District is to maintain safe and healthful conditions, prevent water pollution, protect wildlife habitat, preserve cover and natural beauty and control building and development shall occur in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts upon the wetland. These provisions shall apply in all wetlands in the Wetland District. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be allowed, subject to all applicable county, State, and federal law: 
(a)  Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, but which must be carried out without filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling or excavating: 
1.  Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming and boating. 
2.  The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops. 
3.  The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber. 
4.  The pasturing of livestock and the construction and maintenance of fences. 
5.  The cultivation of agricultural crops. 
6.  The construction and maintenance of duck blinds. 
7.  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways, including those built on pilings. 
8.  The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing Town and county highways, and bridges and pedestrian trails/walkways. 
(b)  Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which may involve filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling or excavating to the extent specifically provided below: 
1.  Temporary water level stabilization measures in the practice of silviculture, which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry condition that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected. 
2.  Dike and dam construction and ditching for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries. 
3.  Ditching, tiling, dredging, excavating or filling done to maintain or repair existing agricultural drainage systems only to the extent necessary to maintain the level of drainage required to continue the existing agricultural use. 
(c)  The following uses are allowed upon issuance of a zoning permit or special use permit. If the proposed use is located in a Wetland District which is regulated by the shoreland-wetland provisions of the Marathon County Zoning Ordinance, a zoning permit or special exception permit must be obtained from the county. A Town permit is not required. 
Construction of Town, county highways, bridges and pedestrian trails/walkways. 
(d)  If the proposed use is located in a wetland that is not regulated under the Marathon County Zoning Ordinance, a Town zoning permit or a conditional use permit is required. A zoning permit may be issued by the Town Building Inspector if the proposed use does not involve an earth disturbance exceeding 5,000 square feet in area. A Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Section 17.225 is required if the earth disturbance exceeds 5,000 square feet in area. 
1.  The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary to conduct silvicultural activities or are necessary for agricultural cultivation, provided that: 
a.  The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland. 
b.  The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland and meets the following standards: 
1)  The road shall be designed and constructed as a single lane roadway with only such depth and width necessary to accommodate the machinery required to conduct agricultural and silvicultural activities. 
2)  Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only. 
3)  Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling or excavating that is to be done must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road. 
2.  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings used solely in conjunction with raising of waterfowl, minnows, or other wetland or aquatic animals or used solely for some other purpose which is compatible with wetland preservation, if such building cannot as a practical matter be located outside the wetland, provided that: 
a.  Any such building does not exceed 500 square feet in area. 
b.  No filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling or excavating is to be done. 
3.  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, pedestrian trails/walkways, boat access sites, natural and outdoor education areas, historic and scientific areas, wildlife refuges, game preserves and private wildlife habitat areas, provided that: 
a.  Any private recreation or wildlife habitat area must be used exclusively for that purpose. 
b.  No filling is to be done. 
c.  Ditching, excavation, dredging, dike and dam construction may be done in wildlife refuges, game preserves and private wildlife habitat areas, but only for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values. 
d.  The owner of a new private recreation or wildlife area in a wetland shall notify the Town Building Inspector in writing before beginning construction. 
4.  The construction and maintenance of electric, gas, telephone, water and sewer transmission and distribution lines and related facilities, by public utilities and cooperative associates organized for the purpose of producing or furnishing heat, light, power, or water to their members provided that: 
a.  The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities cannot as a practical matter be located outside the wetland. 
b.  Any filling, excavating, ditching or draining that is to be done must be done in a manner designed to minimize flooding and other adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetlands. 
5.  The construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that: 
a.  The railroad lines cannot as a practical matter be located outside the wetland. 
b.  Any filling, excavating, ditching or draining that is to be done must be necessary for such construction or maintenance and must be done in a manner designed to minimize flooding and other adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland. 
(3)  Procedure. The procedure for zoning a district as a Wetland District shall be according to Section 17.223 of this Chapter. 
(4)  Standards for Rezoning. A wetland or a portion thereof in the Wetland District shall not be rezoned if the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following: 
(a)  Storm and floodwater storage capacity. 
(b)  Maintenance of dry season stream flow, the discharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland. 
(c)  Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters. 
(d)  Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds. 
(e)  Wildlife habitat and wildlife. 
(f)  Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types. 
(5)  Setbacks. Setback for any structure not specifically permitted above, shall be 10 feet from the edge of the delineated wetlands. 
Section 17.115 - Lakeshore Overlay District. 
(1)  Definition. Lakeshores are the land margins of navigable waters as defined by State of Wisconsin Statutes. Lakeshores are all areas within 75 feet of the ordinary high water mark of such features. Decorative water features shall not be considered "navigable waters" for the purposes of this Section. This meaning of "lakeshores" shall remain distinct from the meaning of the term as employed by the State of Wisconsin Statutes and the DNR. 
(2)  Purpose of Lakeshore Protection Requirements. Lakeshores serve to protect land/water margins from erosion due to site disruption. Because of regular contact with wave action, currents, and runoff, such areas are highly susceptible to continuous, and in some cases, rapid erosion. Lakeshore protection also provides a natural vegetation buffer which serves to reduce water velocities and wave energy, and filters significant amounts of water-borne pollutants and sediments. Lakeshores also promote infiltration and groundwater recharging, and provide a unique habitat at the land/water margin. 
(3)  Determination of Lakeshore Boundaries. General lakeshore boundaries are depicted on USGS Topographic Maps covering the Town. Upon the proposal of development activity on any property which contains a lakeshore depicted on said maps, the petitioner shall prepare a detailed site analysis per the requirements of Section 17.120. This analysis shall depict the location of all lakeshore areas on the subject property as related to the provisions of Subsection (1), above. 
(4)  Mandatory Lakeshore Protection Requirements. Lakeshores shall remain in an undisturbed state, except for the land uses permitted in Section 17.054 per the requirements of Subsection 17.056(10). All Marathon County regulations pertaining to Shorelands shall be applicable, as administered by the County Zoning Department. 
Section 17.116 - Drainageway Overlay District. 
(1)  Definition. Drainageways are non-navigable, above-ground watercourses, detention basins and/or their environs which are identified by the presence of one or more of the following: 
(a)  All areas within 75 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a "perennial stream" as shown on USGS maps covering the Town of Rib Mountain; 
(b)  All areas within 50 feet of the ordinary high water mark of an "intermittent stream" or "open channel drainageway" as shown on USGS maps covering the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(2)  Purpose of Drainageway Protection Requirements. Drainageways serve in the transporting of surface runoff to downstream areas. As such, drainageways serve to carry surface waters, supplement floodplain, wetland, and lakeshore water storage functions in heavy storm or melt events, filter water-borne pollutants and sediments, promote infiltration and groundwater recharging, and provide a unique habitat at the land/water margin. Drainageway protection requirements preserve each of these functions as well as greatly reducing the potential for soil erosion along drainageways by protecting vegetative groundcover in areas which are susceptible to variable runoff flows and moderate to rapid water movement. 
(3)  Determination of Drainageway Boundaries. General drainageway boundaries are depicted on USGS Topographic Maps covering the Town of Rib Mountain. Upon the proposal of development activity on any property which contains a drainageway, the petitioner shall prepare a detailed site analysis per the requirements of Section 17.120. This analysis shall depict the location of all drainageway areas on the subject property as related to the provisions of Subsection (1), above. 
(4)  Mandatory Drainageway Protection Requirements. Drainageways shall remain in an undisturbed state except for the land uses permitted in Section 17.054 per the requirements in Subsection 17.056(10). Vegetation clearing to maintain drainageway functions is permitted with the written approval of the Town Engineer. All areas designated as drainageways shall be located within a public easement or dedication for maintenance purposes to preserve proper drainage flow. 
Section 17.117 - Woodland Overlay District. 
(1)  Definition. Woodlands are areas of trees whose combined canopies cover a minimum of 80% of an area of one acre or more, as shown on the most recent air photos covering the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(2)  Purpose of Woodland Protection Requirements. Woodlands provide a wide variety of environmental functions. These include atmospheric benefits such as removing air-borne pollutants, carbon dioxide uptake, oxygen production, and evapotranspiration returns. Water quality benefits include substantial nutrient uptake rates (particularly for nitrogen and phosphorus) and surface runoff reduction in terms of both volumes and velocities. Woodlands provide unique wildlife habitats and food sources. Woodlands are excellent soil stabilizers, greatly reducing runoff-related soil erosion. Woodlands also serve to reduce wind velocities which further reduces soil erosion. Finally, under proper management techniques, woodlands serve as regenerative fuel sources. 
(3)  Determination of Woodland Boundaries. General woodland boundaries are depicted on the most recent air photos covering the Town of Rib Mountain. Upon the proposal of development activity on any property which contains a woodland, the petitioner shall prepare a detailed site analysis per the requirements of Section 17.120. This analysis shall depict the location of all woodland areas on the subject property as related to the provisions of Subsection (1), above. 
(4)  Mandatory Woodland Protection Requirements. Woodlands shall remain in an undisturbed state except for the land uses permitted in Section 17.054 per the requirements of Subsection 17.056(10) and areas subject to the following mitigation requirements. Selective cutting operations are permitted as a Special Use in all woodland areas (per the requirements of Section 17.056(2)(f)). Clear cutting is permitted as a Conditional Use in all woodland areas (per the requirements of Section 17.056(2)(g)). 
Section 17.118 - Steep Slope Overlay Zoning District. 
(1)  Definition. Steep slopes are areas which contain a gradient of 12% or greater, (equivalent to a 10-foot elevation change in a distance of 83 feet or less), as shown on USGS Topographic Maps (or more detailed site specific topographic information) covering the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(2)  Purpose of Steep Slope Protection Requirements. Steep slopes are particularly susceptible to damage resulting from site disruption, primarily related to soil erosion. Such damage is likely to spread to areas which were not originally disturbed. Such erosion reduces the productivity of the soil, results in exacerbated erosion downhill, and results in increased sedimentation in drainageways, wetlands, streams, ponds and lakes. Beyond adversely effecting the environmental functions of these resources areas, such sedimentation also increases flood hazards by reducing the flood water storage capacity of hydrological system components, thus elevating the flood level of the drainage system in effected areas. Beyond these threats to the public safety, disruption of steep slopes also increases the likelihood of slippage and slumping-unstable soil movements which may threaten adjacent properties, buildings, and public facilities such as roads and utilities. 
(3)  Determination of Steep Slope Boundaries. General steep slope boundaries are depicted on USGS Topographic Maps (or more detailed site specific topographic information) covering the Town of Rib Mountain. Upon the proposal of development activity on any property which contains a steep slope, the petitioner shall prepare a detailed site analysis per the requirements of Section 17.120. This analysis shall depict the location of all steep slope areas on the subject property as related to the provisions of Subsection (1), above. 
(4)  Mandatory Steep Slope Protection Requirements. Steep slopes shall remain in an undisturbed state except for the land uses permitted in Section 17.054 per the requirements of Subsection 17.056(10). 
Section 17.120 - Detailed Site Analysis. 
(1)  Purpose. The detailed site analysis required by this Subchapter is designed to provide the clear identification of permanently protected green space areas on a site which is proposed for development. The detailed survey work required to identify these areas accurately on a map is not required prior to the initiation of development plans for an area. A detailed site analysis shall be performed in conjunction with required land division documents or development site plans (see Section 17.228) for any and all properties containing permanently protected natural resource areas. 
(2)  Description. The detailed site analysis shall be shown on a map of the subject property which depicts the location of all protected natural resource areas, as defined by the provisions of this Subchapter, and as located by an on-site survey. The detailed site analysis shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Scale: A minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet shall be used. 
(b)  Topography: Topographic information is not required for any property which does not contain steep slopes (as designated on USGS topographic maps covering the Town in excess of 12%). For such properties, topographic information with a minimum contour interval of 2 feet is required. 
(c)  Specific Natural Resources Areas: All natural resource areas which require protection under the provisions of this Chapter shall be accurately outlined and clearly labeled. Particular care as to clarity shall be taken in areas where different resource types overlap with one another. 
(d)  Development Pads: 
1.  All site disruption (including selective cutting) proposed to occur within permanently protected natural resource areas shall be limited to development pads. Development pads shall be depicted on the detailed site analysis map, site plans required for development permits, and the recorded Plat of Subdivision or Certified Survey Map. 
2.  Beyond visible damage to natural resources, vegetation, soil, and drainage patterns, site disruption activities shall not compact soil covering tree roots, or otherwise damage trees beyond the area from which trees are to be removed. All trees with calipers exceeding 3 inches, whose canopies are located adjacent to disturbed areas, which die within a period of 5 years following site disruption shall be replaced by the property owner with a 3-inch caliper tree of the same type (canopy or understory). Therefore, care shall be taken to ensure that equipment and actions associated with permitted site disruption activities are limited to the area in which they are permitted. The use of snow fences and other barriers to outline development pads during disruption activity is strongly recommended to limit the extent of inadvertent compaction or other disturbance of earth, and collision damage to vegetation intended for protection. Such barriers should be placed no closer to protected trees than a point on the ground directly under their outer canopy edge; 
(e)  Mitigation Areas: All mitigation areas related to the provisions of this Chapter shall be depicted on the detailed site analysis map with notations provided which describe the mitigation techniques employed. 
(3)  Required Procedure for Submission and Review. 
(a)  Required Timing of Submission: The detailed site analysis map shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for initial review prior to, or concurrently with, the submission of the Preliminary Plat of Subdivision or the Certified Survey Map; or if the proposed development does not involve a land division, then submittal is required as an attachment to a required site plan (see Section 17.228). A concept plan of the proposed development may be submitted prior to the submission of the detailed site analysis map, however, in no way does the acceptance and/or general approval of the concept plan indicate the approval of natural resource feature locations. A detailed site analysis map prepared for the subject property which has been previously approved by Town Staff, may be submitted for any subsequent development activity on the site. However, modifications to such a previously approved map will be required if the analysis is no longer accurate for the subject property. 
(b)  Review by Town Staff: Town staff shall review the submitted detailed site analysis map for general compliance with the following data sources: 
1.  Air photos of the subject property; 
2.  USGS Quads and other sources of topographic information; 
3.  Applicable FEMA and related floodplain maps; 
4.  Applicable Federal and State Wetland Inventory Maps; 
5.  The Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan; and 
6.  Site visits and/or certified on-site survey information. 
The Zoning Administrator shall provide the petitioner with a written evaluation of the submitted detailed site analysis map which shall indicate the acceptance by Town Staff; or the need for further analysis work, discussion with the petitioner and/or Staff-recognized experts, or a joint site visit. 
(c)  Modification of Detailed Site Analysis Map. If necessary, as determined by Town Staff, revised detailed site analysis maps shall be prepared and submitted for review by Town Staff, until a version is deemed acceptable. Staff review of the detailed site analysis map may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals as a matter of Ordinance Interpretation (see Section 17.254). 
(d)  Acceptance of Detailed Site Analysis Map. Upon notification of acceptance by Town Staff, (or in case of appeal, by determination of the Board of Zoning Appeals), the petitioner may proceed with the submittal of necessary development documents. 
(4)  Integration of Detailed Site Analysis Information with Required Development and/or Land Division Documents. Information contained on the detailed site analysis map relating to the boundaries of permanently protected green space areas (including natural resource protection areas, other permanently protected green space areas, and required mitigation areas) shall be clearly depicted on any and all site plans required as a precondition for application for any development permit (such as a Building Permit) and on any proposed Plat of Subdivision or Certified Survey Map. (See also, Section 17.228 regarding required site plans.) 
SUBCHAPTER 17-VIII: - LANDSCAPING & BUFFERYARD REGULATIONS 

Section 17.141 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Subchapter is to protect and enhance Rib Mountain's environmental, economic and aesthetic resources thereby promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and contributing in a positive manner to the quality of life in the town. This Subchapter establishes minimum standards for the design and amount of landscaping for all land uses in the community other than agricultural and single-family and two-family residential. These minimum landscaping requirements are intended to improve the appearance of the community, reduce soil erosion and storm water runoff, help recharge groundwater resources, help absorb carbon dioxide and supply oxygen, provide shade for cooling, screen noise, trap dust, reduce glare, and help to preserve, protect and enhance the natural environment. These regulations are also intended to reduce the potential conflicts between abutting land uses. 
Section 17.142 - How to Use this Subchapter. 
(1)  This Subchapter contains the standards which govern the amount, size, type, installation and maintenance of required landscaping. This Subchapter recognizes the important and diverse benefits which landscaping provides in terms of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, and implementing the Master Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Each section of this Subchapter is oriented to a specific category of required landscaping. These include Landscaping Requirements for Foundations (Section 17.144), Landscaping Requirements for Developed Lots (Section 17.145) Landscaping Requirements for Street Frontages (Section 17.146), Landscaping Requirements for Paved Areas (Section 17.147), Landscaping Requirements for Permanently Protected Green Space Areas (Section 17.148), Landscaping Requirements for Reforestation (Section 17.149), and Landscaping Requirements for Bufferyards (Section 17.150). 
(3)  In each instance, a "landscaping point" concept is used to provide a maximum amount of flexibility in terms of the selection of plant materials. Section 17.143 presents sample landscape point combination alternatives used by this Ordinance. At the end of this Subchapter, Section 17.151 provides a listing of plant species fitting into the "climax tree", "tall deciduous tree", "medium deciduous tree", "low deciduous tree", "tall evergreen tree", "medium evergreen tree", "low evergreen tree", "tall deciduous shrub", "medium deciduous shrub", "low deciduous shrub", "medium evergreen shrub", "low evergreen shrub", and "non-contributory plants" used by this Ordinance. Section 17.152 provides requirements for the installation and maintenance of required landscaping, and Section 17.153 describes the procedure for calculating landscaping requirements for this Subchapter. 
Section 17.143 - Landscaping Points, Sample Landscaping Schemes and Measurement for Landscaping Requirements. 
(1)  All landscaping requirements are stated in terms of the number of landscaping points required. The required number of landscaping points is dependent upon the type of land use, the zoning district, and the size of the development. A different number of points is awarded for each plant, depending upon its typical growth rate, its mature height, and whether it is a deciduous or evergreen species. A minimum installation size is required for each of these plant categories. These requirements are outlined in the table on the following page. 
LANDSCAPING POINTS AND MINIMUM INSTALLATION SIZES Plant Category Landscaping Points 
Per Plant Minimum Permitted 
Installation Size Climax Tree 35 2? Caliper Tall Deciduous Tree 30 11/2? Caliper Medium Deciduous Tree 15 6' Tall Low Deciduous Tree 10 4' Tall Tall Evergreen Tree 30 5' Tall Medium Evergreen Tree 20 4' Tall Low Evergreen Tree 12 3' Tall Tall Deciduous Shrub 5 36? Tall Medium Deciduous Shrub 3 24? Tall Low Deciduous Shrub 1 18? Tall Medium Evergreen Shrub 5 18? Tall/Wide Low Evergreen Shrub 3 12? Tall/Wide Non-Contributory Plants 0 n/a Source: A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin , E.R. Hasselkus, UW-Extension Publication: A2865.  
(2)  Depiction of Sample Landscaping Schemes: Illustration 17.143, shown on the following pages, depicts sample landscaping schemes that may be used for building foundations, developed lots, street frontages, paved areas, reforestation, and bufferyards. In general, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative A are best for building foundations, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative B are best for developed lots, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative C are best for street frontages, landscaping schemes similar to Alternative D are best for paved areas (including parking lots, walkways and plazas), landscaping schemes similar to Alternative E are best for reforestation, and landscaping schemes similar to Alternative F are best for bufferyards. A detailed listing of which plant species fit each plant type is provided in Section 17.151. 
Alternative A: 
Best Suited for 
Building Foundations 
Alternative B: 
Best Suited for 
Developed Lots 
Alternative C: 
Best Suited for 
Street Frontages 
Alternative D: 
Best Suited for 
Paved Areas 
Alternative E: 
Best Suited for 
Reforestation 
Alternative F: 
Best Suited for 
Bufferyards 
(3)  Measurement for Landscaping Requirements: A minimum amount of landscaping points, based upon the zoning district, is required for the linear feet Building Foundations, the gross floor area of buildings on Developed Lots, the linear feet of Street Frontage, and the total combined area of Paved Areas. The following diagram illustrates the measurement techniques used to determine these requirements: 
Section 17.144 - Landscaping Requirements for Building Foundations. 
(1)  This Section requires that certain buildings constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance (See Section 17.011.) be accented by a minimum amount of landscaping placed near the building foundation. The intent of this section is to require a visual break in the mass of buildings and to require a visual screen of a minimum of 6 feet in height for all exterior appurtenances (such as HVAC, utility boxes, standpipes, stormwater discharge pipes and other pipes.) 
(2)  Landscaping required by this Section shall be placed so that at maturity, the plant's drip line is located within 10 feet of the building foundation. Such landscaping shall not be located in those areas required for landscaping as street frontages, paved areas, protected green space areas, reforestation areas, or bufferyards, under Sections 17.145 through 17.149, of this Subchapter. See Section 17.143(2)(A) for a suggested scheme. 
(3)  For each 100 feet of building foundation perimeter, the following number of landscaping points (as described in Section 17.143) shall be provided on a prorated basis, and installed and permanently maintained per Section 17.152: 
(4)  Climax Trees and Tall Trees shall not be used to meet this requirement. 
TABLE 17.144: BUILDING FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 
Minimum Required Landscaping Points per 100 linear feet of Building Foundation Zoning District Land Use (see Section 17.056) All Other Land Uses Single-Family Residential 
(per 17.093(1)-(9)) Agricultural 
(per 17.056(2)) Rural/Agricultural (RA-35ac) 40 0 0 Countryside Residential (CR-5ac) 100 0 0 Estate Residential (ER-1) 90 0 0 Suburban Residential (SR-2) 80 0 0 Suburban Residential (SR-3 and SR-4) 80 0 0 Mixed Residential (MR-4) 60 0 0 Urban Residential (UR-8) 40 0 0 Estate Office (EO) 90 0 0 Suburban Office (SO) 80 0 0 Neighborhood Commercial (NC) 80 0 0 Suburban Commercial (SC) 80 0 0 Urban Commercial (UC) 40 0 0 Central Commercial (CC) 20 0 0 Suburban Industrial (SI) 80 0 0 Urban Industrial (UI) 40 0 0 Heavy Industrial (HI) 20 0 0  
Section 17.145 - Landscaping Requirements for Developed Lots. 
(1)  This Section requires that certain lots developed after the effective date of this Ordinance (see Section 17.011) contain a minimum amount of landscaping. The intent of this section is to require the establishment of yard shade and create visual variety and interest in the area located between a building and adjacent paved areas. 
(2)  Landscaping required by this Section is most effective if located away from those areas required for landscaping as building foundations, street frontages, paved areas, protected green space areas, reforestation areas, or bufferyards, under Sections 17.145 through 17.150, of this Subchapter. See Section 17.143(2)(B) for a suggest landscaping scheme. 
(3)  The following number of landscaping points (as described in Section 17.143) shall be provided on a prorated basis for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, and installed and maintained per the requirements of Section 17.152: 
TABLE 17.145: DEVELOPED LOT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 
Minimum Required Landscaping Points per 1,000 Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Zoning District Land Use (see Section 17.056) All Other Land Uses Single-Family Residential 
(per 17.093(1)-(9)) Agricultural 
(per 17.056(2)) RA-35ac 20 0 0 CR-5ac 60 0 0 ER-1 50 0 0 SR-2 40 0 0 SR-3 and SR-4 40 0 0 MR-4 40 0 0 UR-8 40 0 0 EO 40 0 0 SO 30 0 0 NC 30 0 0 SC 20 0 0 UC 10 0 0 CC 10 0 0 SI 20 0 0 UI 10 0 0 HI 10 0 0  
Section 17.146 - Landscaping Requirements for Street Frontages. 
(1)  This Section requires that street frontages on certain lots developed after the effective date of this Ordinance (see Section 17.011) contain a minimum amount of landscaping in those areas which abut the right-of-way of a public street. The intent of this section is to establish a visual buffer between the street and the abutting parking lot, building and any other abutting site improvements. 
(2)  All landscaping used to meet this requirement shall be located within 10 feet of the public right-of-way. In no instance shall such landscaping be located within a public right-of-way. See Section 17.143(2)(C) for a suggested landscaping scheme. Landscaping shall not impede vehicle or pedestrian visibility. 
(3)  For every 100 linear feet of street frontage where a developed lot abuts a public street right-of-way, the following number of landscaping points (as described in Section 17.143) shall be provided on a prorated basis, and installed and maintained per the requirements of Section 17.152. 
(4)  Shrubs shall not be used to meet this requirement. A minimum of 50% of all points shall be devoted to climax and tall trees and a minimum of 30% of all points shall be devoted to medium and low trees. 
TABLE 17.146: STREET FRONTAGE LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 
Minimum Required Landscaping Points per 100 Linear Feet of Street Frontage Zoning District Land Use (see Section 17.056) All Other Land Uses Single-Family Residential 
(per 17.093(1)-(9)) Agricultural 
(per 17.056(2)) RA-35ac 40 0 0 CR-5ac 100 0 0 ER-1 90 0 0 SR-2 80 0 0 SR-3 and SR-4 80 0 0 MR-4 60 0 0 UR-8 40 0 0 EO 90 0 0 SO 80 0 0 NC 80 0 0 SC 80 0 0 UC 40 0 0 CC 40 0 0 SI 80 0 0 UI 40 0 0 HI 40 0 0  
Section 17.147 - Landscaping Requirements for Paved Areas. 
(1)  This Section requires that paved areas on certain lots developed after the effective date of this Ordinance contain a minimum amount of landscaping within, or within 10 feet of, the paved area. The intent is to require a continuous visual screen of paved areas, from public rights-of-way, at a minimum height of 40". 
(2)  A minimum of 360 square feet of landscaped area, located within 10 feet of the paved area, is required for the placement of every 100 landscaping points. Said area does not have to be provided in one contiguous area-sample configurations are depicted in Section 17.143, above. Plants used to fulfill this requirement shall be used to visually screen parking, loading and circulation areas from view from public streets. 
(3)  All landscaping areas located adjacent to paved areas shall be separated from the paved area by a continuous minimum 4 inch tall curb, which is constructed of concrete, asphalt, timber or like material approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(4)  For every 20 off-street parking stalls or 10,000 square feet of pavement (whichever yields the greater landscaping requirement) located in a development, the following number of landscaping points (as described in Section 17.143) shall be provided on a prorated basis, and installed and maintained per the requirements of Section 17.152. A minimum of 30% of all points shall be devoted to medium and low trees and a minimum of 40% of all points shall be devoted to shrubs. 
TABLE 17.147: PAVED AREA LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 
Minimum Required Landscaping Points per 10,000 Square Feet of Paved Area or 20 Parking Stalls Zoning District Land Use (see Section 17.056) All Other Land Uses Single-Family Residential 
(per 17.093(1)-(9)) Agricultural 
(per 17.056(2)) RA-35ac 80 0 0 CR-5ac 200 0 0 ER-1 180 0 0 SR-2 160 0 0 SR-3 and SR-4 160 0 0 MR-4 120 0 0 UR-8 80 0 0 EO 190 0 0 SO 160 0 0 NC 160 0 0 SC 160 0 0 UC 80 0 0 CC 40 0 0 SI 160 0 0 UI 80 0 0 HI 40 0 0  
Section 17.148 - Landscaping Requirements for Other Permanently Protected Green Spaces. 
(1)  This Section requires that each acre of other permanently protected green space (See Section 17.054) approved after the effective date of this Ordinance (See Section 17.011) be planted with a minimum amount of landscaping. 
(2)  For every one acre of other permanently protected green space in a development, 200 landscaping points (as described in Section 17.143) shall be provided. In addition, adequate ground cover shall be provided to stabilize the soil. 
Section 17.149 - Landscaping Requirements for Required Reforestation. 
(1)  This Section requires that each area required to be reforested, be reforested and maintained in a manner appropriate to site conditions. 
(2)  A detailed reforestation plan shall be submitted by the property owner and approved by the Town prior to clear cutting. This plan shall be reviewed by a reforestation consultant chosen by the Town, with funding for consulting services provided by the Petitioner to the Town. 
Rationale: The provisions of this Section are designed to ensure that reforestation efforts required as part of woodland disruption mitigation standards result in the thorough and reasonably rapid replacement of the important and varied environmental functions which woodlands provide. (See Section 17.117.) 
Section 17.150 - Landscaping Requirements for Bufferyards. 
(1)  Purpose. This Section provides the landscaping and width requirements for bufferyards on lots developed after the effective date of this Ordinance. (See Section 17.011.) A bufferyard is a combination of distance and a visual buffer or barrier. It includes an area, together with the combination of plantings, berms and fencing, that are required to eliminate or reduce existing or potential nuisances. These nuisances can often occur between adjacent zoning districts. Such nuisances are dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs, and incompatible land uses, buildings or parking areas. 
Rationale: One of zoning's most important functions is the separation of land uses into districts which have similar character and contain compatible uses. The location of districts is supposed to provide protection, but in the Town of Rib Mountain, this is not the case since zoning districts permitting uses as diverse as single-family residential and industrial uses were located next to one another long before the effective date of this Ordinance. Bufferyards will operate to minimize the negative impact of any future use on neighboring uses. 
(2)  Required Locations for Bufferyards. Bufferyards shall be located along (and within) the outer perimeter of a lot wherever 2 different zoning districts abut one another. Bufferyards may be located in required setback areas. In such instances, the one-half of the bufferyard requirements of this Section shall be used instead of the street frontage landscaping required in Section 17.146, if such requirements of this Section are greater. (In such instances, the width of the right-of-way may be counted as contributing to the width requirements for a bufferyard, however, the minimum width required along the street frontage by Section 17.146 shall be provided in all cases.) Bufferyard plantings or structures shall not be located on any portion of any existing, dedicated, or officially mapped right-of-way. 
(3)  Determination of Required Bufferyard. The determination of bufferyard requirements is a two-staged process. First, the required level of bufferyard opacity is determined using Table 17.150(4)(a). Opacity is a quantitatively-derived measure which indicates the degree to which a particular bufferyard screens the adjoining property. The required level of opacity indicated by this Table is directly related to the degree to which the potential character of development differs between different zoning districts. The provisions of this Subsection indicate the minimum requirements for bufferyards located along zoning district boundaries. 
(a)  Identification of Required Level of Opacity. Table 17.150(4)(a) shall be used to determine the minimum level of opacity for the required bufferyard. The required level of opacity is determined by the value given in the cell of the Table at which the column heading along the top row of the Table (representing the subject property's zoning district) intersects with the row heading along the left hand side of the Table (representing the adjacent property's zoning district). The value listed is the required level of opacity for the bufferyard on the subject property. 
(b)  Identification of Detailed Bufferyard Requirements. 
1.  If a proposed use adjoins a parcel for which a bufferyard is required by the presence of a zoning district boundary, that use shall provide a bufferyard with the level of the opacity indicated in Table 17.150(4)(a). 
2.  For each level of opacity listed in Table 17.150(4)(a), a wide variety of width, landscaping point, berm, and structure combinations are possible. These are listed in Table 17.150(4)(b). The requirements listed in Table 17.150(4)(b) pertain to the number of landscaping points, the minimum bufferyard width, and the type of berm or fencing required within every 100 feet of required bufferyard. A variety of landscaping point options are available and may be mixed within distinct portions of the same bufferyard. Section 17.143 describes the various available landscaping point alternatives. Section 17.151 provides a listing of tree and shrub species which correspond the landscaping point descriptions. 
(4)  Tables for Required Bufferyards: See following pages for Tables 17.150(4)(a) and (b). 
Notes for Table 17.150(4)(a): For properties zoned in the Rural Holding District (RA-35ac), refer to the Master Comprehensive Plan's Future Land Use Map to determine the proposed zoning district for said property. Bufferyard requirements shall be taken from this proposal. Caution: The required opacity levels listed in Table 17.150(4)(a) are generally different on either side of any given zoning district boundary. 
TABLE 17.150(4)(a): REQUIRED BUFFERYARD OPACITY VALUES Adjacent Property's Zoning District Subject Property's Zoning District RA- 
35ac CR- 
5ac ER- 
1ac SR-2 SR-3 MR-4 UR-8 EO SO SC NC UC CC SI UI HI RA- 
35ac 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 CR- 
5ac .0 1 .1 1 .2 1 .2 1 .3 1 .4 1 .4 .5 .5 .5 .6 .8 .5 .6 1.0 ER- 
1ac .0 1 .1 1 .1 1 .2 1 .3 1 .3 .4 .4 .4 .5 .6 .4 .5 1.0 SR-2 .0 1 .1 1 .1 1 .2 1 .3 .4 .4 .4 .5 .6 .4 .5 1.0 SR-3 .0 1 .1 1 .2 1 .3 .4 .4 .4 .5 .6 .4 .5 1.0 MR-4 .0 1 .1 1 .2 .3 .3 .3 .4 .5 .3 .4 1.0 UR-8 .0 1 .1 .2 .2 .2 .3 .4 .2 .3 1.0 EO .1 .2 .2 .3 .4 .2 .3 .6 SO .1 .1 .2 .3 .1 .2 .6 SC .1 .2 .3 .1 .2 .6 NC .1 .2 .1 .1 .6 UC .1 .1 .6 CC .1 .6 SI .2 .6 UI .5 HI 1 For any non-residential use (such as a church or a school) within this Zoning District, provide an additional 0.1 level of opacity to the minimum required opacity level listed below for any and all borders shared with a residential land use. 2 For properties zoned in the Rural Agriculture District (RA-35ac), refer to the Comprehensive Master Plan's Future Land Use Map to determine the proposed zoning district for said property. Bufferyard requirements shall be taken from this proposal.  
TABLE 17.150(4)(b) DETAILED BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS Opacity # Landscaping Points/100 feet Width Required Structure 0.05 00 10'+ min. 44? picket fence* 00 10'+ min. 4' wood rail fence* 40 10' - 36 15' - 33 20' - 31 25' - 29 30'+ - 0.10 00 10'+ min. 44? picket fence* 38 10'+ min. 4' wood rail fence* 91 10' - 80 15' - 73 20' - 68 25' - 65 30' - 62 35'+ - 00 35'+ min. 4' berm 0.20 00 10'+ min. 6' solid fence* 84 10'+ min. 44? picket fence* 133 15'+ min. 4' wood rail fence* 198 15' - 173 20' - 158 25' - 149 30' - 140 35' - 10 35'+ min. 4' berm 135 40'+ - 00 40'+ min. 5' berm 0.30 00 10'+ min. 6' solid fence* 198 15'+ min. 44? picket fence* 320 20' - 240 20'+ min. 4' wood rail fence* 276 25' - 252 30' - 235 35' - 104 35'+ min. 4' berm 223 40' - 44 40'+ min. 5' berm 215 45' - 209 50'+ - 00 50'+ min. 6' berm 0.40 53 10'+ min. 6' solid fence* 330 20'+ min. 44? picket fence* 440 25' - 362 25'+ min. 4' wood rail fence* 385 30' - 349 35' - 208 35'+ min. 4' berm 327 40' - 148 40'+ min 5' berm 310 45' - 299 50'+ - 56 50'+ min. 6' berm 0.50 135 15'+ min. 6' solid fence* 564 30' - 405 30'+ min. 44? picket fence* 492 30'+ min. 4' wood rail fence* 499 35' - 319 35'+ min. 4' berm 454 40' - 261 40'+ min. 5' berm 422 45' - 405 50' - 160 50'+ min. 6' berm 388 55' - 374 60'+ - 0.60 221 20'+ min. 6' solid fence* 433 35'+ min. 4' berm 541 35'+ min. 44? picket fence* 630 35'+ min. 4' wood rail fence* 626 40' - 379 40'+ min. 5' berm 570 45' - 525 50' - 270 50'+ min. 6' berm 500 55' - 480 60'+ - 0.80 415 30'+ min. 6' solid fence* 655 40'+ min. 4' berm 627 45'+ min. 5' berm 873 45'+ min. 44? picket fence* 910 50' - 505 50'+ min. 6' berm 809 50' min. 4' wood rail fence* 804 55' - 744 60' - 710 65' - 677 70'+ - 1.00 636 40'+ min. 6' solid fence* 732 50'+ min. 6' berm 751 50'+ min. 5' berm 867 55'+ min. 4' berm 1091 60'+ min. 44? picket fence* 1136 60'+ min. 4' wood rail fence* 1083 65' - 994 70' - 934 75' - 892 80'+ - *Where used in combination with plant materials to meet bufferyard requirements, a minimum of 50% of all plant materials shall be located on the exterior side (the side away from the center of the subject property) of the fence. NOTE: Opacity standards provided courtesy of Lane Kendig, Inc.  
Section 17.151 - Classification of Plant Species. 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, plant materials are classified into 13 groupings: "climax tree", "tall deciduous tree", "medium deciduous tree", "low deciduous tree", "tall evergreen tree", "medium evergreen tree", "low evergreen tree", "tall deciduous shrub", "medium deciduous shrub", "low deciduous shrub", "medium evergreen shrub", "low evergreen shrub", and non-contributory plants. Species suitable for landscaping use and compatible with Marathon County climate and soil factors are listed in Table 17.151, below. The Zoning Administrator (see Section 17.252) shall review proposals for, and the applicability of, species not contained in this list and is authorized to approve appropriate similar species. 
    The Appendix to this Ordinance lists additional information that may be helpful in selecting appropriate plants. 
       RF refers to reforestation. Marked species are native to Wisconsin, and recommended for reforestation efforts by the Wisconsin DNR (see Section 17.149). 
TABLE 17.151: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANTS 
Climax Trees (35 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name * Acer saccharum RF Sugar Maple 'Green Mountain' * Carya ovata RF Shagbark Hickory Ginkgo biloba Ginko 'Fastigiata' 'Sentry Ginkgo' Juglans nigra RF Walnut Eastern Walnut Black Walnut * Quercus alba RF White Oak * Quercus bicolor RF Swamp White Oak * Quercus macrocarpa RF Bur Oak Mossycup Oak * Quercus palustris Pin Oak * Quercus rubra RF (Quercus Borealis) Northern Red Oak Red Oak  
Tall Deciduous Trees (30 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name Acer nigrum Black Maple Acer platanoides Norway Maple 'Cleveland' 'Columnare' 'Crimson King' 'Harlequin' 'Emerald Queen' 'Globe' 'Greenlace' 'Royal Red' 'Schwedleri' 'Summershade' * Acer rubrum RF Red Maple Scarlet Maple Swamp Maple 'Armstrong' 'Autumn Flame' 'Bowhall' 'Red Sunset' 'Schlesingeri' * Acer saccharinum RF Silver Maple Soft Maple White Maple River Maple 'Blair' 'Pyramidale' (Upright) 'Silver Queen' (Seedless) 'Wieri' (Cutleaf) Aesculus hippocastanum Horsechestnut Alnus glutinosa European Alder Black Alder Betula lutea RF Yellow Birch Catalpa speciosa Northern Catalpa * Celtis occidentalis RF Common Hackberry * Fagus grandifolia RF American Beech Fagus sylvatica European Beech * Fraxinus americana RF White Ash 'Autumn Purple' 'Rosehill' Fraxinus excelsior European Ash 'Aurea' (Golden) 'Hessei' (Hesse) Fraxinus nigra RF Black Ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica RF Green Ash Red Ash 'Marshall's Seedless' 'Summit' * Gleditsia triancanthos inermis Thornless honeylocust 'Imperial' 'Shademaster' 'Skyline' 'Sunburst' * Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky Coffeetree Juglans cinerea RF Butternut Larix decidua European Larch 'Pendula' Larix kaempferi Japanese Larch Larix laricina RF American Larch Tamarack Liriodendron tulipifera Tuliptree * Platanus occidentalis Sycamore American Planetree Populus alba White Poplar 'Pyramidalis' Populus deltoides RF Eastern Poplar 'Robusta' 'Siouxland' 'Cottonless' Populus grandidentata RF Bigtooth Aspen * Prunus serotina RF Black Cherry Taxodium distichum Baldcypress * Tilia americana RF American Linden Basswood Linden Tree Linn Tree Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden 'Chancellor' 'Greenspire' Tilia x euchlora Redmond Linden 'Redmond'  
Medium Deciduous Trees (15 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name Aesculus x carnea Ruby Horsechestnut 'Briotii' Aesculus glabra Ohio Buckeye Alnus glutinosa European Alder * Betula nigra RF River Birch * Betula papyifera RF Paper Birch Betula pendula Cutleaf European Birch 'Gracilis' B. platyphylla
japonica Japanese White Birch Cercidiphyllum
japonicum Katsuratree Cladrastis lutea American Yellowwood Magnolia acuminata Cucumbertree * Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum Phellodendron
amurense Amur Corktree Prunus maackii Amur Chokecherry Prunus padus commutata Harbinger European Bird Cherry * Prunus
pennsylvanica RF Pin Cherry Prunus sargentii Sargent Cherry Salix alba tristis Golden Weeping Willow Ulmus parvifolia Chinese Elm  
Low Deciduous Trees (10 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name Acer ginnala Amur Maple * Alnus rugosa Speckled Alder * Amelanchier arborea RF Downy Serviceberry Amelanchier x grandiflora Apple Serviceberry * Amelanchier laevis Allegany Serviceberry * Carpinus caroliniana RF American Hornbeam Cercis canadensis Eastern Redbud * Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood * Crataegus crus-galli Thornless Cockspur Hawthorn 'Inermis' Crataegus laevigata Paul's Scarlet Hawthorn 'Paulii' 'Superba' (Crimson Cloud) Crataegus x lavallei Lavalle Hawthorn * Crataegus mollis Downy Hawthorn Crataegus phaenopyrum Washington Hawthorn * Crataegus punctata Dotted Hawthorn Crataegus x Toba Hawthorn 'Toba' Elaeagnus angustifolia Russianolive Magnolia x loebneri Dr. Merrill Magnolia 'Merill' Magnolia x soulangiana Saucer Magnolia Malus species & cultivars Flowering Crabapples M. 'Adams' Adams F.C. M. baccata jackii Jack F.C. M. 'Bob White' Bob White F.C. M. 'Candied Apple' Weeping Candied Apple F.C. M. 'David' David Flowering Crabapple M. 'Dorothea' Dorothea F.C. M. 'Indian Summer' Indian Summer F.C. M. 'Profusion' Profusion F.C. M. 'Red Jewel' Red Jewel F.C. M. 'Robinson' Robinson F.C. M. 'Sentinel' Sentinel F.C. M. 'White Cascade' White Cascade F.C. * Ostrya virginiana RF Hophornbeam * Prunus americana RF American Plum Prunus cerasifera 'Newportii' Newport Plum * Prunus virginiana RF Chokecherry 'Canada Red' or 'Shubert' Shubert Chokecherry Pyrus calleryana Callery Pear Saliz matsudana Corkscrew Willow Saliz pentandra Laurel Willow Sorbus alnifolia Korean Mountainash Sorbus aucuparia European Mountainash * Sorbus decora Showy Mountainash Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac  
Tall Evergreen Trees (30 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name Abies concolor White Fir Picea abies Norway Spruce * Picea glauca RF White Spruce Picea omorika Serbian Spruce Picea pungens glauca Blue Colorado Spruce Pinus cembra Swiss Stone Pine Pinus nigra Austrian pine * Pinus resinosa RF Red Pine * Pinus strobus RF Eastern White Pine Pinus sylvestris Scots Pine Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglasfir * Tsuga Canadensis RF Canada Hemlock  
Medium Evergreen Trees (20 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name * Thuja occidentalis RF American Arborvitae  
Low Evergreen Trees (12 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name Juniperus chinnensis Keteleer Juniper Mountbatten Juniper * Juniperus virginiana RF Eastern Redcedar 'Burkii' Burke E.R. 'Canaertii' Canaert E.R. 'Glauca' Silver E.R. 'Hillii' Hill Dundee E.R. * Picea glauca RF Densata Black Hills Spruce Taxus cuspidata Japanese Yew * Thuja occidentalis RF 'Fastigiata' Pyramidal Arborvitae 'Techny' Techny Arborvitae  
Tall Deciduous Shrubs (5 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name * Amelanchier sp. 
(see low trees) Serviceberry Caragana arborescens Siberian Peashrub Chionanthus virginicus Fringetree * Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood Cornus mas Corneliancherry Dogwood * Cornus racemosa Gray Dogwood * Cornus sericea Redosier Dogwood baileyi Bailey R.D. Cotoneaster multiflora Manyflowered Cotoneaster Elaeagnus umbellata Autumnolive Euonymus alata Winged Euonymus * Euonymus
atropurpurea Eastern Wahoo Euonymus europaea Spindletree of European Euonymus 'Aldenhamensis' Aldenham E.E. 'Redcap' Redcap E.E. Exochorda racemosa Pearlbush * Hamamelis virginiana Common Witchhazel Hydrangea paniculata Peegee Hydrangea 'Grandiflora' Kolkwitzia amabilis Beautybush Ligustrum amurense Amur Privet Ligustrum vulgare Cheyenne Privet 'Cheyenne' Lonicera x bella White Belle Honeysuckle 'Candida' Lonicera tatarica zabelii Zabel Honeysuckle Magnolia stellata Star Magnolia * Physocarpus opulifolius Eastern Ninebark Prunus tomentosa Manchu Cherry Prunus triloba Double Flowering Plum Rhamnus frangula Tallhedge Glossy Buckthorn * Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac Rhus typhina Staghorn or Shredleaf Sumac Salix caprea Goat W. or French Pussy Willow Shepherdia argentea Buffaloberry * Staphylea trifolia American Bladdernut Syringa x chinensis Chinese Lilac Syringa x hyacinthiflora Hyacinth Lilacs Syringa x prestoniae cvs. Preston Lilacs Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac Syringa vulgaris cvs. Common Lilac Tamarix ramosissima Tamarisk Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood Viburnum Viburnum lantana Wayfaringtree V. * Viburnum lentago Nannyberry V. * Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum Viburnum sieboldii Siebold Vibernum * Vibernum trilobum American Cranberrybush Vibernum  
Medium Deciduous Shrubs (3 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry Cornus alba Creamedge Dogwood * Corylus americana American Filbert or Hazelnut Cotoneaster divaricatus Spreading Cotoneaster Cotoneaster lucidus Hedge Cotoneaster Euonymus alatus Dwarf Winged Euonymus Forsynthia x intermedia Border Forsythia Forsythia ovata Early Forsythia Forsythia suspensa Weeping Forsythia * Ilex verticillata Winterberry Ligustrum obtusifolium Regel's Border Privet Malus sargentii Sargent Crabapple 'Tina' Myrica pensylvanica Bayberry Philadelphus x virginalis Glacier Mockorange  
Medium Deciduous Shrubs (3 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name Prunus x cistena Purple-leaved Sand Cherry Rhodotypos scandens Jetbead Rosa hugonis Father Hugo Rose Rosa rugosa cvs. Rugosa Rose * Rosa setigera Prairie Rose Spiraea prunifolia Bridalwreath Spirea Spiraea thunbergii Thunberg Spirea Spiraea x vanhouttei Vanhoutte Spirea Syringa meyeri 'Palibin' Palibin Lilac Viburnum carlesii Koreanspice Viburnum * Viburnum
cassinoides Witherod Viburnum Weigela florida Old-fashioned Weigela Weigela x 'Vanicekii' Vanicek Weigela  
Low Deciduous Shrubs (1 Landscaping Point) Botanical Name Common Name Acanthopanax
siebold. Fiveleaf Aralia * Amelanchier
stolonifera Running Serviceberry * Aronia melanocarpa Black Chokeberry Berberis thunbergii Japanese Barberry 'Atropurpurea' Redleaf J.B. Crimson Pygmy J.B. Buxus microphylla Korean Littleaf Box Chaenomeles japonica a. Dwarf Japanese 
Floweringquince Cotoneaster
apiculatus Cranberry Cotoneaster Deutzia x lemoinei Compact Lemoine * Diervilla lonicera Dwarf Bushhoneysuckle Forsythia viridissima Bronx Forsythia Hydrangea
arborescens Annabelle Hydrangea 'Grandiflora' Snowhill Hydrangea * Hypericum
kalmianum Kalm's St. Johnswort Lonicera x
xylosteoides 'Clavey's Dwarf Honeysuckle Lonicera xylosteum Emerald Mound Honeysuckle Mahonia aquifolium Mayhan Oregongrape Philadelphus
coronarius Golden Mockorange Philadelphus x
lemoinei Mont Blanc Mockorange Physocarpus opulifolius Dwarf Common Ninebark * Potentilla fruticosa cvs. Bush Cinquefoil Prunus glandulosa Pink Dwarf 
Floweringalmond Rhododendron x k. Mollis Hybrid Azaleas Rhododendron x PJM Hybrid Rhododendron * Rhus aromatica Fragrant Sumac Ribes alpinum Alpine Currant Rosa virginiana Virginia Rose Salix repens argentea Silver Creeping Willow Spiraea x arguta Compact Garland Spirea Spiraea x billiardii Billiard Spirea Spiraea x bumalda Anthony Waterer Spirea 'Froebelii' Froebel Spirea Spiraea japonica
alpina Daphne Spirea 'Snowmound' Snowmound Spirea Symphoricarpos rivularis Snowberry Symphoricarpos orb. Indiancurrant Coralberry Viburnum opulus Compact European 
Cranberrybush Viburnum opulus Dwarf European Cranberrybush V.  
Tall - Med. Evergreen Shrubs (5 Landscaping Pts.) Botanical Name Common Name Juniperus chinensis Ames Juniper 'Blaauw' Blaauw Juniper 'Herzii' Herz Blue Juniper 'Maney' Maney Juniper 'Old Gold' Old Gold Juniper 'Pfitzerana' Pfitzer Juniper 'Pfitzerana Glauca' Blue Pfitzer J. * Juniperus communis d. Oldfield Common Juniper Juniperus sabina Von Ehren Savin Juniper Juniperus squamata Meyer Singleseed Juniper Picea glauca RF 'Conica' Dwarf Alberta Spruce Pinus mugo Mugo Pine Taxus cuspidata Spreading Japanese Yew 'Nana' Dwarf Japanese Yew Taxus x hunnewelliana Hunnewell Yew Taxus x media cvs. Anglojapanese Yew Thuja occidentalis RF Ware American Arborvitae 'Woodwardii' Woodward Globe Arborvitae  
Low Evergreen Shrubs (3 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name Juniperus chinensis p. Japanese Garden Juniper Juniperus chinensis s. Sargent Juniper * Juniperus horizontalis Creeping Juniper 'Bar Harbor' Bar Harbor Juniper 'Douglasii' Waukegan Juniper 'Plumosa' Andorra Juniper 'Prince of Wales' Prince of Wales Juniper 'Wiltonii' Blue Rug Juniper 'Youngstown' Youngstown Juniper Juniperus sabina Arcadia Savin Juniper 'Broadmoor' Broadmoor Savin Juniper 'Skandia' Skandia Savin Juniper 'Tamariscifolia' Tamarix Savin Juniper  
Non-Contributing Species (0 Points) Botanical Name Common Name Acer negundo Boxelder Crown Vetch * Crataegus crus-galli Cockspur Hawthorn * Gleditsia triacanthos Common Honeylocust Lonicera x bella Belle Honeysuckle Lonicera tatarica Tatarian Honeysuckle Lonicera morrowi Morrow Honeysuckle Purple Loosestrife Rhamnus cathartica Common Buckthorn Rhamnus frangula Glossy Buckthorn  
The following sources were used in compiling the preceding lists of plant species: 
Department of Natural Resources. Forest Trees of Wisconsin: How to Know Them . Madison, Wisconsin: Department of Natural Resources, 1987. 
Hasselkus, E.R. A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin . Madison, Wisconsin: College of Agricultural and Life Sciences University of Wisconsin - Extension, Cooperative Extension Programs, 1982. 
Hightshoe, Gary L. Native Trees, Shrubs, and Vines for Urban and Rural America: A Planting Design Manual for Environmental Designers . New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1988. 
Iowa State University. Landscape Plants for Iowa . Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Cooperative Extension Service, May 1984. 
Section 17.152 - Requirements for the Installation, Maintenance & Use of Landscaped and Bufferyard Areas. 
(1)  Installation: 
(a)  Any and all landscaping and bufferyard material required by the provisions of this Chapter shall be installed on the subject property, in accordance with the approved site plan (see Section 17.228) within one year after the date of issuance of an Occupancy Permit for any building on the subject property. 
(b)  Surety: 
1.  As a condition of the issuance of an Occupancy Permit, the property owner shall file, subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator, a bond, certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or a certified check with the Town Treasurer in an amount equal to 110% of the estimate of landscaping materials and installation costs. This surety shall constitute an agreement to comply with this subchapter and security to assure compliance before and after occupancy of the property. An enforceable contract for all work on the subject property required under the provisions of this subchapter, from a qualified contractor, shall be used to determine the amount of surety. 
2.  If compliance with this subchapter has been accomplished as of the time of the issuance of the Occupancy Permit, no surety shall be required. 
3.  Any surety filed under the provisions of this section shall be returned to the property owner not sooner than 12 months, nor later than 24 months, from the date of issuance of an Occupancy Permit for any building on the subject property, unless violations of this subchapter occur within that time. The timing of the return of the surety to the property owner shall be in the sole discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
4.  If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this subchapter exists, notice shall be given to the owner or the owner's representative. The Zoning Administrator may cause part or all of the surety amount to be forfeited if compliance with this subchapter has not been accomplished within 30 days after the date of written notice by certified or registered mail to that effect by the Zoning Administrator of the violation to the owner or the owner's representative. 
5.  If the property is a part of a plat of subdivision approved pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter, the surety amount may be split into amounts which are applicable to phases of the plat approved pursuant to the requirements of the Town Land Division Ordinance. 
6.  A governmental unit to which these surety provisions apply may, in lieu of posting the required surety, file a resolution or letter from officers authorized to act in its behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this subchapter. 
7.  The surety provisions of this section shall not apply to one-family or two-family residential building projects. 
(c)  Existing plant material which meets the requirements of Section 17.143 and which will be preserved on the subject property following the completion of development, may be counted as contributing to the landscaping requirements. 
(d)  All landscaping and bufferyard areas shall be seeded with lawn or native ground cover unless such vegetation is already fully established. 
(e)  The exact placement of required plants and structures shall be the decision of each property owner within the requirements of this Subchapter, except that the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Evergreen shrubs shall be planted in clusters in order to maximize their chance for survival. 
2.  Where a combination of plant materials, and/or berming and/or fencing is used in a bufferyard, the fence and/or berm shall be located toward the interior of the subject property and the plant material shall be located toward the exterior of the subject property. 
3.  A property owner may establish through a written agreement, recorded with the Register of Deeds Office, that an adjacent property owner shall agree to provide a partial or full portion of the required bufferyard on an immediately adjacent portion of their land, thereby exempting the developer from providing all or a portion of the required bufferyard on his property. 
4.  In no manner shall landscaping or bufferyard materials be selected and/or located in a manner which results in the creation of a safety or visibility hazard (see Section 17.173). 
5.  The restrictions on types of plants listed in Sections 17.144 through 17.147 shall apply. 
(2)  Maintenance: The continued and continual maintenance of all required landscaping and bufferyard materials shall be a requirement of this Chapter and shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which said materials are required. This requirement shall run with the property and is binding upon all future property owners. Development of any and all property following the effective date of this Chapter shall constitute an agreement by the property owner to comply with the provisions of this Section. Upon failure to comply with these provisions, the Town may enter upon the property for the purpose of evaluating and maintaining all required landscaping and bufferyard materials, and may specially assess the costs thereof against the property. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be considered a violation of this Chapter, and shall be subject to any and all applicable enforcement procedures and penalties (see Section 17.256). 
(3)  Use of Required Bufferyard and Landscaped Areas: Any and all required bufferyards or landscaped areas may be used for passive recreation activities. Said areas may contain pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails provided that: no required material is eliminated; the total width of the required bufferyard, or the total area of required landscaping, is maintained; and all other regulations of this Chapter are met. In no event, however, shall swimming pools, tennis courts, sports fields, golf courses, or other such active recreation used be permitted in such areas. Furthermore, in no instance shall any parking be permitted in such areas, nor shall any outdoor display of storage of materials be permitted in such areas. Paving in such areas shall be limited to that required for necessary access to, through, or across the subject property. 
(4)  Utility Easements: Landscaping materials, fences and berms which are located within a duly recorded utility easement and/or a pedestrian easement shall not count toward meeting a landscaping requirement. However, the width of such areas may be counted as part of a landscaping requirement. 
Section 17.153 - Calculating Landscaping and Bufferyard Requirements. 
    In calculating the number of required landscaping points under the provisions of this Subchapter, all areas and distances on which required calculations are based shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number of square feet or linear feet. Any partial plant derived from the required calculations of this Subchapter (for example 23.3 canopy trees) shall be rounded up to the nearest whole plant (24 canopy trees). 
Section 17.154 - Depiction on Required Site Plan. 
    Any and all proposed landscaping on the subject property, required to meet the standards of this Chapter, shall be clearly depicted and labeled as to its location and make-up on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. (Refer to Section 17.228.) 
SUBCHAPTER IX: - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Section 17.171 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Subchapter is to indicate the requirements for access, visibility, off-street parking, off-street loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odors, electromagnetic radiation, glare and heat, fire and explosion, toxic and noxious materials, waste materials, drainage, exterior construction materials, and hazardous materials for all development occurring within the jurisdiction of this Title (see Section 17.009). 
Section 17.172 - Access Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Subsection is to alleviate or prevent congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of access to public rights-of-way in accordance with the utilization of various sites. 
(2)  Permit Required: Each access point onto a public street or right-of-way shall have a permit issued by the Director of Public Works per Ch. 86, Wis. Stats. 
(3)  Number of Access Points: 
(a)  Each nonresidential lot shall have not more than 2 access points on any street frontage adjacent to any lot. Said access shall require approval by the Zoning Administrator and the Director of Public Works. 
(b)  In no instance shall any lot be permitted more than one access point on any one street if its frontage on said street is less than 100 linear feet (as measured along the right-of-way line). 
(c)  On arterial streets and in certain areas experiencing, or expected to experience, congestion and/or safety problems, access to a lot may be required to be located via an access point located on an adjacent property or another street frontage. 
(d)  For residential uses, 2 access points serving the same street frontage may be approved as a Conditional Use. 
(4)  Residential Uses: Residential uses shall not have access points onto a nonresidential collector or arterial street unless such street has the only available frontage. 
(5)  Nonresidential Uses: Nonresidential uses shall not have access points onto a residential collector street or a local residential street unless such street has the only available frontage. 
(6)  Access Near Street Intersections: At its intersection with the street right-of-way line on an arterial or nonresidential collector street, no access point shall be located closer than 100 feet from the intersection of any 2 street rights-of-way unless such street is the only available frontage on the subject property. In all cases, access points shall be located as far from an intersection as the lot size permits. 
(7)  Distance Between Access Drives: The minimum distance between access drives serving the same property shall be 25 feet (edge to edge), as measured at the property line. A distance in excess of said 25 feet may be required if, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator and the Director of Public Works, present or projected traffic factors warrant a greater distance. 
(8)  Angle of Intersection with Public Right-of-Way: All access drives shall intersect with any public right-of-way at an angle of not less than 75 degrees, and shall intersect at an angle of 90 degrees wherever possible. 
(9)  Distance from Property Line: The distance from an access drive to the property line of an adjacent property shall not be less than 5 feet, as measured along the right-of-way line unless the driveway is shared with the adjacent property in which case the driveway may be located on the property line or the driveway may straddle the property line. Driveways serving a corner lot shall not be located closer than 35 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way of the 2 intersecting streets. 
(10)  Width of Driveways: All access drives shall have a minimum width of 10 feet for one-family and two-family dwellings, and 18 feet for all other land uses. All curb openings for access drives shall have a maximum width of 25 feet for all residential uses, and 35 feet for all non-residential uses, as measured at the right-of-way line. Access drives may be flared between the right-of-way line and the roadway up to a maximum of 5 additional feet. 
(11)  Traffic Control: The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized and controlled in a manner which avoids congestion on public streets and other safety hazards. Traffic into and out of all off-street parking, loading and traffic circulation areas serving 6 or more parking spaces shall be forward moving, with no backing into streets or pedestrian ways. Traffic control devices shall be required as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
(12)  Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any and all proposed access drives on the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. 
(13)  Paving of Access: All access approach areas located within a street right-of-way shall be paved to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works with a hard, all-weather surface (concrete or asphalt), and shall be maintained so as to prevent the transport of gravel, dirt, or other eroded material from the subject property into the right-of-way. 
(14)  All nonconforming access drives shall be modified to conform to the provisions of this Chapter within 6 months of issuance of a building permit which would allow for expansion of the existing use or expansion of the bulk of an existing building or construction of a new building on the lot which contains the nonconforming access drives. Where a hardship may exist, the owner may seek a conditional use to retain the existing access drives or modify the existing access drives in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. The conditional use request shall be made in compliance with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
Section 17.173 - Visibility Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Subsection is to alleviate or prevent congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of vehicular visibility at intersecting streets and where commercial driveways enter upon a street. 
(2)  Requirement: In order to provide a clear view for motorists at intersecting streets, both public and private, and at locations where commercial driveways enter upon a street, there shall be a vision clearance triangle established. Said triangle shall be bounded by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and a line connecting points on the 2 perpendicular street right-of-way lines. The points so connected shall be measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, or the edge of a driveway pavement, in the case of a commercial driveway, a distance as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Generally, the following standards shall apply: 
VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE STANDARDS Right-of-Way Width Distance from R-O-W 
Intersection less than 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 51-60 feet 40 feet 61-66 feet 34 feet 67 feet-82.5 feet 15 feet greater than 82.5 feet 15 feet  
Within said triangular area, no signs, parking spaces, structures, or earthwork in excess of 30 inches, and no vegetation, fencing, nor other such obstructions between 30 inches and 8 feet in height which exceeds an opacity of 0.2 (see Section 17.150(4)(b)) shall be permitted which exceeds 30 inches in height above either of the centerline elevations of said 2 streets. 
(3)  Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any and all visibility triangles located on the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. 
Section 17.174 - Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Subsection is to alleviate or prevent congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of off-street parking and circulation in accordance with the utilization of various sites. 
(2)  Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any and all parking and traffic circulation areas proposed to be located on the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. Each and every parking space designed to serve as required parking shall not be located farther than 500 feet from the access to all of the various areas it is designated to serve. A garage stall, meeting the access requirements of Subsection (6)(d), below, shall be considered a parking space. Parking spaces for any and all vehicles exceeding 18 feet in length, shall be clearly indicated on said site plan. 
(3)  Use of Off-Street Parking Areas: The use of all required off-street parking areas shall be limited to the parking of operable vehicles which are not for lease, rent, or sale. Within residential zoning districts, said parking spaces shall only be used by operable cars and trucks. 
(4)  Traffic Circulation and Traffic Control: Site circulation shall be designed to provide for the safe and efficient movement of all traffic entering, exiting, and on the site. Circulation shall be provided to meet the individual needs of the site with specific mixing of access and through movements, and where required, shall be depicted on the required site plan. Circulation patterns shall conform with the general rules of the road and all traffic control measures shall meet the requirements of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(5)  Maintenance of Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Areas: All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall be maintained in a dust-free condition at all times. In no instance or manner shall any off-street parking or traffic circulation area be used as a storage area. 
(6)  Off-Street Parking and Traffic Circulation Design Standards. 
(a)  Surfacing and Marking: All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas (including all residential driveways-except those within the A/R District) shall be paved with a hard, all-weather surface (blacktop or concrete), to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. Said surfaces intended for 6 or more parking stalls shall be marked in a manner which clearly indicates required parking spaces. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Lighting: All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas serving 6 or more cars shall be lit so as to ensure the safe and efficient use of said areas during the hours of use. An outdoor illumination level of between 0.4 and 1.0 foot candles is required for said areas. 
(d)  Access: Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway that is wide enough and designed to provide a safe and efficient means of vehicular access to the parking space without backing or maneuvering a vehicle into a public right-of-way. All off-street parking and traffic circulation facilities shall be designed with an appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley, in a manner which least interferes with traffic movements. No driveway across public property, or requiring a curb cut, shall exceed a width of 35 feet. (See also Table 17.174(6)(j)) 
(e)  Fire Lanes: A fire lane shall be required to provide access to any portion of any structure equal to or less than 40 feet tall which is more than 150 feet from the nearest street right-of-way, and to any portion of any structure greater than 40 feet tall which is more than 50 feet from the nearest street right-of-way. The Zoning Administrator may also require the provision of a fire lane or lanes to any part of any structure upon a determination that the distance of the structure from the nearest hydrant, the configuration of development on the site, or other special characteristics of the site otherwise inhibit effective fire extinguishment. All fire lanes shall: provide clear, unobstructed access for vehicles and apparatus at all times through a combination of pavement marking and signage; shall be a minimum of 18 feet wide; and shall be surfaced as an all-weather roadway. 
(f)  Signage: All signage located within, or related to, required off-street parking or traffic circulation shall comply with the Sign Regulations. 
(g)  Handicapped Parking Spaces: Parking for the handicapped shall be provided at a size, number, location, and with signage per State and Federal regulations. 
(h)  Parking Space Design Standards: Other than parking required to serve the handicapped, every and all provided off-street parking space shall comply with the minimum requirements of Table 17.174(6)(j). The minimum required length of parking spaces shall be 17.0 feet, plus an additional 1.5 foot vehicle overhang area at the end of the stall. All parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of at least 7 feet. 
(i)  Snow Storage: Required off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall not be used for snow storage. 
(j)  Parking Lot Design Standards: Horizontal widths for parking rows, aisles, and modules shall be provided at widths no less than listed in Table 17.174(6)(j), and shown on the following page. 
(7)  Calculation of Minimum Required Parking Spaces. 
(a)  General Guidelines for Calculating Required Parking Spaces: The requirements of Subsection (c), below, shall be used to determine the minimum required number of off-site parking spaces which must be provided on the subject property. Requirements are generally tied to the capacity of the use; the gross floor area of the use; or the number of employees which work at the subject property during the largest work shift. The term "capacity" as used herein means the maximum number of persons that may be accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by State Building Code regulations, whichever number is greater. References herein to "employee(s) on the largest work shift" means the maximum number of employees working at the facility during a single given day, regardless of the time period during which this occurs, and regardless of whether any such person is a full-time employee. The largest work shift may occur on any particular day of the week or during a lunch or dinner period in the case of a restaurant. In all cases, one reserved parking space shall be provided for each vehicle used by the operation during business hours. Said spaces shall be in addition to those required by Subsection (c), below. Where said parking needs of any land use exceed the minimum requirements of this Title, additional parking spaces sufficient to meet the average maximum weekly peak-hour parking space demand shall be provided by said land use. 
Table 17.174(6)(j): PARKING LAYOUT DIMENSIONS Minimum Permitted Dimensions Parking Angle in Degrees (°) 0°(parallel) 45° 60° 75° 90° Stall Width at Parking Angle (SW) 9.0' 9.0' 9.0' 9.0' 9.0' Stall Width Parallel to Aisle (WP) 24.0' 12.7' 10.4' 9.3' 9.0' Stall Depth to Wall (D) 9.0' 17.5' 19.0' 19.5' 18.5' Stall Depth to Interlock (DI) - 15.3' 17.5' 18.8' - Stall Length (including 1.5' curb overhang) (SL) 18.5' 18.5' 18.5' 18.5' 18.5' Aisle Width (AW) 12.0'* 12.0'* 16.0'* 23.0'* 26.0'* Throat Length (right-of-way to parking area) (T) Refer to Requirements in Table 17.174(7)(f). Parking Module Width (PMW): Wall to Wall (Single-Loaded) (W1) 21.0' 29.5' 35.0' 42.5' 44.5' Wall to Wall (Double Loaded) (W2) 30.0' 47.0' 54.0' 62.0' 63.0' Wall to Interlock (Double Loaded) (W3) - 44.8' 52.5' 61.3' - Interlock to Interlock (Double Loaded) (W4) - 42.6' 51.0' 60.6' - *This dimension represents (AW) for one-way traffic. For two-way traffic, add 8.0 feet to (AW), up to a maximum (AW) of 26.0 feet.  
Diagram for Table 17.174(6)(j): TYPICAL PARKING LAYOUT DIMENSIONS   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
(b)  Joint Parking Facilities. 
1.  Parking facilities which have been approved by the Director of Public Works to provide required parking for one or more uses, shall provide a total number of parking spaces which shall not be less than the sum total of the separate parking needs for each use during any peak hour parking period when said joint parking facility is utilized at the same time by said uses. 
2.  Each parking space designed to serve as joint parking shall not be located farther than 500 feet from the access to all of the various areas it is designated to serve. 
3.  The applicant(s) for approval of a joint parking facility shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that there is no substantial conflict in the demand for parking during the principal operating hours of the 2 of more uses for which the joint parking facility is proposed to serve. 
4.  Pedestrian and vehicular cross-connections between participating uses shall be required as specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
5.  A legally binding instrument, approved by the Zoning Administrator, shall be executed by any and all parties to be served by said joint parking facility. This instrument shall be recorded with the Register of Deeds Office, and filed with the Town Clerk. A fee shall be required to file this instrument. 
(c)  Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements for Land Uses. The off-street parking requirements for each land use are listed within Section 17.056. 
(d)  Provision of Fee-in-Lieu of Parking Spaces Development. Within any zoning district, the conditional use process may be used by a Petitioner to provide the Town with a parking space development fee-in-lieu of parking space provision for all spaces required by development of change of land use occurring after the affective date of this Ordinance. Said fee shall be in the amount of $2,000.00 per required parking space (or as increased by the Town Board as part of the conditional use process). Through the conditional use process, Town Board has the right to deny all, or part, of request related to this subsection. 
(e)  Locational Prohibitions for Off-Street Parking Areas. To maintain a high level of aesthetics in residential areas and to reduce yard clutter as viewed from a street, the location of parking spaces in residential areas is closely regulated. For any single-family detached house, no more than 4 off-street parking spaces may be located between the principal structure on a residential lot and a street right-of-way unless the proposed parking area is reviewed by the Plan Commission and found not (to) be contrary to the purpose of this Chapter as described in Section 17.005. These 4 allowed parking spaces may be located within residential driveways or parking lots designated on the approved site plan. 
The location of off-street parking spaces for other residential dwelling unit types shall be reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission as part of the site plan review process. 
No private parking shall occur on street terraces, driveways, or any other areas located within a public right-of-way unless the parking is specifically authorized by the Town Board. 
(f)  Minimum Permitted Throat Length. The table on the following page shall be used to determine the minimum permitted throat length of access drives serving parking lots, as measured from the right-of-way line along the centerline of the access drive: 
SUMMARY TABLE 17.174(7)(f): MINIMUM PERMITTED THROAT LENGTH LAND USE TYPE SCALE OF 
DEVELOPMENT TYPE OF ACCESS STREET COLLECTOR ARTERIAL RESIDENTIAL Any Residential 0-100 dwelling units 25 feet 101-200 dwelling units 50 feet 75 feet 201+ dwelling units 75 feet 125 feet COMMERCIAL Office 0-50,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 50 feet 50,000-100,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 75 feet 100,001-200,000 gross sq. ft. 50 feet 100 feet 200,001+ gross sq. ft. 100 feet 150 feet In-Vehicle Sales 0-2,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 75 feet 2,001+ gross sq. ft. 50 feet 100 feet Indoor Entertainment 0-15,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 50 feet 15,001+ gross sq. ft. 25 feet 75 feet Commercial Lodging 0-150 rooms 25 feet 75 feet 151+ rooms 25 feet 100 feet Other Commercial Uses 0-25,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 50 feet 25,001-100,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 75 feet 100,001-500,000 gross sq. ft. 50 feet 100 feet 500,001+ gross sq. ft. 75 feet 200 feet INDUSTRIAL All Industrial Uses 0-100,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet 50 feet 100,001-500,000 gross sq. ft. 50 feet 100 feet 501,001+ gross sq. ft. 50 feet 200 feet ALL OTHER LAND USES: 6+ parking spaces 25 feet 50 feet  
Section 17.175 - Off-Street Loading Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Subsection is to prevent congestion of public rights-of-way and private lots so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of loading facilities on various sites. 
(2)  Applicability: Any use which has a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet or more, and which requires deliveries or makes shipments, shall provide off-street loading facilities in accordance with the regulations of this Subsection. 
(3)  Location: All loading berths shall be located 25 feet or more from the intersection of 2 street right-of-way lines. Loading berths shall not be located within any required front yard or street yard setback area. Access to the loading berth shall be located in conformance with Subsection 17.175(5). All loading areas shall be located on the private lot and shall not be located within, or so as to interfere with, any public right-of-way. 
(4)  Size of Loading Area: The first required loading berth shall be designed in accordance with Table 17.175(4). All remaining required loading berths shall be a minimum of 25 feet in length. All required loading berths shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. The following standards shall be the minimum used to design loading areas: 
Table 17.175(4): Loading Standards Design 
Vehicle Length in 
Feet (L) Dock Angle 
(°) Clearance in 
Feet (D) Berth Width 
in Feet (W) Apron 
Space in Feet (A) Total Offset 
in Feet (F) WB-40 50 90° 50 10 63 113 12 56 106 14 52 102 60° 44 10 46 90 12 40 84 14 35 79 45° 36 10 37 73 12 32 68 14 29 65 WB-50 55 90° 55 10 77 132 12 72 127 14 67 122 60° 48 10 55 103 12 51 99 14 46 94 45° 39 10 45 84 12 40 79 14 37 76  
(5)  Access to Loading Area: Each loading berth shall be located so as to facilitate access to a public street or alley, and shall not interfere with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic per Subsection 17.172, and shall not interfere with the function of parking areas. In no instance shall loading areas rely on backing movements into public rights-of-way. 
(6)  Surfacing and Marking: All required loading areas shall be paved and maintained in a dust-free condition at all times. Said surface shall be marked in a manner which clearly indicates required loading areas. 
(7)  Use of Required Loading Areas: The use of all required loading areas shall be limited to the loading and unloading of vehicles. Said area shall not be used to provide minimum required parking spaces. 
(8)  Lighting: All loading areas shall be lit so as to not to create undue glare or ambient light. 
(9)  Signage: All signage located within, or related to, loading areas shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(10)  Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any and all required loading areas proposed to be located on the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. 
(11)  Calculation of Required Loading Spaces. 
(a)  Indoor Institutional Land Uses: One loading berth shall be required for each building having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to 29,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, 2 loading berths shall be required. 
(b)  Commercial (except Offices), Storage/Disposal, Transportation, and Industrial Land Uses: One loading berth shall be required for each building having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to 29,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth shall be required for any portion of each 50,000 square feet of gross floor area in addition to the original 29,999 square feet. 
(c)  Office Land Uses: One loading berth shall be required for each building having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to 99,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 100,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth shall be required for any portion of each 100,000 square feet of gross floor area in addition to the original 99,999 square feet. 
Section 17.176 - Exterior Storage Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to control the use of residential, office and commercial property for exterior storage so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public. For exterior storage in agricultural and industrial districts, refer to Section 17.056. 
(2)  Requirements for Exterior Storage in Residential Zoning Districts: 
(a)  In all residential zoning districts (See Section 17.032 for a listing of these districts), all materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building except for the following which shall not be located within any front yard or street yard (required or excess yard, except for vehicles in designated parking spaces) and shall be stored a minimum of 5 feet from any and all property lines: firewood, construction materials, landscaping materials storage and related equipment connected with on-site construction, and off-street parking. 
(b)  In all residential zoning districts, recreational equipment including, but not limited to, boats, snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, travel trailers, pop-up campers, and motor homes, shall be permitted if said equipment is stored or parked a minimum of 5 feet from any and all property lines and shall not be located within any front yard or any required street side yard (except for designated parking spaces) unless screened from the street with a bufferyard with a minimum of 0.30 opacity (see Section 17.150(4)(b)). 
(c)  Said equipment storage shall not be located in a minimum required parking space during said equipment's off-season. Motor homes which are used on a year-round basis shall be permitted in said areas on a year-round basis. (Winterization of such vehicles shall be a conclusive indication of non-use.) 
(d)  Temporary utility hook-ups shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 72 hours for loading and unloading purposes; and an aggregate of 14 days in any 30-day period for sleeping quarters if the recreational vehicle is owned by the occupant or a guest of the occupant of the residence, subject to the conditions above. 
(e)  At no time shall a recreational vehicle be used for permanent living, sleeping, materials storage or other purpose. No recreational vehicle shall be permanently connected to water, gas, electric, or sanitary sewer service. 
(3)  Requirements for Exterior Storage in Office and Commercial Districts. In all office and commercial zoning districts (see Section 17.032 for a listing of these districts), all materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building except for the following which shall not be located within any front yard or required street yard (except for vehicles in designated parking spaces) and shall be stored a minimum of 5 feet from any and all property lines: screened refuse containers; construction materials, landscape materials and related equipment connected within on-site construction; and off-street parking. 
(4)  Inoperative Motor Vehicles and Junk: Refer to the Town Code of Ordinances. 
Section 17.177 - Exterior Lighting Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the spill-over of light and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the vicinity of a light source in order to promote traffic safety and to prevent the creation of nuisances. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all private exterior lighting within the Town of Rib Mountain, except for lighting within public rights-of-way and/or lighting located on public property. 
(3)  Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any and all exterior lighting shall be depicted as to its location, orientation and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. (Refer to Section 17.228.) 
(4)  Requirements: 
(a)  Orientation of Fixture: In no instance shall an exterior lighting fixture be oriented so that the lighting element (or a transparent shield) is visible from a property located within a residential zoning district. The use of shielded luminaries and careful fixture placement is encouraged so as to facilitate compliance with this requirement. 
(b)  Intensity of Illumination: In no instance shall the amount of illumination attributable to exterior lighting, as measured at the property line, exceed 0.50 footcandles. 
(c)  Location: Light fixtures shall not be located within required bufferyards. 
(d)  Flashing, Flickering and other Distracting Lighting: Flashing, flickering and/or other lighting which may distract motorists are prohibited. (Refer to Section 17.214(1)(c).) 
(e)  Minimum Lighting Standards: All areas designated on required site plans for vehicular parking, loading, or circulation and used for any such purpose after sunset shall provide artificial illumination in such areas at a minimum intensity of 0.4 footcandles. 
(f)  Nonconforming Lighting: All lighting fixtures existing prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall be considered as legal nonconforming uses, (see Section 17.057). 
(g)  Special Events Lighting: Any temporary use using exterior lighting which is not in complete compliance with the requirements of this Section shall secure a temporary use permit. (Refer to Section 17.226.) 
Section 17.178 - Vibration Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of vibration which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all uses and activities which create detectable vibrations, except that these standards shall not apply to vibrations created during the construction of the principal use on the subject property. 
(3)  Depiction on Required Site Plan: Any activity or equipment which create detectable vibrations outside the confines of a building shall be depicted as to its location on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. (Refer to Section 17.228.) 
(4)  Requirements: 
(a)  No vibration shall be produced which is discernible through the air or through the ground without the aid of instruments at any point beyond the boundaries of the subject property. 
(b)  No earthborne vibration in excess of the displacement values set forth in this Subsection. Said vibration shall comply with all 3 of the given maximum permitted displacement levels. Vibration shall be measured for displacement, with an instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in 3 mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum vector resultant shall be less than the maximum level of permitted displacement. Said maximum permitted displacement levels shall be determined by the following formula: 
D = K/F D = displacement in inches K = a constant (given below) F = the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground, as measured in hertz  
Constant K by Type of Vibration: Type Timing K Continuous Vibration less than 1 second between pulses .003 Impulsive Vibration at least 1 second between pulses which do not exceed 1 second duration .006 Pulse Vibration for less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period .015  
Section 17.179 - Noise Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to supplement the noise regulations in Section 9.21 of the Rib Mountain Municipal Code. 
(2)  Applicability and Requirements: This Section establishes noise limits for the zoning districts which are not covered by Table I of Section 9.21 including the RA-35ac, SC, SI, UC, CC, UI, and HI Districts and any Unified Development District. All of the other requirements and provisions of Section 9.21 apply within the aforementioned districts. 
Table 17.179(3)(a): Maximum Permitted Noise Level* Zoning District Sound Pressure 
Decibels re 0.0002 dyne/cm2 RA-35ac 65 SC, SI, UC, CC 70 UI, HI 75 *If the noise is not smooth and continuous or is present only during day time hours, one or more of the corrections, in Table 17.179(3)(b) below, shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given above in Table 17.179(3)(a).  
Table 17.179(3)(b) Adjustment Factors for Maximum Noise Levels Type of Operation in Character of Noise Correction in Decibels Daytime operation only plus 5 Noise source operates less than 20%of any one-hour period plus 5* Noise source operates less than 5% of any one-hour period plus 10* Noise source operates less than 1% of any one-hour period plus 15* Noise of impulsive character (Hammering, etc.) minus 5 Noise of periodic character (hum, speech, etc.) minus 5 *Apply one of these corrections only.  
Section 17.180 - Air Pollution Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of air pollution which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply to air pollution created during the construction of the principal use on the subject property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations. 
(3)  Standards: 
(a)  The emission, from all sources within any lot, of particulate matter containing a particle diameter larger than 44 microns is prohibited. 
(b)  Emission of smoke or particulate matter of density equal to, or greater than Number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart (US Bureau of Mines) is prohibited at all times. 
(c)  Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, and roads within the boundaries of any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other acceptable means. 
(d)  All applicable state and federal standards. 
Section 17.181 - Odor Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of odor which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply to odors created during the construction of the principal use on the subject property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations. Public landfills and public sanitary sewage treatment plants shall be exempted from the requirements of this Section as essential public services. 
(3)  Standards: Except for food preparation and cooking odors emanating from residential land uses, and odors associated with property development and maintenance (such as construction, lawn care, and the painting and roofing of structures), no odor shall be created for periods exceeding a total of 15 minutes per any day which are detectable (by a healthy observer such as the Zoning Administrator or a designee who is unaffected by background odors such as tobacco or food) at the boundary of the subject property, where said lot abuts property within any residential, office, commercial zoning district, or the Suburban Industrial (SI) District. (See Section 17.032.) 
Section 17.182 - Electromagnetic Radiation Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of electromagnetic radiation which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities. 
(3)  Standards: It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any planned or intentional source of electromagnetic radiation for such purposes as communication, experimentation, entertainment, broadcasting, heating, navigation, therapy, vehicle velocity measurement, weather survey, aircraft detection, topographical survey, personal pleasure, or any other use directly or indirectly associated with these purposes which does not comply with the then current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation. Further, said operation in compliance with the Federal Communications Commission shall be unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation in performance of other electromagnetic radiators or electromagnetic receptors of quality and proper design because of proximity, primary field, blanketing, spurious radiation, harmonic content, modulation or energy conducted by power or telephone lines. The determination of "abnormal degradation in performance" and "of quality and proper design" shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers, and the Electronic Industries Association. In case of any conflict between the latest standards and principles of the above groups, the following precedence in the interpretation of the standards and principles shall apply: (1) American Institute of Electrical Engineers, (2) Institute of Radio Engineers, and (3) Electronic Industries Association. 
Section 17.183 - Glare and Heat Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of glare or heat which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply to glare created during the construction of the principal use on the subject property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations. 
(3)  Standards: No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the lot line of the subject property shall be permitted. (See also, Section 17.177.) Furthermore, there shall be no transmission of heat or heated air so as to be discernible (by a healthy observer such as the Zoning Administrator or a designee) at the lot line. Solar systems regulated by §66.03, Wis. Stats., shall be entitled to the protection of its provisions. 
Section 17.184 - Fire and Explosion Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of fire and/or explosion hazards which adversely effect adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities. 
(3)  Standards: Any use involving materials which could decompose by detonation shall locate such materials not less than 400 feet from any residential or office zoning district (see Section 17.032), except that this standard shall not apply to the storage or usage of liquefied petroleum or natural gas for normal residential or business purposes. All activities and storage of flammable and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate safety and fire fighting devices in accordance with all fire prevention codes of the State of Wisconsin. 
Section 17.185 - Toxic or Noxious Material Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the handling of toxic or noxious material which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities. 
(3)  Standards: 
(a)  No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject property, or through percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious material in such concentration as to be detrimental to, or endanger, the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to the property or business. 
(b)  No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with State and Federal regulations. 
Section 17.186 - Waste Material Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the handling of waste material which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities. 
(3)  Standards: 
(a)  No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject property, or through percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious material in such concentration as to be detrimental to, or endanger, the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to the property or business. 
(b)  No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
Section 17.187 - Drainage Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the creation of drainage which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities. 
(3)  Standards: No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water runoff which causes property damage, a nuisance, and/or erosion on adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly conveyed to a public storm drain, drainageway or other such public drainage facility per the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
Section 17.188 - Exterior Construction Material Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the use of certain exterior construction materials creation so as to attain a degree of uniformity in exterior appearance, and thus maintain and enhance the attractiveness and property value of certain zoning districts. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities. 
(3)  Standards for All Residential, Office and Commercial Zoning Districts: Except for exposed foundations not to exceed 3 feet in height (except for instances of "walk-out" or "drive-out" basements), no buildings or structures located within a residential, office, or commercial zoning district (see Section 17.032) shall employ non-decorative exterior construction materials. Examples of such non-decorative exterior construction materials include but are not limited to: non-decorative concrete block; non-decorative cinder block; non-decorative corrugated metal siding; non-decorative sheet metal siding; sheet plywood; sheet particle board; sheet pressboard; or any related material as determined by the Zoning Administrator, on its visible exterior in the following portions of the structure or building: 
(a)  Any portion of the building or structure visible from adjacent residentially zoned property; 
(b)  Any portion of the building or structure located within 50 feet of a public right-of-way; or, 
(c)  Any other portion of the building or structure situated at an angle of 60 degrees or less: from a line which is parallel to the nearest right-of-way (for uncurved rights-of-way); or from a line which is parallel to a chord connecting the right-of-way boundary on the inside side of the curve at points located at, or opposite from, the 2 outer boundaries of the subject property along the right-of-way line (for curved rights-of-way). 
Section 17.189 - Hazardous Materials Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to provide information to the Town regarding the nature of land uses which involve research, production, storage, disposal, handling, and/or shipment of hazardous materials. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all land uses and activities involving any one or more of the following: 
(a)  Micro-Organism Cultures subject to §94.65, Wis. Stats.; 
(b)  Pesticides subject to §94.67(25), Wis. Stats.; 
(c)  Biological Products subject to §95.39, Wis. Stats.; 
(d)  Hazardous Substances subject to §100.37(1)(c), Wis. Stats.; 
(e)  Toxic Substances subject to §101.58(2)(j), Wis. Stats.; 
(f)  Infectious Agents subject to §101.58(2)(f), Wis. Stats.; or 
(g)  Any material for which the State of Wisconsin requires notification of a local fire department 
(h)  Any other uses, activities, or materials which are subject to County, State, or Federal hazardous, or related, materials regulations. 
(3)  Standards: All land uses involving such hazardous materials shall submit a written description of such materials and the operations involving such materials conducted on their property as part of the required site plan submittal (see Section 17.228). 
Section 17.190 - Fencing Standards. 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the materials, location, height, and maintenance of fencing, landscaping walls and decorative posts in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Applicability: The requirements of this Section apply to all fencing, landscape walls and decorative posts equal to, or exceeding, 30 inches in height, for all land uses and activities. 
(3)  Standards: 
(a)  Materials: 
1.  Residential Districts: Acceptable materials for constructing fencing, landscape walls, and decorative posts include, wood, stone, brick, wrought iron, prefabricated vinyl panels, chain link, and wire mesh, except that chain link or wire mesh fencing is not permitted within required front yard or street yard areas, and that barbed wire and/or above-ground electric fencing is not permitted anywhere in residential districts. (Am. #2016-02) 
2.  Nonresidential Districts: Acceptable materials for constructing fencing, landscape walls, and decorative posts include, wood, stone, brick, wrought iron, prefabricated vinyl panels, chain link, and wire mesh. Barbed wire fencing is permitted on security fences at heights equal to or greater than 51/2 feet (66"). (Am. #2016-02) 
3.  Temporary Fencing : Temporary fencing, including the use of wood or plastic snow fences for the purposes of limiting snow drifting, protection of excavation and construction sites, and the protection of plants during grading and construction is permitted. 
4.  Snow Fences: Snow fences constructed of wood and wire, and/or plastic shall be permitted only as temporary fences, and used on a seasonal basis only. (Am. #12-05) 
(b)  Location: On all properties, no fence, landscape wall, or decorative post shall be located closer than 2 feet to the front yard or street yard property line. Fences may be located on any property line abutting a side or rear yard. 
(c)  Maximum Height: The maximum height of any fence, landscape wall, or decorative post shall be the following: 
1.  4 feet when located within a required front yard or required street yard on any property; 
2.  6 feet when located on any residentially zoned property, but not within a required front yard or a required street yard; and 
3.  6 feet when located on any nonresidentially zoned property, but not within a required front yard or a required street yard, except that security fences may exceed this height. 
4.  Height Exceptions: (Am. #12-05; #2016-02) 
a)  Decorative posts at a minimum spacing of 24 inches may extend eight (8) inches over the maximum height (see Figure 2). 
b)  Up to four (4) inches of ground clearance shall be allowed to accommodate slope and/or lawn maintenance (Figure 2). This will not contribute to the measurement of maximum height. 
5.  The location and maximum heights listed for Subsections (c)(l-4), above, may be exceeded or varied with the approval of a conditional use permit per Section 17.225. The following conditions (at a minimum) shall be established for such requests: (Cr. #2016-02; Am. #12-05) 
a)  The increase in height shall in no way further obstruct vision for intersecting streets, driveways, sidewalks or other traffic areas; 
b)  The fence shall be screened on its external side with adequate plants so as to maintain an attractive appearance to said side; 
c)  The fence shall be set back from the property line beyond the requirement of Subsection (3)(b) above, such distance as appropriate to contain adequate landscaping per Subsection (5)(b) above, and so as to maintain an attractive relationship to fence's external side. 
(d)  Orientation: Any and all fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts shall be erected so as to locate visible supports and other structural components toward the subject property. 
(e)  Maintenance: Any and all fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts shall be maintained in a structurally sound and attractive manner. 
(f)  Swimming Pools: Fencing for swimming pools shall be provided per the Model Swimming Pool Enclosure Code established by the National Spa and Pool Institute (NSPI), which is available at the Town Hall. The Zoning Administrator may approve alternative pool cover enclosures which are designed to meet recognized standards. (Am. #12-05) 
(4)  Permit and Fee Required: An accessory use zoning permit and fee is required for these structures. (Cr. #2016-02) 
Figure 2: Measuring Maximum Fence Height 

Section 17.191 - Administration and Enforcement of Performance Standards. 
(1)  Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of performance standards set forth herein range from those which can be made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person using normal senses and no mechanical equipment, to those requiring great technical competence and complex equipment for precise measurement. It is the intent of this Title that: 
(a)  Where determinations can be made by the Zoning Administrator using equipment normally available to the Town or obtainable without extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so made before notice of violations is issued. 
(b)  Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable for the Town to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures shall be available for causing corrections or apparent violations of performance standards, for protecting individuals from arbitrary, capricious, and unreasonable administration and enforcement of performance standard regulations, and for protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for administration and enforcement. 
1.  The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice, by Certified mail or other means, ensuring a signed receipt for such notice to the person or persons responsible for the alleged violations. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the reasons why the Zoning Administrator believes there is a violation in fact, and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to reply or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the administrative official within the time limit set constitutes admission of violation of the terms of this Title. The notice shall further state that upon request of those to whom it is directed, technical determination as described in this Title will be made, and that if violations as alleged are found, costs of such determinations shall be charged against those responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but that if it is determined that no violation exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by the Town. 
(2)  Enforcement of the provisions of this Subchapter shall be per Section 17.256. 
SUBCHAPTER X: - SIGNAGE REGULATIONS 

Section 17.211 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Subchapter is to establish most of the signage regulations for properties within the Town of Rib Mountain. Additional signage requirements are established in other elements of this Chapter. 
Rationale: This Subchapter establishes most of the regulations for the location, type, size, and height of signage within the Town of Rib Mountain. This Subchapter is designed to ensure the implementation of the Comprehensive Master Plan of the Town of Rib Mountain, particularly in regard to the implementation of the desired overall character of the community, and its constituent zoning districts. 
Section 17.212 - Sign Permits. 
(1)  The following sign uses and purposes are permitted in all zoning districts without the need for a sign permit. Such signs shall not count as part of the maximum permitted sign area as regulated by Table 17.216(6). 
(a)  Address numerals and identification signs not exceeding one square foot in area. 
(b)  Legal notices. 
(c)  Signs established by, or by order of, any governmental agency. 
(d)  Memorial signs and tablets displayed in cemeteries. 
(e)  On-premises directional signs and warning signs which bear no advertising. 
(f)  Neighborhood Watch signs and related government-authorized signs located within a public right-of-way. 
(g)  Temporary signs which conform to the requirements of Section 17.217. 
(2)  Community information signs shall be permitted only as a conditional use within all zoning districts and upon any property within the Town of Rib Mountain. As such, the review of a request for the erection of a community information sign shall comply with the requirements of Section 17.225. The proposed size, configuration, and design of the sign shall be described as part of the conditional use requirements. As a conditional use, the Town of Rib Mountain may revoke the designation of an approved community information sign if such sign fails to comply with the requirements of this Chapter. Such action shall proceed per the requirements of Section 17.225(8). Upon revocation, the owner of said sign shall have 30 days to remove the sign at the owner's expense. 
(3)  Except as provided in Subsections (1) and (2) above, no sign shall be erected, altered, or relocated within the Town of Rib Mountain unless a sign permit has been issued in accordance with Section 17.227. 
Section 17.213 - Definitions and Regulations Specific to Certain Signs. (Am. #2014-04) 
    The following definitions shall be used by this Subchapter to assist in the establishment of clear cut signage regulations. In general, Sign Purposes refers to where or how a sign is used. Sign Configurations refers to the style of the sign, and Sign Measurement explains how the dimensions of a sign are determined. 
    Sign: any object, device, display, structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Signs do not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state, city, religious, fraternal, or civic organization; also merchandise and pictures or models of products or services incorporated in a window display, works of art which in no way identify a product, or scoreboards located on athletic fields. Definitions of particular functional, locational, and structural types of signs are listed in this Section. (Traffic control and other public agency signs located within a right-of-way are not included within this definition and are not regulated by the provisions of this Chapter.) 
(1)  Sign Purposes. 
(a)  Advertising sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed. Advertising signs include billboards (Refer to Subsection 17.214(1)(g)). 
(b)  Auxiliary sign: A sign which provides special information such as price, hours of operation, or warning and which does not include brand names, or information regarding product lines or services. It may contain a business logo if the logo is under one square foot in area. Examples of such signs include directories of tenants in buildings, "no trespassing" signs, menu boards, and signs which list prices of gasoline (Refer to Subsection 17.216(5)). 
(c)  Business sign: a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, offered, or manufactured upon the premises where the sign is located (Refer to Section 17.216 and Table 17.216(6)). 
(c-1)  Changeable message sign: A sign which is electronically, manually capable of altering its color, appearance, or message. (Cr. #09-02; Am. #2016-10) 
(c-2)  Electronic message sign: A sign whose informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display screen composed of electronically illuminated parts. Electronic message signs use changing lights to form a message in text form wherein the sequence of the text and rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. (Cr. #2016-10) 
(d)  Community information sign : An officially designated sign which is limited to the display of information of interest to the general community regarding scheduled public events and public activities (Refer to Subsection 17.212(2)). 
1.  Such sign shall only display information regarding events and information of general interest to the residents of Rib Mountain. Copy which may be considered as advertising a product, private or restricted participation event, or activity for private profit shall be prohibited. 
2.  Such sign may be located on private or public property (including right-of-way). 
3.  Such sign shall conform to the visibility requirements of Section 17.173. 
4.  Such sign shall not be counted as adding to the area of signage on the subject property for the purposes of regulating sign area per Section 17.216(6). 
(e)  Directional sign, off-premises: A sign which indicates only the name, direction, and/or distance of a business or activity. It may contain a business logo if the logo is under one square foot in area. (Refer to Subsections 17.214(1)(f) and (g)). Counts against the permitted business sign area and requires a conditional use permit per Section 17.225. 
(f)  Directional sign, on-premises: A sign which indicates only the name or direction of a pedestrian or traffic facility, or a particular building within a complex of structures, on the property on which said facility or building is located. For each permitted or required parking area that has a capacity of more than 5 cars, one sign, not more than 2 square feet in area, designating each entrance and/or exit; and one sign, not more than 9 square feet in area, designating the conditions of use of the parking area. It may contain a business logo if the logo is under one square foot in area. On-premises directional signs shall not exceed 4 square feet in area. No lot shall contain more than 3 such signs. 
(g)  Group sign: A sign displaying the collective name of a group of uses such as the title of a shopping center, office park, or industrial park and its tenants. No sales or price information shall be permitted. Portions of the sign containing names of individual tenants shall be considered as part of the area of a group sign. Group signs shall only be permitted within developments serving 5 or more nonresidential tenants, and shall limit information to the name of the development (Refer to Table 17.216(6)). 
(h)  Identification sign: A sign indicating the name and/or address of the tenant of the unit or manager of the property located upon the residential premises where the sign is displayed (Refer to Sections 17.215, and 17.216(1) and (2)). 
(i)  Temporary sign: A sign or advertising display intended to be displayed for a certain period of time (as permitted by Section 17.217). Included in the definition of "temporary signs" are retailers' signs temporarily displayed for the purpose of informing the public of a "sale" or special offer. If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be considered as temporary. A mobile or portable sign shall not be considered a temporary sign or used for such a purpose. 
(j)  Unique sign: A sign which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, does not fall into any of the above categories. 
(k)  Residential nameplate sign: A freestanding sign indicating the name of the tenant and/or address of the premises. This type of sign may be attached to a mailbox, yard light, ornamental light or erected as a freestanding sign on posts. Except for those attached to a mailbox, this type of sign shall not be located closer than 5 feet from the front or street side lot line per Section 17.096(4)(a)2. (Am. #2016-10) 
(2)  Sign Configurations. 
(a)  Freestanding sign: A self-supporting sign resting on or supported by means of poles, standards, or any other type of base on the ground. This type of sign includes pylon and monument signs. The base or support(s) of any and all freestanding signs shall be securely anchored to a concrete base or footing. The footing and related supporting structure of a freestanding sign including bolts, flanges, brackets, etc., shall be concealed by the sign exterior, masonry covering, earth and permanent groundcover, or through the use of evergreen shrubs (Refer to Sections 17.213(3)(b)1. and 17.216(3)). 
(b)  Marquee sign: An overhanging sign providing a canopy of a theater, auditorium, fairground, museum or other use, which advertises present and scheduled events (Refer to Section 17.213(3)(b)1). 
(c)  Mobile or portable sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operation of the business. These signs are prohibited. 
(d)  Projecting sign: A sign, other than a wall sign which is attached to and projects more than one foot, generally perpendicular from a structure or building face. The bottom edge of such sign shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the ground level directly under the sign. Such sign shall be mounted directly to a building. The sign must be located in an Urban Commercial District (UC). 
(e)  Pylon & Monument Signs: Freestanding signs resting on or supported by means of poles, pylons, standards, or any other type of base on the ground. The base or support(s) of any and all pylon and monument signs shall be securely anchored to a concrete base or footing. The height of pylon and monument signs shall be measured from the ground grade adjacent to the sign to the top of the sign, and shall not exceed 10 feet in height. Pylon and monument signs shall be erected so that they do not obstruct vision triangles for street and/or driveway intersections, or impede visibility for safe pedestrian and/or vehicular circulation. (Refer to Sections 17.214(2)(g) and Table 17.216(6).) The footing and related supporting structure of a pylon or monument sign, including bolts, flanges, brackets, etc., shall be concealed by the sign exterior, masonry covering, earth and permanent groundcover, or through the use of evergreen shrubs (Refer to Section 17.173 and Table 17.216(6)). 
1.  Exceptions: 
a.  Pylon and monument sign height may exceed the permitted maximum height through a conditional use approval, if located within the areas described in (e)1.c. of this section; subject to, but not limited to, the conditions listed in (e)1.d. through (e)1.k. of this section. 
b.  Findings of Fact. As part of the conditional use review process of the proposed pylon or monument sign exceeding 10 feet in height, the Plan Commission shall make explicit findings specifically in regards to one or more of the following: 
1.  The proposed sign is needed for highway visibility due to topography variations created by the I-39/USH-51 highway; 
2.  The proposed sign is needed for highway visibility due to line-of-site obstructions from adjacent properties; 
3.  The proposed sign is needed for highway visibility due to on-site specific conditions that obstruct or create difficulty for highway visibility. 
c.  Areas where pylon and monument signs may exceed the permitted maximum height through a conditional use approval are described in the following areas: 
1.  Buffer area consisting of the 200 feet directly adjacent to the East of the East I-39/USH-51 Right-of-Way boundary, including exit/entrance ramps; from the North line of the S 1/2 S 1/2 Section 3 T28N R7E (Northern boundary line of buffer area), to the intersection of the North Right-of-Way line of Lilac Avenue and Lakeshore Drive (Southern boundary line of buffer area lying due East and West); 
2.  Properties West of the West Right-of-Way boundary line of I-39/USH-51, which defines the Eastern boundary, to the Western Right-of-Way boundary line of County Road R (Hummingbird Road), which defines the Western Boundary; From the centerline of County Road NN (North Mountain Road), which defines the northern Boundary, to the intersection of the Western Right-of-Way boundary line of County Road R (Hummingbird Road) and the South Right-of-Way Boundary line of Park Road, which defines the southern boundary lying due East; This area description does not include any property or parcel to the West of County Road R (Hummingbird Road). 
d.  No more than one pylon or monument sign over the permitted maximum height of 10 feet may be approved for any single parcel. 
e.  Sign height shall not exceed 35 feet from ground level. 
f.  Any portion of the pylon or monument sign shall be set back from all property lines a minimum of 10 feet. and must be set back from a property line abutting a residentially zoned property a minimum of 35 feet. 
g.  Shall not obstruct vision triangles for street and/or driveway intersections, or impede visibility for safe pedestrian and/or vehicular circulation (Refer to Sections 17.214(2)(g) and Table 17.216(6)). 
h.  Maximum pylon or monument signage area sizes shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis in regards to demonstrated on-site specific needs, and shall count against the maximum allowed signage area on any parcel. 
i.  Shall not be located within a residentially zoned district. 
j.  Shall comply with Rib Mountain Municipal Code Section 17.039 - USH 51 and STH 29 Overlay District. 
k.  Applicant must obtain all other required State and Federal permits. 
(f)  Wall sign: A sign mounted parallel to a building facade or other vertical building surface. Wall signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted, nor shall they project more than 18 inches from its surface. The height of a wall sign shall be measured from the base of the building below the sign to the top of the sign face. The top of the sign shall be no higher than the nearest portion of the building to which it is mounted. 
(3)  Sign Measurement. 
(a)  Ground level: The average elevation of the ground upon which the sign supports are placed, except when the sign supports rest upon a berm or other area elevated above the surrounding ground. In such cases, the average elevation of the base of such berm or other area shall be considered as the ground level. 
(b)  Sign area shall be measured in the following manner: 
1.  In the case of a sign placed within a frame, marquee sign, or other structure, sign area consists of the entire surface area of the sign on which copy could be placed. The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall not be counted as a part of the sign face area unless such structure or bracing is made a part of the sign's message. Where a sign has 2 display faces, the combined total area of one face or the largest face shall be considered the sign face area. 
2.  In the case of a sign whose message is fabricated together with the background which borders or frames that message, sign face area shall be the total area of the entire background. 
3.  In the case of a sign whose message is applied to a background which provides no border or frame, sign face area shall be the area of the smallest rectangle which can encompass all words, letters, figures, emblems, and other elements of the sign message. 
4.  Signs less than one square foot in area are not regulated by this Ordinance. 
5.  The following illustrations demonstrate how sign face area shall be determined. 

Section 17.214 - General Signage Regulations. 
    The regulations contained in this Section apply to signs in all districts. 
(1)  Sign Prohibitions and Limitations. 
(a)  No sign shall use any word, phrase, symbol, shape, form, or character in such manner as to interfere with moving traffic, including signs which incorporate typical street-type and/or traffic control-type signage designs and colors. 
(b)  No fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving signs, pennants or other decorations shall be permitted. 
(c)  No illuminated flashing signs shall be permitted. Flashing signs are those which change their appearance more than once in every 30 seconds. (Am. #09-02) 
(d)  No illuminated sign shall be permitted unless the illumination of the sign is so designed that the lighting element is not visible from any property within a residential zoning district (per Section 17.032). All illuminated signs shall comply with the State Electrical Code, and limited to the hours of customer access. 
(e)  No mobile or portable signs shall be permitted. 
(f)  No off-premises directional signs shall be permitted for non-governmental or non-institutional uses or for any use outside of a public right-of-way except with the granting of a Conditional Use Permit per Section 17.213(1)(e). However, such signs are permitted within a public right-of-way per Subsection (2)(e), below, for governmental and institutional uses. 
(g)  No advertising signs shall be permitted, except for specific information signs as provided within public rights-of-way per the State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation. 
Rationale: The adoption of Subsection (g), above, reflects a formal finding of fact on the part of the Town of Rib Mountain Plan Commission and Town Board that the prohibition of advertising signage furthers 2 compelling government interests: 1) the general public interest of reducing visual clutter caused by advertising signage which the Town has determined is a significant cause of unsafe traffic conditions; and 2) the public interest served by furthering the implementation of the purposes of this Chapter and the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan in terms of limiting the further spread of strip commercial development-of which advertising signs are a primary contributor. Furthermore, the Town of Rib Mountain advocates that this regulation leaves ample and adequate alternative channels of commercial speech communication for the messages portrayable on such advertising signs-namely distributed print media, broadcast media, and point-of-purchase display, and is narrowly defined so as to limit said prohibition to commercial speech on exterior signage. 
(2)  Sign Location Requirements. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reason of its position, proximity to the street right-of-way, wording, illumination, size, shape, or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device . 
(b)  No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reason of its position, proximity to the street right-of-way, wording, illumination, size, shape, or color creates a safety hazard for pedestrians or the operators of motor vehicles. 
(c)  No sign shall be located within a required bufferyard or within a permanently protected green space area (see Section 17.055). 
(d)  No sign shall be mounted on a roof . 
(e)  No sign , temporary or otherwise, shall be affixed to a tree or utility pole unless otherwise authorized by the Director of Public Works. 
(f)  Private signs shall not be allowed within any street right-of-way . 
(g)  Projecting signs located over a vehicle circulation area shall not be permitted. 
(h)  Pylon signs are not permitted in any residential district (See Section 17.032) 
(i)  No signs shall be located within the USH 51/STH 29 Overlay District unless a conditional use is granted in compliance with Section 17.225, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
(j)  No sign shall be erected which does not comply with the visibility standards of Section 17.173. 
(3)  Electronic Message Sign Requirements: (Cr. #2016-10) 
(a)  Electronic message signs are only permitted through issuance of a conditional use permit per Section 17.225 and may only be installed as an integral and subordinate portion of a monument or pylon sign configurations (and not a wall, projecting, window or any other sign configuration). 
(b)  Electronic message signs may be permitted as a conditional use, per Section 17.225, within the UC, SC, and SR-3 zoning districts, or part of an approved UDD project. 
(c)  No electronic message signs shall be permitted within 100 feet of a neighboring residential zoning district. 
(d)  Electronic message signs shall only display static messages. Messages shall not contain animation, effects simulating animation, or video. Messages shall not contain text or images that dissolve, fade, scroll, travel, flash, spin, revolve, shake, or include any other form of movement or motion during the message interval. 
(e)  The message interval, or the minimum amount of time a message is required to be displayed, shall not be less than the following: 
1.  10 seconds for properties within the USH 51 and STH 29 Overlay District (per Section 17.039). 
2.  30 seconds for properties outside of the USH 51 and STH 29 Overlay District. 
(f)  The electronic message sign area or display face shall be included iu the calculation of sign measurement and shall not exceed 50 percent of total sign area (per Section 17.213(3)(b)(l) - Sign Measurement). 
(g)  Electronic message signs shall be equipped with a sensor or other device programmed to automatically determine the ambient light level and adjust or dim the message board light level to not exceed a maximum brightness level of 0.3 foot-candles above ambient light conditions during both daylight hours (i.e., sunrise to sunset) and night time hours (i.e., sunset to sunrise). 
(h)  The electronic message sign shall be programmed or set in such a manner that the display face will turn dark and emit no light in case of a malfunction. 
Section 17.215 - Sign Regulations Applicable to Residential Districts. 
    In all residential zoning districts (see Section 17.032), signage shall be permitted per the requirements of Sections 17.211-17.214 and 17.216-17.219 and per the following: 
(1)  Wall, residential nameplate and monument signs are permitted in residential zoning districts. Other sign configurations are prohibited. Monument signs shall be located a minimum of 12 feet from the public right-of-way and are limited to the institutional land uses described in Section 17.056(3), and no more than one per street frontage. (Am. #09-02) 
(2)  For each single-family lot, or multi-family lot containing 4 or fewer dwellings units, one residential nameplate sign , not to exceed one and one-half square feet in area, and one identification sign , not to exceed 2 square feet in area, are permitted for each lot. 
(3)  For each multi-family lot with a structure containing more than 4 dwelling units, one residential nameplate sign , not to exceed 11/2 square feet in area, and one wall sign that may only be an identification sign , not to exceed 12 square feet in area, are permitted. 
(4)  Permanent subdivision identification signs may be approved as a conditional use per the procedures in Section 17.225. Such sign shall comply with the visibility standards of Section 17.173. 
(5)  For any permitted principal use other than those specified in (2)-(4), above, one sign, not to exceed 32 square feet in area, is permitted. The sign shall indicate nothing more than the name and address of the premises and the schedule of services or other information relevant to the operation of the premises. Requests for more than one sign or for signs larger than 32 square feet may be approved as a conditional use per the procedures in Section 17.225. 
(6)  Temporary Signs, including rummage or garage sale signs, are permitted per the requirements of Section 17.217. 
Section 17.216 - Sign Regulations Applicable to Nonresidential Districts. 
    In all nonresidential zoning districts (see Section 17.032), signs shall be permitted per the requirements of Sections 17.211-17.215 and 17.217-17.219 and per the following: 
(1)  The owners of multi-tenant properties will be allowed to allocate sign size to each business up to a specified maximum for the entire property. This would allow the owner to allocate much of the allowed sign area to one business and none to another business if he or she saw fit to do so. 
(2)  The total surface area of all business and identification signs on a lot shall not exceed the maximum permitted by Table 17.216(6), using any one of the 3 calculation methods: 
(a)  The listed ratio of sign area in square feet to linear feet of building frontage on a public street; or 
(b)  The listed ratio of sign area in square feet to linear feet of street frontage along public streets; or 
(c)  The listed ratio of sign area in square feet to square feet of building facade facing a public street. 
(3)  The number of business and group signs for a business use shall not exceed the number shown in Table 17.216(6). 
(4)  Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted to be erected within the required yard for each street frontage of a lot. Such sign may be either a business sign or a group sign. No lot shall be permitted more than 2 freestanding signs, including no more than one pylon sign. All signs shall be located so that no part of the sign shall extend over the lot line or impede visibility (refer to Section 17.173). 
(5)  Auxiliary signs may only be permitted when specifically approved as part of the site plan review process. Said signage shall be calculated independently of the requirements of Subsection (1) above, and shall not exceed 50% of the maximum permitted area. 
(6)  Maximum sign sizes for non-residential districts shall be permitted per the requirements of the Table of Maximum Sign Sizes (see Table 17.216(6) on the following page). 
(7)  Temporary signs are permitted per the requirements of Section 17.217. 
(8)  Other signs or unique signs: Any other type of sign may be permitted which is approved by the Town Board as a conditional use due to unique or special circumstances. As a condition of approving a sign under this paragraph, when any element of the approved sign is altered including the exterior appearance of any part of the sign, its frame, its supporting structure, or its lighting; the message on the sign (except for approved marquee signs) including the name of the product or service advertised on the sign or changing the name of the business shown on the sign; or changing the symbols, color, material, height, or location of the sign, the sign shall be removed unless the Town Board approves the alteration following the conditional use procedures in Section 17.225. 
TABLE 17.216(6) Table of Maximum Sign Sizes Zoning 
District Type of Sign 
Permitted Maximum Sign Size 6 Maximum Total 
Sign Area 
Per Business 5 Maximum 
Number of 
Signs Per 
Street 
Frontage 6 Building 1,2 
Frontage 
Length 
Ratio Street 3,4 
Frontage 
Length Ratio Building 
Facade 
Area Ratio CC, EO Business 1.00:1 or 5 1.00:1 or 5 5% 5 50 sq. ft. 5 2/Business SO, SC, NC, SI Business 1.00:1 or 5 0.50:1 or 5 5% 5 maximum of 100 square feet per sign, up to 500 square feet of total sign area as determined by one of the three ratio calculations 5 2/Business Group Freestanding 0.50:1 or 5 0.25:1 or 5 5% 5 maximum of 100 square feet per sign, up to 500 square feet of total sign area as determined by one of the three ratio calculations 5 1/Lot UC, UI, HI Business 1.00:1 or 5 0.50:1 or 5 5% 5 maximum of 150 square feet per sign, up to 500 square feet of total sign area as determined by one of the three ratio calculations 5 2/Business Group Freestanding .50:1 or 5 0.25:1 or 5 5% 5 maximum of 150 square feet per sign, up to 500 square feet of total sign area as determined by one of the three ratio calculations 5 1/Lot 1 Applies to all buildings regardless of the number of businesses located within. 2 Building frontage length is defined as the linear width of the exterior portion of the structure housing the principal use(s) and facing a street. Circulatory and access drives or parking areas are not considered streets for the purposes of this Ordinance. For example: under the SO District a business located in a building having a width of 75 feet could have a business sign up to 75 square feet in size (75 feet x 1.0 = 75 square feet). If said building is located on a lot with 200 feet of street frontage, said sign could be 100 square feet in size (200 feet x .5 = 100 square feet). 3 Applies to all properties regardless of the number of businesses present on a property. 4 Street frontage length is defined as the length of public street frontage for the subject property. Frontage on internal paved areas such as access drives and parking lots and residential collector streets and local residential streets is not considered street frontage for the purpose of this subsection. 5 Maximum total sign area may be selected using either the building frontage length ratio or the frontage length ratio or the facade area ratio for the first floor area of the external wall to be signed. 6 Street frontage shall be considered any and all portions(s) of a lot adjacent to a public street. Signs are not constrained to locate along the street frontage they are enabled by.  
Section 17.217 - Temporary Signs. (Am. #2014-06) 
    Only one temporary sign may be displayed on a property at any one time. Except as provided by (1) through (5) below, any one lot is permitted to display a temporary sign for a maximum of 30 days within any 12-month period. Furthermore, any one lot is limited to a maximum of 2 temporary signs in any 12-month period (political signs are exempt). 
(1)  For each lot: one "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign, not more than 12 square feet in area; 
(2)  For construction on or development of a lot, one sign not more than 32 square feet in area, indicating the name of the persons and products used in the construction of a building but only during the time that construction or development is actively under way; 
(3)  For a temporary event of public interest such as a neighborhood garage sale or church fair, one sign, not over 32 square feet in area, located upon the site of the event. Such sign shall not be erected more than 30 days before the event and shall be removed immediately after the event; 
(4)  Temporary political signs may be permitted for a period of not more than 60 days before and 10 days after an election without obtaining a permit. The total of all political signs on a lot shall not exceed 32 square feet; 
(5)  For each new residential subdivision that has been approved by the Town Board one temporary subdivision identification sign is permitted to be located on some portion of the subdivision for subdivisions which contain more than 10 lots but less than 50 lots. For subdivisions with 50 lots or more 2 temporary subdivision identification signs are permitted. Temporary subdivision identification signs may be a pylon or monument sign and shall comply with the visibility standards of Section 17.173. Each sign shall not be more than 32 square feet in area nor higher than 8 feet. No illumination is allowed. Signs established under this paragraph may remain within the subject subdivision until 80 percent or more of the lots in the subdivision have been sold at which time all temporary subdivision identification signs shall be removed. 
(6)  Yard, garage, rummage and other similar sale signs are permitted for a maximum period of 6 days for a 4-day sale. Each sign is to be no greater than 4 square feet. A maximum of 5 signs are permitted for any one event per property with a maximum of 2 events per year. For location requirements see Section 17.214, except Subsection 17.214(f), no off-site directional signs. All signs must receive permission of property owner where sign is located. (Cr. #08-07) 
(7)  Temporary Direct Seller signs may be permitted for the period of time specified on the approved Direct Seller Permit obtained from the Town. Each direct seller is permitted to have up to 2 signs, not to exceed 12 square feet in total area of all signs. All signs shall be affixed upon the direct seller's vehicle or display and must be taken down at the end of each business day. Illuminated and mobile or portable signs are not permitted. 
Section 17.218 - Construction and Maintenance of Signage. 
(1)  All signage within the Town of Rib Mountain shall remain in a state of proper maintenance. Proper maintenance shall be the absence of loose materials (including peeling paint, paper or other material), the lack of excessive rust, the lack of excessive vibration or shaking, and the presence of the original structural integrity of the sign, its frame and other supports, its mounting, and all components thereof. 
(2)  The repainting, changing of parts, and preventive maintenance of signs which completely conform to the requirements of this Chapter, and result in absolutely no change in the appearance of the sign from that originally approved, shall not be deemed alterations requiring a sign permit. 
(3)  The owner, lessee, or manager of a sign, and the owner of the land on which the same is located, shall keep grass or weeds and other growth cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on which the sign is located. 
(4)  Any signs which may be, or may hereafter become rotted, unsafe, or improperly maintained shall be repaired or removed by the licensee or owner of the sign, or owner of the property upon which the sign stands upon notice of the Zoning Administrator. 
(5)  All signs shall be constructed and mounted so as to withstand a wind pressure of 30 pounds per square foot. 
(6)  Signage in violation of the provisions of this Chapter are subject to Section 17.256. 
Section 17.219 - Nonconforming Sign. 
    To maintain and enhance property values, esthetics, and safety and to improve the uniformity of design in Rib Mountain, this section of the zoning ordinance is intended to eliminate all individual signs, groupings of signs and accumulations of signs that do not comply with the regulations of this Subchapter and other provisions of this Chapter. To accomplish this objective, stringent requirements for the removal of nonconforming signs have been established. These regulations have been formulated with the understanding that the magnitude of hardships likely to be encountered by sign owners as a result of adherence of this Section should not be great since most signs have a relatively short physical and economic life span. 
(1)  Signs existing as of the effective date of this Chapter (see Section 17.011) which do not conform to the provisions of this Chapter, shall be nonconforming signs and may be maintained subject to the provisions of this Section. No alteration of a nonconforming sign may be made nor may a nonconforming sign be moved to a new location unless the sign is brought into compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. For the purpose of this section of this Chapter, alteration of a sign is considered to be: 
(a)  Any change to the exterior appearance of any part of the sign, its frame, its supporting structure, or its lighting; 
(b)  Changing the symbols, color, material, height, or location of the sign; or 
(c)  Changing the message on a nonconforming sign, except for marquee signs and except for changes in the name of the business operating on the premises where the sign is located. For example, changing only the sign message from "ABC Motel" to "XYZ Motel" is not considered to be an alteration because the type of business operating at the site has not changed. This type of message change in the nonconforming sign is permitted . Changing the sign message from "ABC Motel" to "XYZ Service Station" or "ABC Restaurant" is considered to be an alteration and such a change in a nonconforming sign is not permitted . This provision is intended to mitigate the possibility of a hardship arising from the sale of a business from one party to another and the need for the business purchaser to change the name of the business as a result of the change in ownership of the business; or 
(d)  Any other change as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
Alteration of a sign does not include maintaining the existing appearance of the sign or replacing the sign face or the supporting structure with identical materials, colors, and sign messages nor changing the message of a marquee sign. 
(2)  All nonconforming signs located on the premises shall be removed when the principal structure located on the premises undergoes a change of use as listed in the Table of Land Uses (Section 17.053). For example, a change in use from office to indoor sales would require removal of all nonconforming signs located on the premises. Any commercial use or other use which has a nonconforming sign must remove the nonconforming sign, sign frame and structure from the premises within 60 days of closing or termination of the use. 
(3)  Existing business signs on the premises of a nonconforming use or building may be continued in accordance with the requirements in Section 17.219(1), but such signs shall not be allowed to increase in number nor to be expanded in area, height, or illumination. Any new signs proposed to be erected on the premises shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter and shall not be erected until all signs which do not conform to the requirements of this Chapter are removed. 
(4)  All existing mobile or portable signs as defined in Section 17.213(2)(c) shall be removed within 2 years after the effective date of this subsection unless the sign is required to be removed earlier under other provisions this Chapter. 
Section 17.220 - Noncompliance and Penalties. 
(1)  All signs found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, shall be removed within 30 days of receiving written notice of noncompliance and removal from the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  The penalties of Section 17.256 shall be applicable to violations of the provisions of this Chapter. 
SUBCHAPTER XI: - PROCEDURES 

Section 17.221 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Subchapter is to establish the procedural requirements for zoning text amendments, zoning map amendments, conditional use review and approval, special use review and approval, temporary use review and approval, sign permits, site plan review and approval, Certificates of Occupancy, variances, zoning provision interpretations by the Zoning Administrator, and appeals of zoning provision interpretations to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Section 17.222 - Amendment of Zoning Regulations. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed amendments to provisions of this Chapter. 
(2)  Initiation of Request for Amendment to this Chapter. Proceedings for amendment of this Chapter may be initiated by any one of the following 3 methods: 
(a)  An application by any member of the general public; 
(b)  A recommendation of the Plan Commission; or 
(c)  By action of the Town Board. 
(3)  Application Requirements. All applications for proposed amendments to this Chapter, regardless of the party of their initiation shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum of 2 weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. The Zoning Administrator shall forward copies of the complete application to the office of the Town Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by all of the following: 
(a)  A copy of the portion of the current provisions of this Chapter which are proposed to be amended, with said provisions clearly indicated in a manner which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier; 
(b)  A copy of the text which is proposed to replace the current text; and 
(c)  Written rationale for the proposed text amendment, consisting of the reasons why the Applicant believes the proposed text amendment is in harmony with the goals and objectives of the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan. The applicant shall also describe how the proposed amendment addresses the questions set out in Subsection (4)(b) below. 
(4)  Review by the Zoning Administrator. The proposed text amendment shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as follows: 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Ordinance. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Ordinance, he shall return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall so notify Applicant. 
(b)  After the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written evaluation of the Applicant's requested text amendment paying particular attention to the Applicant's rationale for the proposed text amendment and whether the request is in harmony with the goals and objective listed in the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan. The Zoning Administrator shall determine to what extent the proposed amendment addresses each of the following questions: 
1.  How does the proposed text amendment further the purposes of this Chapter as outlined in Section 17.005? 
2.  How does the proposed text amendment further the purposes of the general Subchapter in which the amendment is proposed to be located? 
3.  How does the proposed text amendment further the purposes of the specific Section in which the amendment is proposed to be located? 
4.  Which of the following factors has arisen that are not properly addressed in the current provisions of this Chapter: 
a.  The Comprehensive Master Plan has been amended. (If this is a factor related to the proposed amendment, note pertinent portions of the Comprehensive Plan.); 
b.  A change has occurred in the land market, or other factors have arisen which require a new form of development, a new type of land use, or a new procedure to meet said change(s); 
c.  New methods of development or providing infrastructure make it necessary to alter this Chapter to meet these new factors; 
d.  Changing governmental finances require amending this Chapter in order to meet the needs of the government in terms of providing and affording public services. 
5.  If the proposed text amendment is concerned with the provisions of Subchapters 17-IV and/or 17-V: How does the proposed amendment maintain the desired overall consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use impacts within the pertinent zoning districts? 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the Plan Commission for the Commission's review and use in making its recommendation to the Town Board. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the Town's Comprehensive Master Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report. 
(5)  Review and Action by the Plan Commission. The Town Board shall not make an amendment to this Chapter without allowing for a recommendation from the Plan Commission per the provisions of this Subsection. 
(a)  The Plan Commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing to consider the application within 45 days after the filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Applicant shall appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. Notice of the proposed amendment and the public hearing shall conform to the requirements of 162.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. Said notice shall contain a description of the proposed text change. In addition, at least 10 days before said public hearing, the Town Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the Applicant, and to the Clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this Chapter. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator (or within an extension of said period requested in writing by the Applicant and granted by the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission shall make a written report to the Town Board stating its findings regarding Subsection (4), above, and its recommendations regarding the application as a whole. Said report shall include a formal finding of facts developed and approved by the Plan Commission concerning the questions of Subsection (4)(b)1. through 5., above. 
(c)  If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after the filing of said complete application (and in the absence of a Applicant-approved extension per Subsection (b), above), then the Town Board may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the expiration of said 60-day period. Failure to receive said written report from the Plan Commission per Subsection (5)(a), above, shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the Town Board. If such a public hearing is necessary, the Town Board shall provide notice per the requirements of Subsection (a), above. 
(d)  If the Plan Commission recommends approval of an application, it shall state in the minutes or in a subsequently issued written decision, its conclusion and any finding of facts supporting its conclusion as to the following: (1) that the potential public benefits of the proposed amendment outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed amendment. 
(6)  Review and Action by the Town Board. The Town Board shall consider the Plan Commission's recommendation regarding the proposed text amendment. The Board may request further information and/or additional reports from the Plan Commission, Zoning Administrator, and/or the Applicant. The Board may take final action on the application at the time of its initial meeting, or may continue the proceedings at the Applicant's request. The Town Board may approve the amendment as originally proposed, may approve the proposed amendment with modifications (per the recommendations of the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission, authorized outside experts, or its own members), or may deny approval of the proposed amendment. The Town Board's approval of the requested amendment shall be considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed amendment. 
(7)  Effect of Denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator. 
(8)  Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 17.255(1)(a). 
Section 17.223 - Amendment of Official Zoning Map. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed amendments to the boundaries of the Official Zoning Map. 
(2)  Initiation of Request for Amendment to Official Zoning Map. Proceedings for amendment of the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by any one of the following 3 methods: 
(a)  An application of the owner(s) of the subject property; 
(b)  A recommendation of the Plan Commission; or 
(c)  By action of the Town Board. 
(3)  Application Requirements. All applications for proposed amendments to the Official Zoning Map, regardless of the party of their initiation per (2) above, shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum of 2 weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. The Zoning Administrator shall forward copies of said complete application to the office of the Town Clerk. Said application shall be accompanied by all of the following: 
(a)  A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the zoning is proposed to be amended, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current tax records of the Town of Rib Mountain. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided; 
(b)  A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the Town as a whole; and 
(c)  Written rationale for the proposed map amendment, consisting of the reasons why the Applicant believes the proposed map amendment is in harmony with the goals and objectives of the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan. The applicant shall also describe how the proposed amendment addresses the questions set out in Subsection (4)(b) below. 
(4)  Review by the Zoning Administrator. The proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as follows: 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Ordinance. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Ordinance, he shall return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall so notify the Applicant. 
(b)  After the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written evaluation of the Applicant's requested map amendment and pay particular attention to the Applicant's rationale for the proposed map amendment and whether the request is in harmony with the goals and objective listed in the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan. The Zoning Administrator shall determine to what extent the proposed amendment addresses each of the following questions: 
1.  How does the proposed Official Zoning Map amendment further the purposes of this Chapter as outlined in Section 17.005 and the applicable rules and regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)? 
2.  Which of the following factors has arisen that are not properly addressed on the current Official Zoning Map? 
a.  The designations of the Official Zoning Map should be brought into conformity with the Comprehensive Master Plan; 
b.  A mistake was made in mapping on the Official Zoning Map. (That is, an area is developing in a manner and purpose different from that for which it is mapped.) NOTE: If this reason is cited, it must be demonstrated that the discussed inconsistency between actual land use and designated zoning is not intended, as the Town may intend to stop an undesirable land use pattern from spreading; 
c.  Factors have changed, (such as the availability of new data, the presence of new roads or other infrastructure, additional development, annexation, or other zoning changes), making the subject property more appropriate for a different zoning district; 
d.  Growth patterns or rates have changed, thereby creating the need for an Amendment to the Official Zoning Map. 
3.  How does the proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map maintain the desired consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject property? 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the Plan Commission for the Commission's review and use in the making its recommendation to the Town Board. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the Town's Comprehensive Master Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report. 
(5)  Review and Action by the Plan Commission. The Town Board shall not make an amendment to the Official Zoning Map without allowing for a recommendation from the Plan Commission per the provisions of this Subsection. 
(a)  The Plan Commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing to consider the application within 45 days of the filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Applicant shall appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. Notice of the proposed amendment and the public hearing shall conform to the requirements of Section 62.23(7)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes. Said notice shall contain a description of the subject property and the proposed change in zoning. In addition, at least 10 days before said public hearing, the Town Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the Applicant; to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property as identified in Subsection (3)(a), above; and to the Clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this Chapter. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator (or within an extension of said period requested in writing by the Applicant and granted by the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission shall make a written report to the Town Board stating its findings regarding Subsection (4), above, and its recommendations regarding the application as a whole. Said report shall include a formal finding of facts developed and approved by the Plan Commission concerning the requirements of Subsections (4)(b)1.-3., above. 
(c)  If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after the filing of said complete application (and in the absence of an Applicant-approved extension per (b), above), then the Town Board may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the expiration of said 60-day period. Failure to receive said written report from the Plan Commission per Subsection (5)(a), above, shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the Town Board. If such a public hearing is necessary, the Town Board shall provide notice per the requirements of Subsection (a), above. 
(d)  If the Plan Commission recommends approval of an application, it shall state in the minutes or in a subsequently issued written decision, its conclusion and any finding of facts supporting its conclusion as to the following: that the potential public benefits of the proposed amendment outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed amendment, as identified in Subsections (4)(b)1.-4. above, after taking into consideration the proposal by the Applicant. 
(6)  Review and Action by the Town Board. The Town Board shall consider the Plan Commission's recommendation regarding the proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map. The Board may request further information and/or additional reports from the Plan Commission, the Zoning Administrator, and/or the Applicant. The Board may take final action on the application to amend the Official Zoning Map at the time of its initial meeting, or may continue the proceedings to a future date. The Town Board may approve the amendment as originally proposed, may deny approval of the proposed amendment or may approve the proposed amendment with modifications (per the recommendations of the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission, authorized outside experts, or its own members) provided that the proposed modifications do not: 
a.  Involve a change in the zoning to a district that is less restrictive than the district listed in the notice of public hearing. For purposes of this provision, RA-35ac shall be consider the most restrictive district allowed in the Town and HI shall be considered the least restrictive district; the order of the remaining zoning districts shall be as established in Section 17.032; and 
b.  Change the area to be rezoned to include additional land that was not part of the description of the property to be considered for rezoning in the notice of public hearing. 
    Any action to amend the Official Zoning Map requires a majority vote of the Board. The Town Board's approval of the requested amendment shall be considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed amendment. 
(7)  Effect of Denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator. 
(8)  Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 17.255(1)(b). 
(9)  Floodland District Boundary Changes Limited. All proposed changes to flood boundary designations shall be per §§87.30 and 144.26, Wis. Stats. 
(10)  Amendments to Shoreland Districts. All proposed changes to flood boundary designations shall be per §§87.30 and 144.26, Wis. Stats. 
Section 17.224 - Special Use Procedures. 
(1)  Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of special uses. 
(b)  Special uses are those uses which have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby properties if allowed to develop simply under the general requirements of this Chapter. In order to prevent these undesirable impacts from occurring, all special uses must meet certain regulations applicable only to special uses, in addition to the general requirements of this Chapter and the requirements of the zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
(c)  Land uses which fail to meet one or more of the regulations listed for the particular special uses described in Section 17.056, may be reviewed as a conditional use (see Section 17.052(3)(b)). 
(2)  Regulations Applicable to All Special Uses. No public hearing is required to develop a special use, however, a site plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 17,228. In the site plan application materials, the developer shall explain how all special use requirements of this Subchapter and Subchapter 17-IV will be met. 
(3)  Application Requirements. All applications for a special use, shall follow the application, review and all other elements of Section 17.228 governing site plans. 
(4)  Fee. There is no additional fee for a special use, however, the fee required for a site plan in accordance with in Section 17.228 shall be paid. 
Section 17.225 - Conditional Use Procedures. 
(1)  Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this Section is to establish regulations which govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval or denial of proposed conditional uses. 
(b)  Conditional uses are those uses which have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby properties or public facilities if allowed to develop simply live under the general requirements of this Chapter. In order to mitigate or prevent these impacts from occurring, all conditional uses are required to meet certain procedural requirements applicable only to conditional uses. In addition, conditional uses shall meet the general requirements of this Chapter and the general and conditional use requirements of the zoning district in which the subject property is located. A public hearing process is required to review a request for a conditional use. 
(c)  Conditional uses are also those proposed uses which are listed as special uses, but fail to meet one or more of the requirements for special use approval listed in Section 17.056. (See Section 17.052(3)(b).) 
(2)  Initiation of Request for Approval of a Conditional Use. Proceedings for approval of a conditional use may be initiated by any one of the following 3 methods: 
(a)  An application of the owner(s) of the subject property; 
(b)  A recommendation of the Plan Commission; or 
(c)  By action of the Town Board. 
(3)  Application Requirements. All applications for proposed conditional uses, regardless of the party of their initiation per (2) above, shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum of 2 weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. The Zoning administrator shall forward copies of said complete application to the office of the Town Clerk. Said application shall be accompanied by all of the following: 
(a)  A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the conditional use is proposed, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds of Marathon County (as provided by the Town of Rib Mountain). Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided; 
(b)  A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the Town as a whole; 
(c)  A written description of the proposed conditional use describing the type of activities, buildings, and structures proposed for the subject property and their general locations; 
(d)  A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development. Said site plan shall conform to all of the applicable requirements of Section 17.228(3) subparagraphs (a) through (f) as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(e)  Written rationale for the proposed conditional use, consisting of the reasons why the Applicant believes the proposed conditional use is appropriate for the proposed site. The applicant shall describe how the proposed conditional use addresses the questions set out in Subsection (4)(b) below. 
(4)  Review by The Zoning Administrator. The proposed conditional use shall be reviewed by The Zoning Administrator as follows: 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Ordinance. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Ordinance, he shall return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall so notify Applicant. 
(b)  After the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written evaluation of the Applicant's requested conditional use and pay particular attention to the Applicant's rationale for the conditional use and whether the request is in harmony with the goals and objective listed in the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Master Plan. The Zoning Administrator shall determine to what extent the proposed conditional use addresses each of the following questions: 
1.  How is the proposed conditional use (the use in general) in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Plan, this Chapter, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted, or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the Town? 
2.  How is the proposed conditional use (in its specific location) in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Plan, this Chapter, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted, or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the Town? 
3.  Is it likely that the proposed conditional use, in its proposed location and as depicted on the required site plan (see (3)(d), above), will have an adverse impact on the use of adjacent property, the neighborhood, the physical environment, pedestrian or vehicular traffic, parking, public improvements, public property or rights-of-way or other matters affecting the public health, safety, or general welfare, either as they now exist or as they may in the future be developed as a result of the implementation of the regulations or recommendations of this Chapter, the Comprehensive Master Plan, or any other plan, program, map, or ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the Town or other governmental agency having jurisdiction to guide growth and development? 
4.  Does the proposed conditional use maintain the desired consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject property? 
5.  Is the proposed conditional use located in an area that will be adequately served by, and will not impose an undue burden on, any of the improvements, facilities, utilities or services provided by public agencies serving the subject property? 
6.  Do the potential public benefits of the proposed conditional use outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed conditional use (as identified in Subsections 1. through 5., above), after taking into consideration any proposal by the Applicant and any requirements recommended by the Applicant to ameliorate such impacts? 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the Plan Commission for the Commission's review and use in making its recommendation to the Town Board. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the Town's Comprehensive Master Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report. 
(5)  Review and Action by the Plan Commission. The Town Board shall not approve a conditional use without allowing for a recommendation from the Plan Commission per the provisions of this Subsection. 
(a)  The Plan Commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing to consider the application within 45 days after the filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Applicant shall appear in person, or by agent, and/or by attorney. Notice of the conditional use public hearing shall conform to the requirements of §62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. Said notice shall contain a description of the subject property and the proposed conditional use. In addition, at least 10 days before said public hearing, the Town Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the Applicant; to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property; and to the Clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of the proposed conditional use. Failure to mail these notices, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate the proceedings under this Section. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator (or within an extension of said period requested in writing by the Applicant and granted by the Plan Commission), the Plan Commission shall make a written report to the Town Board stating its findings regarding Subsection (4), above, and its recommendations regarding the application as a whole. Said report shall include a formal finding of facts developed and approved by the Plan Commission concerning the questions in (4)(b)1. through 6., above. The Plan Commission may recommend that the conditional use request be approved by the Town Board, denied by the Town Board or approved if the Applicant is willing to meet certain conditions of approval that are stated in the Plan Commission's statement of finding. If the Plan Commission chooses not to make a recommendation or fails to make a recommendation to the Town Board within 45 days of the public hearing, the request for a conditional use shall be forwarded to the Town Board without a Plan Commission recommendation. 
(c)  If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after the filing of said complete application (and in the absence of an Applicant-approved extension per (b), above), then the Town Board may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the expiration of said 60-day period. Failure to receive said written report from the Plan Commission per Subsection (5)(a), above, shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the Town Board. If such a public hearing is necessary, the Town Board shall provide notice per the requirements of Subsection (a), above. 
(6)  Review and Action by the Town Board. The Town Board shall consider the Plan Commission's recommendation regarding the proposed conditional use. The Board may request further information and/or additional reports from the Plan Commission, The Zoning Administrator, and/or the Applicant. The Board may take final action on the application at the time of its initial meeting, or may continue the proceedings at Applicant's request. The Town Board may approve the conditional use as originally proposed, may approve the proposed conditional use with modifications and conditions (per the recommendations of The Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission, authorized outside experts, or its own members) or may deny approval of the proposed conditional use. The Town Board's approval of the proposed conditional use shall be considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed conditional use. 
(7)  Effect of Denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator. 
(8)  Termination of an Approved Conditional Use. Upon approval by the Town Board, the Applicant must demonstrate in the site plan required for initiation of development activity on the subject property per Section 17.228 that the proposed conditional use meets all general conditional use requirements and all conditions of approval as established by the Town Board. Following approval of a conditional use, no Zoning Permit (per Section 17.228), Certificate of Occupancy (per Section 17.229), or Building Permit shall be issued for any development unless the development complies with all requirements of this Chapter and all conditions of approval as established by the Town Board. 
    Any conditional use found not to be in compliance with the terms of this Chapter or the specific conditions of approval as established by the Town Board shall be considered in violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to all applicable enforcement procedures and penalties of this Chapter. 
    By majority vote of the Town Board, a conditional use may be revoked for noncompliance with the terms of this Chapter or for noncompliance with the specific conditions of approval. 
(9)  Time Limits on the Development of Conditional Use. The start of construction of any and all conditional uses shall be initiated within 365 days of their approval by the Town Board and shall be operational within 730 days of said approval unless the period is extended by the Town. Failure to initiate development within this period shall automatically constitute a revocation of the conditional use. For the purposes of this Section, "operational" shall be defined as the granting of a Certificate of Occupancy for the conditional use. Prior to such a revocation, the Applicant may request an extension of this period. Said request shall require formal approval by the Town Board and shall be based upon a showing of acceptable justification (as determined by the Town Board). 
(10)  Discontinuing an Approved Conditional Use. Any conditional use which has been discontinued for a period exceeding 365 days shall become null and void and the activity shall not be re-established unless another conditional use is granted following the procedures in paragraphs (2) through (7) above. The burden of proof shall be on the holder of the conditional use permit to conclusively demonstrate that the subject conditional use was operational during this period. 
(11)  Change of Ownership. All requirements of the approved conditional use shall be continued regardless of ownership of the subject property. Modification of any conditional use approved per (6), above, without approval by the Town Board, shall be grounds for revocation of said conditional use approval per (8), above. 
(12)  Fee. One or more fees are required for this procedure. Refer to Section 17.255(1)(d). 
Section 17.226 - Reserved. 
Section 17.227 - Sign Permit. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide a procedure and requirement for obtaining a Sign Permit prior to the erection of certain signs. 
(2)  General Requirement. Unless specifically exempted by Subchapter 17-X, no sign shall be erected, altered, or relocated after the effective date of this Chapter (see Section 17.011) until a Sign Permit has been secured from the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  Application Requirements. All applications for sign permits shall be made in writing on a form supplied by the Zoning Administrator. Said application shall be submitted with all required information including: 
(a)  An approved site plan for the subject property per Section 17.228. If a site-plan was not previously required, an abbreviated site plan for the subject property meeting the submittal requirements as determined by the Zoning Administrator, and showing at a minimum, the property lines, the location and dimensions of all buildings, structures, and existing signs on the subject property, and the proposed location for the proposed sign; 
(b)  The proposed sign configuration listing the height, width, total square footage, method of attachment, method of illumination, and sign materials; 
(c)  The subject property's zoning designation; and 
(d)  The total area of all signs on the subject property both before and after the installation of the proposed sign. 
(4)  Procedure. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall review said application for compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, and shall issue or deny the issuance of a sign permit within 15 working days of the submittal of a complete application. 
(5)  Termination of a Sign Permit. Any sign found not to be in compliance with the terms of this Chapter shall be considered in violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties. 
(6)  Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 17.255(1)(f). 
Section 17.228 - Site Plan Procedures. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to specify the requirements and procedures for the review and approval of site plan applications. The provisions of this Section are designed to ensure that all proposed land use and development activity complies with the requirements of this Chapter. Specifically, this Section requires that the initiation of all development activity (including clear cutting, grading or filling) and all development within a Unified Development District [UDD] requires the approval of a site plan by the Town Plan Commission before the zoning, building, and occupancy permits can be issued. 
    Building development activity associated with the construction of single-family detached dwellings, duplex houses, twin houses and two-flat houses which are not located within a Unified Development District [UDD] are exempt from-the Plan Commission review and approval requirement in Subsection (4). The Zoning Administrator shall perform the review and approval functions of the Plan Commission for single-family detached dwellings, duplex houses, twin houses and two-flat houses. All other elements of this Section are still applicable to the construction of single-family detached dwellings, duplex houses, twin houses and two-flat houses. 
(2)  Procedure. 
(a)  Initiation of Request for Approval of a Site Plan. Proceedings for approval of a site plan shall be initiated by the owner(s) of the subject property, or their legally authorized representative(s). 
(b)  Pre-Application Meeting. The Applicant shall first meet with the Zoning Administrator and other appropriate Town Staff to discuss preliminary concepts and plans for the development. Guidance will be provided to the Applicant on technical requirements and procedures, and a timetable for project review may be discussed. 
(c)  Application for Site Plan Review and Review by Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall apply to the Zoning Administrator and request an appearance before the Plan Commission to review the site plan application. The appearance before the Plan Commission shall not be scheduled unless the application is approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator. Said application shall meet the requirements of Subsection (3), below. Within 10 working days of submittal of an application, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether or not the application contains all of the information required by Subsection (3), below. Once the application is approved as complete, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule the applicant for an appearance before the Plan Commission, If the Zoning Administrator determines that the site plan is relatively simple, the Zoning Administrator may schedule the appearance at the next Plan Commission meeting. If the site plan is deemed to be complex, the Zoning Administrator shall not schedule Plan Commission review for sooner than 2 weeks after the application if determined to be complete. 
(3)  Application Requirements. All applications for review and approval of site plans shall be accompanied by all of the following documents which shall provide the information required to review the application for a site plan. The Zoning Administrator may waive the submission of a particular document or information item if, in the judgement of the Zoning Administrator, the document or item is not needed to adequately review the proposed site plan. 
(a)  Operational Plan of the intended use describing in reasonable detail the: 
1.  Existing zoning district(s) (and proposed zoning district(s) if different); 
2.  Land use plan map designation(s); 
3.  Natural Resources Site Evaluation Worksheet (Subsection 17.073(3)); 
4.  Current land uses present on the subject property; 
5.  Proposed land uses for the subject property (per Section 17.056); 
6.  For nonresidential developments, the methods that will be used to manage snow storage and/or snow removal activities. The Applicant shall explain how any on-site snow storage activities will not reduce the required number of parking spaces needed to serve the intended land uses and how on-site snow storage activities will be managed to eliminate damage to required landscape materials. 
7.  Projected number of residents, employees, and daily customers; 
8.  Proposed number of dwelling units, floor area, impervious surface area, and landscape surface area, and resulting site density, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio, and landscape surface area ratio; 
9.  Operational considerations relating to hours of operation, projected normal and peak water usage, sanitary sewer or septic loadings, and traffic generation; 
10.  Operational considerations relating to potential nuisance creation as a result of noncompliance with the performance standards described in Subchapter 17-IX (Sections 17.171-17.191) including, street access, traffic visibility, parking, loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odor, electromagnetic radiation, glare and heat, fire and explosion, toxic or noxious materials, waste materials, drainage, and hazardous materials. If no such nuisances will be created (as indicated by complete and continuous compliance with the provisions of Subchapter 17-IX), then the statement "The proposed development shall comply with all requirements of Subchapter 17-IX." shall be provided. If certain performance standards will not be met, a full explanation shall be provided which indicates the anticipated extent of noncompliance and why the proposed use cannot comply with the standards. Note: the Plan Commission may require full compliance with these standards or withhold approval of the site plan until the applicant proves that the operation will comply; 
11.  Proposed erosion control and storm water management measures; 
12.  Exterior building and fencing materials (Sections 17.188 and 17.190); 
13.  Possible future expansion and related implications for 1.-11., above; and 
14.  Any other information pertinent to adequate understanding by the Zoning and its relation Administrator or Plan Commission of the intended use its relation to nearby properties. 
(b)  A Small Location Map. at 11? × 17? showing the subject property and illustrating its relationship to the nearest street intersection. (A photocopy of the pertinent section of the Town's Land Use Plan Map with the subject property clearly indicated shall suffice to meet this requirement.) 
(c)  A Property Site Plan. drawing (and reduction at 11? × 17?) which includes: 
1.  A title block which indicates the name, address and phone/fax number(s) of the current property owner and/or agent(s) (developer, architect, engineer, planner) for project; 
2.  The date of the original plan and the latest date of revision to the plan; 
3.  A north arrow and a graphic scale. Said scale shall not be smaller than one inch equals 100 feet; 
4.  A legal description of the subject property; 
5.  All property lines and existing and proposed right-of-way lines with bearings and dimensions clearly labeled; 
6.  All existing and proposed easement lines and dimensions with a key provided and explained on the margins of the plan as to ownership and purpose; 
7.  All required building setback lines; 
8.  All existing and proposed buildings, structures, and paved areas, including building entrances, walks, drives, decks, patios, fences, utility poles, drainage facilities, and walls; 
9.  The location and dimension (cross-section and entry throat) of all access points onto public streets; 
10.  The location and dimension of all on-site parking (and off-site parking provisions if they are to be employed), including a summary of the number of parking stalls provided versus required by this Ordinance; 
11.  The location and dimension of all loading and service areas on the subject property and labels indicating the dimension of such areas; 
12.  The location of all outdoor storage areas and the design of all screening devices; 
13.  The location, type, height, size and lighting of all signage on the subject property; 
14.  The location, height, design/type, illumination power and orientation of all exterior lighting on the subject property- including the clear demonstration of compliance with Section 17.177; 
15.  The location and type of any permanently protected green space areas; 
16.  The location of existing and proposed drainage facilities; and 
17.  In the legend, data for the subject property: 
a.  Lot Area; 
b.  Floor Area; 
c.  Floor Area Ratio (b/a); 
d.  Impervious Surface Area; 
e.  Impervious Surface Ratio (d/a); and 
f.  Building Height. 
18.  When the site plan submitted is not a part of a recorded subdivision plat, clearly designated by lots and blocks, the Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to provide a survey, as certified by a "registered land surveyor" or "registered professional engineer." 
(d)  A Detailed Landscaping Plan of the subject property, at the same scale as the main plan (and reduction at 11? × 17?), showing the location of all required bufferyard and landscaping areas, and existing and proposed Landscape Point fencing and berm options for meeting said requirements. The Landscaping Plan shall demonstrate complete compliance with the requirements of Subchapter 17-VIII. (NOTE: the individual plant locations and species, fencing types and heights, and berm heights need to be provided.) 
(e)  A Grading and Erosion Control Plan at the same scale as the main plan (and reduction at 11? × 17?) showing existing and proposed grades, including retention walls and related devices, erosion control measures and storm water conveyance measures. The grading plan shall clearly indicate the manner in which runoff generated on the site will be prevented from causing property damage or becoming a nuisance for abutting property or otherwise violating the standards in Section 17.187. 
(f)  Elevation Drawings of proposed buildings or proposed remodeling of existing buildings showing finished exterior treatment shall also be submitted, with adequate labels provided to clearly depict exterior materials, texture, color and overall appearance. Perspective renderings of the proposed project and/or photos of similar structures may be submitted, but not in lieu of adequate drawings showing the actual intended appearance of the buildings. 
(4)  Review and Approval by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission, during its review of the submitted complete application, shall take into consideration the purposes of this Chapter which, among other objectives, is intended to ensure attractive, efficient, and appropriate development of land in the community, and to ensure particularly that every reasonable step has been taken to avoid depreciating effects on surrounding property and the natural environment. 
    The Plan Commission, in reviewing the application may require such additional measures and/or modifications, as it deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. If such additional measures and/or modifications are required, the Plan Commission may withhold approval of the Site Plan until a revised site plan application, which contains the additional measures and/or modifications is submitted to the Plan Commission, or the Plan Commission may approve the application subject to the provision that a revised application which addresses the concerns of the Plan Commission be submitted to and approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
    Such amended plans and conditions applicable to the proposed use shall be made a part of the official record, and development activity on the subject property may not proceed until the revised application has been approved by one of the 2 above procedures as directed by the Plan Commission. 
    The Plan Commission may also deny approval of a site plan if the proposed development is contrary to the purposes of this Chapter or otherwise threatens the public safety and welfare of the community. 
    The applicant for a site plan may appeal to the Town Board a decision by the Plan Commission to withhold or deny approval of a site plan. This appeal shall be made within 30 days of the Plan Commission's action. Said appeal shall be made in writing on a form provided to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator. The Town Board shall review the available information concerning the applicant's proposed development, the minutes of the Plan Commission meeting where action was taken on the application and consult with the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission members and others as necessary about the applicant's proposal. The Town Board decision regarding a modified or rejected site plan is final. 
(5)  Zoning Permit. A site plan application which has been formally approved by the Plan Commission, the Zoning Administrator when empowered to do so, or the Town Board shall result in the issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Administrator. 
    The start of construction for the buildings or uses approved in connection with the approved site plan shall be initiated within 365 days of their approval by the Plan Commission, Zoning Administrator or Town Board and shall be operational within 730 days of said approval unless the period is extended by the respective approving authority at the time the site plan is approved. Failure to initiate development within this period shall automatically constitute a revocation of the zoning permit. For the purposes of this Section, "operational" shall be defined as the granting of a Certificate of Occupancy for the conditional use. Prior to such a revocation, the Applicant may request an extension of this period. Said request shall require formal approval by the Town Board and shall be based upon a showing of acceptable justification (as determined by the Town Board). 
(6)  Initiation of Land Use or Development Activity. Absolutely no land use or development activity, including site clearing, grubbing, or grading shall occur on the subject property prior to the approval of the required site plan and issuance of a zoning permit. Any land use or development activity undertaken prior to approval of the required site plan and issuance of a zoning permit shall be a violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to all applicable enforcement mechanisms and penalties. 
(7)  Modification of an Approved Site Plan. Modification of an approved site plan may only be made by following the procedures of Subsections (2) and (3) above, so as to clearly and completely depict any and all proposed modifications to the previously approved site plan, prior to the initiation of said modifications at the development site. 
    Using professional judgement and experience and in accordance with the purpose of this Chapter (Section 17.005), the Zoning Administrator may approve minor variations in a previously approved site plan. If, in the judgement of the Zoning Administrator, the proposed modification is not minor or the proposed modification may result in some controversy, the requested modification shall also follow the procedural requirement in Subsection (4) above. 
(8)  Violation of an Approved Site Plan. Any and all variation between development and/or land use activity on the subject property and the approved site plan is a violation of this Chapter. 
(9)  Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 17.255(1)(g). 
Section 17.229 - Certificate of Occupancy. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations governing the review and approval of Certificates of Occupancy. This procedure is required to ensure completed development complies with the approved site plan (per the requirements of Section 17.228), and the requirements of this Chapter as a whole. 
(2)  Land Uses and Development Requiring a Certificate of Occupancy. Certificates of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
(a)  Occupancy and use of a building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
(b)  New occupancy and use of an existing building when the new use is of a different land use classification (a different line in Table 17.053). 
(c)  Occupancy and use of vacant land. 
(d)  New use of vacant land when the new use is of a different land use classification (a different line in Table 17.053). 
(e)  Any change in the use of a nonconforming use. No such occupancy, use of change of use shall take place until a Certificate of Occupancy therefor shall have been issued by the Building Inspection Superintendent. 
(3)  Issuance of Occupancy Permit. 
(a)  Every application for a Building Permit shall also be deemed an application for an Occupancy Permit for a new building or for an existing building which is to be substantially altered or enlarged as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  As a condition of final issuance of a Building Permit, the applicant shall file, subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator, a bond, certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or a certified check with the Town Treasurer in the amount of $1,000.00 for one-family or two-family residential building projects, and in an amount equal to 1% of the general contract price for all other building projects. This surety shall constitute an agreement to comply with this section and security to assure compliance before and after occupancy of the property. 
(c)  If the building for which the Building Permit was issued is a one-family or two-family residential use, the surety shall be returned to the applicant within 30 days after the date the occupancy permit is issued, unless violations of this chapter occur within that time. 
(d)  If the building for which the Building Permit was issued is other than a one-family or two-family residential use, the surety shall be returned to the applicant after the expiration of one year from the date of issuance of the occupancy permit, unless violations of this chapter occur within that time. 
(e)  The Zoning Administrator shall conduct an inspection of the building before occupancy of the building takes place. If occupancy of the building takes place prior to the inspection by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall cause part or all of the surety to be forfeited. 
(f)  If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this chapter exists, other than the violation described in (e) above, the Zoning Administrator shall send written notice of the violation to the Building Permit holder or the holder's representative by certified or registered mail. The Zoning Administrator may cause part or all of the surety to be forfeited if compliance is not accomplished within 30 days after the date written notice to that effect is sent to the Building Permit holder or the holder's representative. 
(4)  Certificate of Occupancy for Legal Nonconforming Uses. Upon application, a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by adoption of this Chapter, or in existence at the effective date of this Chapter (see Section 17.011). Application for such Certificate of Occupancy for nonconforming use shall be filed with the Building Inspector by the owner or lessee of the building or land occupied by such nonconforming use within one year of the effective date of this Chapter. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to issue a Certificate of Occupancy for a legal nonconforming use. 
(5)  Termination of a Certificate of Occupancy. (Am. #2007-05) It shall constitute a violation of this Chapter for any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association, either owner or agent, to do any of the things mentioned in Subsection (2), above, without having first obtained a Certificate of Occupancy. Any Certificate issued upon a false statement of any fact which is material to the issuance thereof shall be void. Whenever the fact of such false statement shall be established to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector, he shall forthwith revoke the Certificate of Occupancy, by notice in writing to be delivered by him to the holder of the void Certificate upon the premises where the violation has occurred, or if such holder be not found there, by mailing the said notice of revocation by Certified Letter to his last known address. Any person who shall proceed thereafter with such work or use without having obtained a new Certificate of Occupancy shall be deemed guilty of violation of this Chapter. Any development that is not in full compliance with the Rib Mountain Municipal Code, specifically Chapters 14 and 17, the approved site plan, or any other applicable code after 24 months of issuance of the permit, the bond shall be forfeited, unless a 12-month extension is granted by the Zoning Administrator (for a maximum of 36 months). Said forfeiture does not preclude other enforcement actions. 
(6)  Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 17.255(1)(h). 
Section 17.230 - Variances. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which enable the Zoning Board of Appeals to vary, in specific cases, the regulations contained in this Chapter. The Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, may determine and vary the regulations of this Chapter in harmony with the general purpose and intent (Section 17.005) of this Chapter, only in the specific instances stated below, where the Zoning Board of Appeals makes findings of fact in accordance with the standards prescribed below and further finds that the requested variance will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this Chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(2)  Initiation of Request for Approval of a Variance. Proceedings for approval of a variance may only be initiated by the owner(s) of the subject property. 
(3)  Application Requirements. An application for a variance shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Administrator and shall contain all of the appropriate information requested in the application form and identified below in order for the application to be considered by the Zoning Administrator as being complete. Incomplete applications will be returned to the Applicant. When the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall file a copy with the Town Clerk. A complete application shall include all of the following: 
(a)  A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the variance is proposed, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds of Marathon County. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and the surrounding area and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. This map and all of its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be shown on the map; 
(b)  A map showing the general location of the subject property within the Town as a whole; 
(c)  A written description of the proposed variance describing which of the specific authorized variances is being requested for the property; 
(d)  A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development. This site plan shall conform to the requirements of Section 17.228(3); and 
(e)  A written, rationale for the requested variance which includes the reasons why the Applicant believes the proposed variance is appropriate and meets all of the standards in Subsection (5), below. 
(4)  Review by The Zoning Administrator. The requested variance shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as follows: 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete. If the application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Section the application shall be returned to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall so notify the Applicant. 
(b)  If the application is determined to be complete, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written report which includes an evaluation of the requested variance and a recommendation as to whether the variance should be granted. In the review, the Zoning Administrator shall indicate whether the requested variance is authorized by this Chapter and shall also indicate whether the requested variance is in harmony with the purpose of this Chapter, the recommendations of the Comprehensive Master Plan and the standards established in Subsection (5) below. 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator shall forwarded the written report and application to the Zoning Board of Appeals for review and action. 
(5)  Standards. (Am. #01-05) The Board of Appeals shall not vary the regulations of this Chapter unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each case that all of the follow standards are met: 
(a)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, size or topographic conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner of the property would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out; 
(b)  The conditions upon which the application for a variance are based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought, and are not applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning district classification. Violations located upon, or variances granted to, neighboring properties shall not justify approval of a variance; 
(c)  The purpose of the variance is not based primarily upon a desire to make more money out of the property; 
(d)  The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by the regulations in this Chapter and has not been created by any current or previous owner of the property after February 1, 1994, the effective date of this Chapter. Reductions in lot area which resulted from the sale of portions of a property and have reduced the remainder of the property below buildable size requirements, or cutting off existing access to a public right-of-way, or deed restrictions imposed by the property owner's predecessor in title shall not be considered to be hardships; 
(e)  The granting of the requested variance will be consistent with the description and purpose of the regulations for the district in which the requested variance is located and will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; and 
(f)  The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
(6)  Reserved. (Rpld. #01-05) 
(7)  Review and Determination by Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(a)  Within 45 days after filing a complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the requested variance. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the Wausau Daily Herald at least one time during each of the 2 weeks prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain a description of the subject property and the nature of the proposed variance. In addition, at least 10 days before said public hearing, the Town Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the Applicant for the proposed variance and to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property as identified in Subsection (3)(a), above. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section. 
(b)  Within 90 days after the holding of the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take final action on the requested variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a written report of its findings and determinations. The report shall include formal findings of facts developed and approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals concerning the standards in Subsection (5), above. 
(c)  The concurring vote of 3 members of the Zoning Board of Appeals is necessary to grant a variance. No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals granting a variance shall be valid for a period longer than one year from the date of the order unless the building permit is obtained within that one-year period and the erection or alteration of the building is commenced within the same one-year period. 
(d)  The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards established in Subsection (5). 
(e)  If the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to make a determination within 90 days after the public hearing then the requested variance shall be considered denied. 
(8)  Effect of Denial. An application for a variance which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial. 
(9)  Limited Effect of a Variance. Where the Zoning Board of Appeals has granted a variance, such approval shall neither change the use classification of the building or premises, nor give it any status as a nonconforming use other than that which it has as a result of the variance. 
(10)  Stay of Proceedings. Submission of a complete application for an authorized variance shall stay all legal proceedings furthering enforcement of any provisions of this Chapter from which the Applicant is requesting the variance, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the request for the variance has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the Zoning Administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. Where peril to life or property are involved, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, or a Court of Law. 
(11)  Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 17.255(1)(j) 
Section 17.231 - Interpretations. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to assign responsibility for the official interpretation of the provisions of this Chapter, and to describe the required procedure for securing such interpretation. 
(2)  Initiation of Request for an Interpretation. Proceedings for an interpretation may be initiated by any of the following 4 methods: 
(a)  An application of the owner(s) of the subject property; 
(b)  A recommendation of the Plan Commission; 
(c)  By action of the Town Board, or; 
(d)  By a request by The Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  Application Requirements. All applications for interpretations, regardless of the party of their initiation per (2) above, shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum of 2 weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. The Zoning Administrator shall forward copies of said complete application to the office of the Town Clerk. Said application shall be accompanied by all of the following: 
(a)  All requests for interpretations shall clearly indicate the part of the text of this Chapter for which the interpretation is requested and the specific questions the Applicant has regarding said text. 
(b)  If the requested interpretation relates to the application of this Chapter to a specific property, the additional following information shall be required: 
1.  A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the interpretation is requested, and all other lands within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current records of the Register of Deeds of Marathon County as provided by the Town of Rib Mountain. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided; 
2.  A map, such as the Land Use Plan Map, of the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the Town as a whole; 
3.  A written description of the reason for the requested interpretation and how the proposed interpretation relates to type of activities, buildings, and structures currently located on, and proposed for, the subject property; and, 
4.  A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development. Said site plan shall conform to any and all the requirements of Section 17.228(3). 
(c)  If the requested interpretation relates to the classification or treatment of a particular land use under the provisions of this Chapter, a series of written responses to the following questions: 
1.  How is the subject land use (in general) in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the Town of Rib Mountain Comprehensive Plan, this Chapter, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted, or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the Town? 
2.  How is the subject land use in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the pertinent zoning district for which the interpretation is being sought? 
3.  Do the potential public benefits of the proposed interpretation outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed interpretation? 
(4)  Review by Zoning Administrator. 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Ordinance. If the zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Ordinance, he shall return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall so notify Applicant. 
(b)  Upon notifying the Applicant that the application is complete, and within 30 days of such filing, the Zoning Administrator shall review the application and shall evaluate and comment on the written justification for the proposed interpretation provided in the application per Subsection (3), above. This review shall also take into consideration the standards for review presented in Subsection (5), below. The Zoning Administrator shall also evaluate the application to determine whether the requested is in harmony with the recommendations of the Town of Rib Mountain's Comprehensive Master Plan. 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the Applicant indicating the interpretation of the Zoning Administrator. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the Town's Comprehensive Master Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report. 
(5)  Standards for Review of Requested Interpretations. This Chapter shall be interpreted in a manner which is consistent with the purposes intended by the Town of Rib Mountain Town Board as noted in this Chapter and the Comprehensive Plan. The intent of the standards and supporting definitions of this Chapter is to protect both individual property owners and the general public from adverse impacts that may result from a proposed, modified, or existing land use. To this end, those called upon to interpret this Chapter shall proceed as follows: 
(a)  Articulate certain public purpose(s) underlying the standard(s) for which an interpretation is required. 
Rationale: Before any zoning interpretation is made, there must be an explicit discussion of certain purpose(s) for which the regulation was initially imposed. Each zoning regulation is intended to protect the interests of both present and future neighbors and the general public. Each standard is developed as a regulatory response to an identifiable potential negative impact. A sound interpretation of any standard cannot be ensured without careful analysis of the regulation and the end toward which it is directed. It is understood that there may be other public purposes underlying the interpretation which are not explicitly articulated. 
(b)  Articulate the actual impact of various proposed interpretations, permitting flexibility in design and prohibiting any interpretation that lowers the protection afforded to the public. 
Rationale: There is a critical distinction between an interpretation which provides a greater degree of design freedom to achieve a permitted land use, and an interpretation which permits a new or not previously permitted use, or which allows a use to be enlarged, or have its intensity increased beyond the degree specified in the Chapter. Design freedom is to be encouraged while a lowering of the standards of this Chapter is to be prohibited. 
(c)  Determine whether the proposed interpretation will ensure a just balance between the rights of the landowner and all others who will be affected by that person's land use proposal. 
Rationale: If an interpretation would merely allow a design solution that is slightly different from the one expressly stated or permitted, and if it would result in a same or greater degree of protection to any affected party (either the adjoining landowners, the public at large, and/or a future property owner or renter), such an interpretation may be appropriately made. Any interpretation which would result in any identifiable loss of protection for one group to the benefit of others is contrary to the spirit of this Chapter. 
Similarly, any interpretation which would either increase the nuisance potential of any use or alter the purpose for which the regulation was adopted shall be considered counter to the legislative intent of this Chapter. Any interpretation which will result in any loss of protection or increase in intensity beyond that already permitted shall only be made if the party interpreting this Chapter has the power to impose additional restrictions or requirements and exercise this power in order to protect the public. 
(d)  This Chapter has been carefully designed by the Town Board to combine maximum achievement of public goals, and the protection of adjoining property owners while providing flexibility for property owners to use their land for a variety of uses consistent with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Rib Mountain. Great care has been taken to balance the rights of competing groups while achieving maximum protection with flexibility and a range of use options. Persons interpreting this Chapter should not substitute their own judgements for the legislative acts of the Town Board. 
(e)  In addition to the Applicant's response to the questions required by Subsection (3) above, the following standards shall govern the decision on the requested interpretation on land use interpretation matters: 
1.  No interpretation shall allow the establishment of any land use which was previously considered and rejected by the Town Board on an application for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, the Official Zoning Map, or a previously applied for appeal from a requested interpretation. 
2.  No interpretation shall permit a land use listed as a use permitted by right, a special use, or a conditional use in another zoning district if the use is not listed as permitted in the zoning district of the subject property (see Section 17.053). 
3.  No interpretation shall permit a land use in a zoning district unless evidence is presented which demonstrates that the land use will comply with any and all regulations applicable to development in the subject property's zoning district (see Sections 17.053 and 17.056). 
4.  No interpretation shall permit a land use in a particular zoning district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses permitted in that same district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses either not permitted in said district, or permitted in a more intensive district in the same zoning district category (see Sections 17.032 and 17.053). 
5.  If the proposed land use is more similar to a land use permitted only as a conditional use in the subject property's district than to a use permitted by right, then an interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned upon the approval of a Conditional Use pursuant to Section 17.225. 
(6)  Effect of a Favorable Land Use Interpretation. No interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specific zoning district shall authorize either the establishment of such use or the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure. A favorable interpretation merely authorizes the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approvals which may be required by this Chapter. These permits and approvals include, but are not limited to required site plans, special use permits, conditional uses, and Certificates of Occupancy. 
(7)  Limitations on Favorable Land Use Interpretation. 
(a)  No interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be valid for a period of more than 365 days from the date of issuance of the interpretation, unless a Building Permit is issued and development is actually begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a Certificate of Occupancy is obtained and a use commenced within that period. 
(b)  An interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be deemed to authorize only that particular use at that particular location for which the interpretation was issued. The interpretation shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate interpretation has not been issued. A favorable interpretation shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or more. 
(8)  Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 17.255(1)(k). 
Section 17.232 - Appeals of Zoning Interpretations. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations which enable the Town to hear and decide requests for appeals from the interpretations of the Zoning Administrator per Section 17.231 as provided for by §62.23(7)(e)7, Wis. Stats. 
(2)  Initiation of Request for Review of Zoning Interpretation. Proceedings for the review of an appeal may be initiated by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the Town affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  Time Limit for Filing An Appeal. Any appeal of an interpretation under the provisions of this Section shall be made per the requirements of Subsection (4), below, within a period not exceeding 30 days from the date of issuance of the interpretation by the Zoning Administrator. Failure to initiate this appeal procedure within this 30 day period shall constitute a final and binding waiver of the right to appeal said interpretation. 
(4)  Application Requirements. All applications for review of an interpretation, regardless of the party of their initiation per (2) above, shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and shall be approved as complete by the Zoning Administrator a minimum of 2 weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. The Zoning Administrator shall forward copies of said complete application to the office of the Town Clerk, and to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Said application shall be accompanied by all of the following: 
(a)  A copy of pertinent items in the file on the matter at hand maintained by the Zoning Administrator, as identified by the Zoning Administrator and/or the Applicant. 
(b)  A written statement from the Applicant indicating the reasons why an appeal is justified, based upon an analysis of the Zoning Administrator's interpretation. This statement shall be dated and signed by the Applicant. 
(5)  Review by the Zoning Administrator. The submitted appeal shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator in the following steps: 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Ordinance. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete or does not fulfill the requirements of this Ordinance, he shall return the application to the Applicant. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall so notify Applicant. 
(b)  Upon notifying Applicant that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall review the application and shall evaluate and comment on the written justification for the appeal as submitted by the Applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall also evaluate the application to determine whether the requested is in harmony with the recommendations of the Town of Rib Mountain's Comprehensive Master Plan. 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the Zoning Board of Appeals for review and action. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the Town's Comprehensive Master Plan or Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report. 
(6)  Review and Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(a)  Within 45 days after the filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing to consider the application. Notice of the appeal and said public hearing shall conform to §63.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. Said notice shall contain a description of the issue per Subsection (4)(b), above. At least 10 days before said public hearing, the Town Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the Applicant; to the Clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this Chapter; and to any property owner within 300 feet of the subject property. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this Section. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the filing of the complete application as determined by the Zoning Administrator (or, within an extension of said period requested in writing by the Applicant and granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals), the Zoning Board of Appeals make its findings per Subsection (3) above. The Zoning Board of Appeals may request further information and/or additional reports from The Zoning Administrator and/or the Applicant. The Zoning Board of Appeals may take final action on the application for appeal at the time of its initial meeting, or may continue the proceedings at Applicant's request. Said final action shall be followed by a written report which shall include a formal finding of facts developed and approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals concerning the request. 
(c)  If the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to make a determination within 60 days after the filing of said complete application, then the request for the appeal shall be considered denied. 
(7)  Effect of Denial. No application for an appeal which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(8)  Limited Effect of a Favorable Ruling on an Appeal. 
(a)  No ruling by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an appeal finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be valid for a period of more than 365 days from the date of issuance of the ruling on the appeal, unless a Building Permit is issued and development is actually begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a Certificate of Occupancy is obtained and a use commenced within that period. 
(b)  A ruling by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an appeal finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be deemed to authorize only that particular use at that particular location for which the ruling was issued. The ruling shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate ruling has not been issued. A favorable ruling shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or more. 
(9)  Fee. A fee is required for this procedure. Refer to Section 17.255(1)(l). 
Section 17.233 - Unified Development District Procedures. 
(1)  Purpose, Project Size and Effect of UDD Approval. 
(a)  The Unified Development District (UDD) provides a regulatory framework to encourage improved environmental design by allowing flexibility in the development of land while ensuring compliance with the basic intent of the Zoning Ordinance and with the Town Master Plan. 
(b)  To achieve the community benefits of Unified Development District (UDD) zoning, it is generally true that the project size should be large enough to allow clustering and to establish a coherence of design. Parcels less that 100,000 square feet are presumptively too small to be approved, but smaller projects may still be submitted and considered. For all projects, the petitioner should clearly demonstrate the public benefits. of the UDD approach over those provided by adherence to the zoning standards provided by this Ordinance. 
(c)  The Unified Development District has no "set" standards or specifications. Developers can propose uses or a combination of uses and configurations of intensity and density of development. Through a process of both informal and formal Plan Commission review and Town Board review and approval, accompanied by discussions with developers and, as appropriate, with other interested parties, a binding development agreement is reached between the property owner and the Town of Rib Mountain. The details of this agreement constitute the zoning controls of the property. These controls have the same legal force and effect as standard zoning requirements. 
(2)  Overview of UDD Review Process. The rezoning of property to a Unified Development District (UDD) is an amendment to the Official Zoning Map. However, as discussed in (1), above, some or many of the otherwise strict zoning requirements imposed by this Ordinance may be ignored or modified through the UDD process. Therefore, the procedure for rezoning to a UDD shall be as required for any other Amendment to the Official Zoning Map under this Ordinance (Section 17.223), with the addition of the requirements noted below: 
(3)  UDD Process Step 1: Pre-Application Conference. 
(a)  The Applicant shall contact the Zoning Administrator to place an informal discussion item for the UDD on the Plan Commission agenda. 
(b)  No details beyond the name of the Applicant and the identification of the discussion item as a UDD is required to be given in the agenda. 
(c)  At the Plan Commission meeting, the Applicant shall engage in an informal discussion with the Plan Commission regarding the potential UDD. Appropriate topics for discussion may include the location of the UDD, general project themes and images, the general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses being considered, approximate residential densities and non-residential intensities, the general treatment of natural features, the general relationship to nearby properties and public streets, and relationship to the Master Plan. 
(d)  Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the process shall be in no way be binding upon the Applicant or the Town, but should be considered as the informal, non-binding basis for proceeding to the next step. 
(4)  UDD Process Step 2: Concept Plan. 
(a)  The Applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a draft UDD Concept Plan Submittal Packet for a determination of completeness prior to placing the proposed UDD on the Plan Commission agenda for Concept Plan review. This submittal packet shall contain all of the following items, prior to its acceptance by the Zoning Administrator and placement of the item on a Plan Commission agenda for Concept Plan review: 
1.  A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11? × 17?, as depicted on a copy of the Town of Rib Mountain Land Use Plan Map; 
2.  A general written description of proposed UDD including: 
a.  General project themes and images; 
b.  The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses; 
c.  Approximate residential densities and non-residential intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious surface area ratio; 
d.  The general treatment of natural features; 
e.  The general relationship to nearby properties and public streets; 
f.  The general relationship of the project to the Master Plan; 
g.  A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed UDD and the location(s) in which they apply and, a complete list of zoning standards which will be more than met by the proposed UDD and the location(s) in which they apply. Essentially, the purpose of this listing shall be to provide the Plan Commission with information necessary to determine the relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility; and, 
3.  A conceptual plan drawing (at 11? × 17?) of the general land use layout and the general location of major public streets and/or private drives. The Applicant may submit copies of a larger version of the "bubble plan" in addition to the 11? × 17? reduction. 
(b)  Within 10 working days of receiving the draft UDD Concept Plan Submittal Packet, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the submittal is complete. Once the Zoning Administrator has received a complete packet, the proposed UDD Concept Plan shall be placed on the Plan Commission agenda. 
(c)  At the Plan Commission meeting, the Applicant shall engage in an informal discussion with the Plan Commission regarding the conceptual UDD. Appropriate topics for discussion may include the any of the information provided in the UDD Concept Plan Submittal Packet, or other items as determined by the Plan Commission. 
(d)  Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the process shall be in no way be binding upon the Applicant or the Town, but should be considered as the informal, non-binding basis for proceeding to the next step. The preferred procedure is for one or more iterations of Plan Commission review of the Concept Plan to occur prior to introduction of the formal petition for rezoning which accompanies the GDP application. 
(5)  UDD Process Step 3: General Development Plan (GDP). 
(a)  The Applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a draft GDP Plan Submittal Packet for a determination of completeness prior to placing the proposed GDP on the Plan Commission agenda for GDP review. This submittal packet shall contain all of the following items, prior to its acceptance by the Zoning Administrator and placement of the item on a Plan Commission agenda for GDP review: 
1.  A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11? × 17?, as depicted on a copy of the Town of Rib Mountain Land Use Plan Map; 
2.  A general written description of proposed UDD including: 
a.  General project themes and images; 
b.  The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses; 
c.  Approximate residential densities and non-residential intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious surface area ratio; 
d.  The general treatment of natural features; 
e.  The general relationship to nearby properties and public streets. 
f.  A Statement of Rationale as to why UDD zoning is proposed. This shall identify barriers that the Applicant perceives in the form of requirements of standard zoning districts and opportunities for community betterment the Applicant suggests are available through the proposed UDD zoning. 
g.  A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed UDD and the location(s) in which they apply and a complete list of zoning standards which will be more than met by the proposed UDD and the location(s) in which they apply shall be identified. Essentially, the purpose of this listing shall be to provide the Plan Commission with information necessary to determine the relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility; and, 
3.  A General Development Plan Drawing at a minimum scale of 1?=100' (11? × 17? reduction shall also be provided by Applicant) of the proposed project showing at least the following information in sufficient detail to make an evaluation against the criteria for approval: 
a.  Public and private roads, nonresidential and multi-family structure driveways and parking facilities; 
b.  Land uses and size, arrangement and location of structures; 
c.  Types, size and location of structures; 
d.  General utility plan; 
e.  Location of recreational and open space areas and facilities and specifically describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for public acquisition and use; 
f.  General landscape treatment plan; 
g.  Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the approximate areas of large development lots and pads, density/intensity of various parts of the development, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio and landscape surface area ratio of various land uses, expected staging, and any other plans required by the Plan Commission or Town Board; and 
h.  Notations relating the written information provided in Subsections (5)(a)2.a.-f., above to specific areas on the GDP Drawing. 
4.  A general signage plan for the project, including all project identification signs and concepts for public fixtures and signs (such as street light fixtures and/or poles or street sign faces and/or poles) which are proposed to vary from Town standards or common practices. 
5.  A general description of building styles, exterior materials and colors. 
6.  A general outline of the intended organizational structure for a property owners association, if any; deed restrictions and provisions for private provision of common services, if any. 
(b)  Within 20 working days of receiving the draft GDP Submittal Packet, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the submittal is complete. Once the Zoning Administrator has received a complete packet, the proposed GDP shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission per the public hearing and notice requirements provided by §62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats. 
(c)  The issues that are the appropriate subject of the Plan Commission public hearing on the proposed UDD/GDP are the rezoning request and the general implementation plan. 
(d)  Following the required public hearing before the Plan Commission, the Plan Commission shall meet to make a determination and recommendation whether to advise the Town Board to approve the rezoning to UDD and the General Development Plan (GDP), to approve it with modifications, or to deny it. The Plan Commission shall be guided in its determination by criteria presented in (e), below: 
(e)  As a basis for determining the acceptability of a proposed zoning map amendment to the Unified Development District, the following criteria shall be applied to the General Development Plan (GDP) - with specific consideration as to whether or not it is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the Town of Rib Mountain Zoning Ordinance and the Town of Rib Mountain Master Plan and its constituent elements, whether the proposed GDP has been prepared with competent professional expertise and guidance, whether the proposed GDP produces significant community benefits that compensate for modifications to normal Town zoning and/or public improvement standards. 
As the key step in its review of the proposed UDD/GDP the Plan Commission shall make explicit findings specifically in regard to the following:. 
1.  Character and Intensity of Land Use: The uses proposed and their intensity and arrangement on the site: 
a.  Respect the physical attributes of the site with particular concern for preservation of protected natural resource areas, and open space; 
b.  Produce an attractive environment of sustained aesthetic and ecological desirability, economic stability and functional practicality which is compatible with the planned development of the area; 
c.  Do not adversely affect the anticipated provision of school or municipal services; and 
d.  Do not create a traffic or parking demand incompatible with the existing or proposed facilities to serve it. 
2.  Engineering Design Standards: Streets, drives, walkways and paths, outdoor lighting, provision for storm water drainage, sanitary sewer service, water supply, or other similar environmental and municipal engineering considerations are based on appropriate standards necessary to implement the specific function and the specific situation, and in not instance are less than those necessary to achieve the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the Town. 
3.  Preservation and maintenance of open space in a Unified Development District; Provision has been made for the preservation and maintenance of appropriate open spaces either by public reservation or dedication to public entities, or by commitment to preservation by a private entity. UDD contracts shall contain specific reference to the ownership of such open space areas and to provision for maintenance. 
(f)  The Plan Commission's findings (per (e) above) and recommendations regarding the proposed UDD/GDP shall be made in a written report to the Town Board. A complete set of maps, plans and written documentation fully describing the proposed development as recommended by the Plan Commission at the GDP level shall accompany the report of the Plan Commission. The matter shall not be considered by the Town Board unless this documentation has a signature by the Zoning Administrator over a statement that the documentation is complete and that it accurately reflects the Plan Commission's recommendations. In a situation in which the Applicant disagrees with certain recommendations of the Plan Commission and is urging the Town Board to approve with modifications, the Applicant must supply documentation of those modifications to the Town Board prior to the matter being placed on the agenda of the Town Board. 
(g)  The Town Board shall consider the Plan Commission's recommendation regarding the proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map to the Unified Development District and proposed in the General Development Plan recommended by the Plan Commission. The Town Board may request further information and/or additional reports from the Plan Commission, the Zoning Administrator, and/or the Applicant. The Town Board may take final action on the proposed UDD/GDP at the time of its initial meeting, or may continue the proceedings at Applicant's request. The Town Board may approve the proposed UDD/GDP as originally proposed, may approve the proposed UDD/GDP with modifications (per the recommendations of the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission, authorized outside experts, or its own members) or may deny approval of the proposed amendment. If the Town Board wishes to make significant changes in the proposed amendment to the UDD/GDP as recommended by the Plan Commission, then the procedure set forth in §62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats., shall be followed prior to Town Board action. Any action to amend the Official Zoning Map (including a UDD/GDP) requires a majority vote of the Town Board. The Town Board's approval of the requested amendment shall be considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed amendment. 
(h)  If the Unified Development District Ordinance as adopted by the Town Board provides explicitly, the area of the UDD/GDP can be segmented. Unless segmented, the owners of record of all included parcels must consent in writing within a single 30-day period following Town Board adoption in order for the UDD/GDP rezoning to take effect. If segmented, the written consent rule applies separately to each segment. Consent shall be binding conditioned or revocable by owners. 
(i)  The approval of a UDD/General Development Plan shall not authorize issuance of building permits. The permits may not be issued until approval by the Town Board of the Precise Implementation Plan. Rezonings to UDD/GDP on the basis of an approved General Development Plan shall revert to prior zoning if the Precise Implementation Plan is not approved within one year from date of filing under Subsection (j), below. Extensions may be granted for cause by the Plan Commission. Records of extensions shall be recorded in the Town file on the UDD District. 
(j)  When the consent signatures for lands in the parcel being rezoned are all acquired by the Applicant and turned in to the Zoning Administrator, the documentation on Plan Commission and Town Board action on the General Development Plan and said consent signatures shall be logged in and filed by the Town and the property shall be indicated as rezoned on Town Official Zoning Map. The date this occurs is the effective date of the rezoning. The Zoning Map indication shall be UDD-GDP. 
(k)  The Town shall record at the Marathon County Register of Deeds office an affidavit of notice of UDD zoning against all real property included in the UDD district. This shall be done on the effective date of the UDD-GDP rezoning. The Town shall require the Applicant to supply necessary property descriptions and to pay all recording and processing fees. 
(l)  No application for UDD/GDP which has been denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of factors found valid by the Zoning Administrator. 
(m)  General Development Plan (UDD/GDP) approval lapses one year after its effective date if substantial development progress (as indicated by the placement of footings) has not occurred. The Plan Commission may grant extensions for good cause. 
(n)  The fee associated with UDD/GDP processing shall be that of an Amendment to the Official Zoning Map plus that of a Conditional Use Permit. Refer to Section 17.255(1)(b). 
(6)  UDD Process Step 4: Precise Implementation Plan (PIP). 
(a)  After the effective date of the rezoning to UDD/GDP, the Applicant may file an application for a proposed Precise Implementation Plan (PIP) with the Plan Commission. The process and requirements for submittal, review and approval of the PIP shall be identical to that for conditional use permits (per Section 17.225) of this Ordinance, and (if land is to be divided) to that for preliminary and final plats of subdivision per the Municipal Code, plus the following additional requirements: 
1.  A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed PIP and the location(s) in which they apply, and a complete list of zoning standards which will be exceeded by the proposed PIP and the location(s) in which they apply, shall be provided. Essentially, the purpose of this listing shall be to provide the Plan Commission with information necessary to determine the relationship of the proposed PIP with the approved GDP, and in that respect gain insight into the relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility; 
2.  Statistical data on all lot sizes in the development, the maximum density or intensity of various parts of the development as indicated by floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio and landscape surface area ratio, expected staging, and any other information or plans required by the Plan Commission or Town Board; 
3.  Notations relating the written information provided in (6)(a)1., above, to specific areas on the PIP Drawing; 
4.  Any and all variations between the requirements of the applicable UDD/GDP zoning district and the proposed PIP development; and, 
5.  The Applicant shall submit proof of financing capability pertaining to construction and maintenance and operation of public works elements of the proposed development. 
6.  The area included in a Precise Implementation Plan may be only a portion of the area included in a previously approved General Implementation Plan. 
7.  The Precise Implementation Plan (PIP) submission may include site plan and design information, allowing the Plan Commission to combine design review and review of the PIP. Design review may, at the choice of the Applicant, be deferred until a later time when specific site and building developments will be brought forth. 
8.  The Plan Commission or Town Board may specify other plans, documents or schedules that must be submitted prior to consideration or approval of the PIP, as such may be relevant to review. 
(b)  When the Precise Implementation Plan submission is deemed by the Zoning Administrator to be complete, the matter shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator per the requirements of Subsection 17.225(4) (including the provisions of findings listed in Subsection 17.225(4)(b), particularly in relation to the approved GDP as specified in Subsection (6)1.-4., immediately above. 
(c)  Following the review by the Zoning Administrator, the PIP shall be placed on the agenda of the Plan Commission per the requirements of Subsection 17.225(5). A public hearing is required at that time. In order to approve a PIP, the Plan Commission must determine that the PIP is reasonably consistent with the previously approved GDP, as well as with sound planning principles as considered in the suggested findings of the Zoning Administrator. 
(d)  If the Plan Commission recommends approval of a Precise Implementation Plan (PIP), complete documentation describing the PIP, and any contracts that the Plan Commission deems necessary for the implementation of the PIP, shall be prepared, reviewed the Zoning Administrator as complete and, when found to be complete, shall be placed on the agenda of the Town Board. 
(e)  The Town Board shall consider and act on the Precise Implementation Plan (PIP) after reviewing the recommendations of the Plan Commission on same. The Town Board shall approve a PIP that is reasonably consistent with the previously approved General Development Plan. 
(f)  Subsections 17.233(5)(h)-(j), above also apply to the processing and consent signatures of a Precise Implementation Plan following approval by the Town Board. Signatures are required by property owners only in the area affected by the Precise Implementation Plan. The affidavit of zoning status need not be recorded at the PIP stage if one is duly on record from the UDD/GDP stage. 
(g)  The filing of an approved Precise Implementation Plan shall authorize release of building and other land use permits to carry out development activities consistent with that approved plan. Any subsequent change of use of any parcel or any modification of the Precise Implementation Plan shall first be submitted for approval to the Plan Commission and if, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, such change or modification constitutes a substantial alteration of the Precise Implementation Plan, the Precise Implementation Plan shall be required to be amended through the same procedures used to approve, file and record the Precise Implementation Plan. If, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, such changes or modifications do not constitute a substantial alteration of the Precise Implementation Plan, the change may be accomplished by approval of the Plan Commission. Such approved modifications shall be documented and recorded in the official file of the Town on the UDD District. 
(h)  Precise Implementation Plan approval lapses one year after its effective date if substantial development progress (as indicated by the placement of footings) has not occurred. The Plan Commission may grant extensions for good cause. 
(i)  Occupancy for the project shall not be granted by the Town until the Precise Implementation Plan project has been completed and it has been inspected by the Zoning Administrator and certified to be in complete compliance with all General Development Plan and Precise Implementation Plan conditions as approved by the Town Board. 
SUBCHAPTER 17-XII: - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 17.251 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Subchapter is to establish the administrative and enforcement framework for the application of this Chapter. 
Section 17.252 - Zoning Administrator. 
(1)  Designation. The Building Inspector or a designee of the Building Inspector is hereby designated as the administrative and enforcement officer for the provisions of this Chapter and is also herein referred to as the Zoning Administrator. The duty of the Zoning Administrator is to interpret and administer this Chapter and to issue, after on-site inspection, all permits required by this Chapter. 
(2)  Duties. The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator or a designee, who in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority shall: 
(a)  Determine that all Detailed Site Analyses, Building Permits, Certificates of Occupancy, Sign Permits, Site Plans, (and their constituent plans) comply with all provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters and land to determine compliance with all provisions of this Chapter. 
(c)  Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary by him to ensure compliance with this Chapter. If, however he is refused entry after presentations of his identification, he may procure a special inspection warrant in accordance with §66.122, Wis. Stats. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters and land to determine compliance with all provisions of this Chapter. 
(d)  Maintain permanent and current records of this Chapter, including but not limited to all maps, amendments, conditional uses, temporary uses, sign permits, site plans, occupancy permits, variances, appeals, interpretations, and applications therefor. 
(e)  Record the first floor and lowest floor (basement or crawlway) elevations of all structures erected, moved, altered, or improved in the floodland districts. 
(f)  Receive, file and forward all applications for any and all procedures governed by this Chapter (see Subchapter 17-I) to the designated official bodies. 
(g)  Grant minor variations to approved site plans in accordance with Section 17.228(7). 
(h)  Institute, in the name of the Town of Rib Mountain, any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator of this Chapter, as provided by law. 
(i)  Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until he has inspected and approved such use or erection. 
(j)  Where useful, the Zoning Administrator, or his agent, may set marks on bridges or buildings or other markers which show the depth of the regional flood; or may set marks delineating the boundaries of wetlands. 
(k)  Request assistance and cooperation from other law enforcement personnel as deemed necessary. 
(l)  Make available to the public, to the fullest extent possible, all reports and documents concerning the Town's comprehensive plan and ordinances. In addition, information in the form of reports, bulletins, maps, and engineering data shall be readily available and widely distributed. The Town Board may set fees necessary to recover the cost of providing information to the public. 
(m)  The Assistant Building Inspector may be designated Deputy Zoning Administrator by the Zoning Administrator. 
(n)  Make interpretations regarding the provisions of this Chapter per Section 17.231. 
(o)  Grant minor variations from the dimensional (setback, height, and area) requirements of this Chapter-up to a maximum variation of 5% for setbacks and height limitations, and up to a maximum variation of 5% or 1,000 square feet for area requirements (whichever is less), so long as the purpose of this Chapter (Section 17.005) is preserved. 
(p)  Upon reasonable cause or question as to proper compliance, to revoke any Building Permit or Permit issued under this Chapter, cause surety to be forfeited, deny the issuance of additional Building Permits or Permits under this Chapter until compliance is accomplished, and issue cease and desist orders requiring the cessation of any violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(q)  Issue uniform ordinance violation citations in response to violations of this Chapter and pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(r)  Upon reasonable cause or question as to proper compliance, cause violations of this chapter to be abated and report the costs of such abatement to the Town Clerk for entry of the amount of the costs onto the tax roll. 
Section 17.253 - Plan Commission. 
    The Plan Commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the Town to the Town Board, other public officials and other interested organizations and citizens. The Commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys. 
    In general, the Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning. Under this Chapter, its functions are primarily recommendatory to the Town Board pursuant to guidelines set forth in this Chapter as to various matters, and, always, being mindful of the intent and purposes of this Chapter. Recommendations shall be in writing. A recording thereof in the Commission's minutes shall constitute the required written recommendation. The Commission may, in arriving at its recommendation, on occasion and of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing. 
    The commission may adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
Section 17.254 - Zoning Board of Appeals. 
    The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power and duty to review and determine all matters relating to requested variances from the provisions of this Chapter (see Section 17.230); or appeals regarding an interpretation of the Zoning Administrator of the provisions of this Chapter (see Section 17.231 and 17.232). 
(1)  Establishment and Membership. A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consists of 5 members appointed by the Town Chair, subject to confirmation by the Town Board, for 3 years, except that of those first appointed, one shall serve for one year; 2 for 3 years. The members shall serve without compensation and shall be removable by the Town Chair for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. The Town Chair shall designate one of the members chairman. The Town Chair shall appoint subject to confirmation of the Town Board for staggered terms of 3 years, 2 alternate members of such Zoning Board, in addition to the 5 members above provided for. Annually, the Town Chair shall designate one of the alternate members as first alternate and the other as second alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full power, only when a member of the Zoning Board refuses or declines to vote, is disqualified because of interest, or when a member is absent. The second alternate shall so act when the first alternate so refuses or declines to vote, is disqualified because of interest or is absent or when more than one member so refuses or declines, is disqualified, or is absent. Other provisions herein appearing, with regard to removal and filling of vacancies, shall apply to such alternates. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of members whose terms become vacant. Appointments shall be made at the organizational meeting the Third Tuesday in April. Terms of office shall commence the first day of May. The Town Clerk shall serve as Secretary of the Zoning Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals may employ other employees. 
(2)  Organization. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for its government and procedure. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairman, and at such other times as the Zoning Board of Appeals may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence an elected Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meeting shall be open to the public. 
    The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each questions, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Zoning Board of Appeals, which is the Town Clerk's office, and shall be a public record. 
(3)  Powers. 
(a)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers: 
1.  To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Code upon which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to pass. 
3.  To authorize variances in accordance with Section 17.230. 
4.  Permit in appropriate cases, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Code, a building or premises to be erected or used for such public utility purposes in any location which is reasonably necessary for the public convenience and welfare. 
(b)  In exercising the above listed powers, the Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may modify any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that end shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of 4 members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is required to pass or to effect any variation in the requirements of this Code. 
(c)  No action of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the effect of permitting in any district uses prohibited in such districts. 
(4)  Appeals. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town of Rib Mountain affected by any decision of the administrative officers. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Zoning Board of Appeals, by filing with the officer(s) from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with payment of a filing fee as may be established by the Town Board. The officer(s) from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all papers constituting the record of appeals upon which the action appealed from was taken. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals and give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and shall decide to same within a reasonable time. 
(5)  Notice of Hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing, cause notice thereof to be published in the official newspaper not less than 7 days prior thereto, cause notice to be given to the appellant or applicant and the administrative officer(s) appealed from by regular mail or by personal service not less than 5 days prior to the date of hearing. For a variance, the public requirements of Section 17.230(7)(a) shall be followed. 
(6)  Hearings. Hearings on appeals shall be public and shall be conducted according to the rules of procedure adopted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. At the hearing, the appellant or applicant may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. Decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals following public hearing may be made either in public or closed session as the Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine. 
(7)  Findings. Findings of fact and reasons for all actions taken shall be reduced by the Board of Zoning Appeals to writing in the minutes of the proceedings. 
(8)  Wetland and Floodland Mapping Disputes. All such disputes shall be referred to the Marathon County Zoning Department. 
(9)  Decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals and applications within 30 days after the public hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the Zoning Board's decision to the appellant or applicant, Zoning Administrator, and Town Plan Commission. 
(10)  Review by Court of Record. Any persons aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the offices of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Section 17.255 - Fees. 
(1)  Fees for Requested Procedures. (Am. #01-08; #2003-10; #08-01) The following fees are hereby established and required**: 
(a)  Text Amendment (per Section 17.222) ..... $150.00* 
(b)  Zoning Map Amendment (Section 17.223) ..... $150.00* 
(c)  Special Use (per Section 17.224) See Section 17.255(1)(g), minimum ..... $50.00* 
(d)  Conditional Use (per Section 17.225) ..... $150.00* 
(e)  Reserved 
(f)  Sign Permit (per Section 17.227) a minimum $1.00/square foot of total sign area plus permit fee of (Am. #13-08) ..... $50.00  
(g)  Site Plan/Zoning Permit: 
1.  One-family and two-family residential ..... $35.00  
2.  All other, $50.00 per acre or fraction of, minimum ..... $50.00* 
(h)  Inspections/Certificate of Occupancy (per Section 17.229) ..... $35.00* 
(i)  Zoning Occupancy Bond Fee (per Section 17.229(3)(b)) 
1.  One-family and two-family residential ..... $1,000.00* 
2.  All other, equal to 1% of the general contract price, minimum ..... $1,000.00* 
(j)  Variance (per Section 17.230) ..... $250.00* 
(k)  Interpretation (per Section 17.231) ..... $150.00* 
(l)  Appeals (per Section 17.232) ..... $250.00* 
(m)  Filing or Recording Fee with Town Clerk ..... $35.00  
+ actual recording fees 
(n)  Bed and Breakfast Establishments (per Section 17.056(4)(l)), per year ..... $150.00* 
* Base fee may be modified by Subsection 17.255(5), provision for consulting fees, and shall also include actual publication fees for any required notices, billed after the notification has occurred. 
** All fractional fees shall be rounded up to the nearest whole dollar amount. 
(2)  Penalty for Failure to Obtain Permit in a Timely Manner. Failure to procure a building permit or sign permit prior to starting any construction activity shall require the applicant to pay double the fee established in Section 17.255(1) in addition to any fines and other penalties as may be required under other Town or County ordinances or as may be levied by a court of law. 
(3)  Fees for Procedures Requested by the Town of Rib Mountain. There shall be no fee in the case of applications filed in the public interest by the Town Board or the Plan Commission, other agency, or official of the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(4)  Payment of Fees. Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the appropriate officer of the Town (per the requirements of this Chapter), and are not refundable. 
(5)  Professional Consultant Review Services. The Town may retain the services of professional consultants (including planners, engineers, architects, attorneys, environmental specialists, recreation specialists, and other experts) to assist in the Town's review of a proposal coming before the Plan Commission. The Town may apply the charges for these services to the Petitioner. The Town may delay acceptance of the application or petition as complete, or may delay final approval of the proposal, until such fees are paid by the Petitioner. The submittal of a development proposal application or petition by a Petitioner shall be construed as an agreement to pay for such professional review services applicable to the proposal. Review fees which are applied to a Petitioner, but which are not paid, may be assigned by the Town as a special assessment to the subject property. 
Section 17.256 - Violations and Penalties. 
(1)  Violation of this Chapter. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any land, engage in any development activity (including disruption of protected vegetation), or construct or use any structure, land or water in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, or otherwise neglect, refuse or fail to comply with this Chapter's requirements. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Subsection (2), below, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses, including actual reasonable attorney and other fees involved in the case. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this Code or any order of the Zoning Administrator shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 and costs of prosecution for each violation, together with all applicable assessments, penalties, and fees. Any person in default of such payment may be imprisoned in the County Jail until such payment is made, not to exceed 30 days. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  Town Promulgated Correction of Violation. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Subchapter for a violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the Town reserves and maintains the continued right to abate violations of this Chapter. 
(a)  Hazardous Condition Caused by Violation of this Chapter: If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of such violation poses a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the violation to be abated. Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred per Subsection (c), below. The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to abate a violation of this Chapter. 
(b)  Non-Hazardous Condition Caused by Violation of this Chapter: If the Zoning Administrator determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of such violation is not such as to pose great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Zoning Administrator shall serve written notice by Registered Mail on the current owner of the property (as indicated by current Town of Rib Mountain tax records) on which said violation is occurring to remove said violation within 10 working days. If such violation is not removed within such 10 working days, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the violation to be abated per Subsection (a), above. Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred per Subsection (c), Below. 
(c)  Cost of Abatement: In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Subchapter for a violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the cost of abating a violation of this Chapter per Subsections (a) and/or (b), above, shall be collected as a debt from the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred. An account of the expenses incurred by the Town to abate the violation shall be kept and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of the violation shall be mailed to the last known address of said property owner by Registered Mail, and shall be payable within 30 calendar days from the receipt thereof. Within 60 days after such costs and expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the Town Clerk shall enter such charges onto the tax roll as a special tax as provided by §66.615(5), Wis. Stats. 
APPENDIX 1: - Detailed Classification of Plant Species 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, plant materials are classified into thirteen (13) groupings: "climax tree", "tall deciduous tree", "medium deciduous tree", "low deciduous tree", "tall evergreen tree", "medium evergreen tree", "low evergreen tree", "tall deciduous shrub", "medium deciduous shrub", "low deciduous shrub", "medium evergreen shrub", "low evergreen shrub", and non-contributory plants. Species suitable for landscaping use and compatible with Marathon County climate and soil factors are listed in APPENDIX 1, below. The Zoning Administrator (see Section 17.252) shall review proposals for, and the applicability of, species not contained in this list and is authorized to approve appropriate similar species. 
RF refers to reforestation. Marked species are native to Wisconsin, and recommended for reforestation efforts by the Wisconsin DNR. (See Section 17.149.) 
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Climax Trees 
(75 Landscaping Points) KEY: *Wisconsin native;  S=Slow;  M=Medium;  F=Fast Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks *Acer saccharum RF Round Rich soil; salt sensitive; oval when young; yellow, orange, or scarlet fall color. Sugar Maple S `Green Mountain' Round Scorch resistant; leathery leaves. *Carya ovata RF Shagbark Hickory Native and very adaptable, salt sensitive, fruit-nut, lawn tree. Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo Pyramidal Very urban; dioecious, females produce smelly fruits; golden yellow fall color. Seedless. S `Fastigiata' Sentry Ginkgo Columnar Seedless. Juglans nigra RF Walnut 
Eastern Walnut 
Black Walnut F Best in public open spaces or lawns; not to be used as a street tree; poisonous to other plants within the drip zone; susceptible to caterpillars and leaf spot disease. *Quercus alba RF White Oak S Round Extremely sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of urban conditions; dry soil; subject to iron chlorosis; red fall color; very difficult to transplant; excellent lawn or shade tree. *Quercus bicolor RF Swamp White 
Oak S Round Very tolerant of urban conditions; moist to wet, intolerant of alkaline soil; tolerates poor drainage; difficult to transplant; yellow fall color. *Quercus 
macrocarpa RF Bur Oak 
Mossycup Oak S Round Sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of urban conditions; dry to wet soil; no fall color; very difficult to transplant. *Quercus palustris Pin Oak M Pyramidal Sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of urban conditions; moist, acid soil; pendulous lower branches; red fall color; iron chlorosis on alkaline soil; lawn tree; cultivar `Sovereign` best for streets. *Quercus rubra RF 
(also known as Quercus Borealis) Northern Red Oak 
Red Oak M Round Sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of urban conditions; pyramidal when young; red fall color; well-drained soil; fast growing for oaks, excellent lawn, shade, and street tree.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Tall Deciduous Trees 
(30 Landscaping Points) KEY: *Wisconsin native;  S=Slow;  M=Medium;  F=Fast Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks Acer nigrum Black Maple M Oval Does well in poor, dry soils; red to bright gold fall color; excellent for lawn, shade, or street. Acer platanoides Norway Maple M Round Shallow root system, not to be used along streets. `Cleveland' F Oval-upright Uniform, dense foliage. `Columnare' Columnar Indistinct central leader. `Crimson King' Keeps deep purple leaf color throughout summer; susceptible to sun scald, bark splitting, and transplant shock. `Drummondii' Harlequin N.M. S Round Variegated, cream-edged leaves. `Emerald Queen' F Oval Vigorous; crisp foliage. `Globosum' Globe N.M. S Globe Useful on a standard under utility wires, 20` height. `Greenlace' Round Deeply divided, fine textured leaves. `Royal Red' S Round Best for purple summer foliage. `Schwedleri' Round New foliage reddish; bronze by summer. `Summershade' F Rapidly growing cultivar; deep green, large, leathery leaves. *Acer rubrum RF Red Maple 
Scarlet Maple 
Swamp Maple F Round Moist, acid soil; tolerates poor drainage; smooth gray bark; yellow, orange, or red fall color; salt sensitive. `Armstrong' Fastigiate No fall color, light gray bark. `Autumn Flame' Early scarlet fall color. `Bowhall' Oval Orange fall color. `Red Sunset' Late, scarlet fall color. `Schlesingeri' Red-orange fall color. *Acer saccharinum RF Silver Maple 
Soft Maple 
White Maple 
River Maple F Vase Hearty and fast growing; moist soil; tolerates poor drainage; fine-textured; weak-wooded (develops heart rots after 50 years, limbs may fall); yellowish or no fall color. `Blair' VF Strong branch structure; storm resistant. `Pyramidale' Upright S.M. Pyramidal Improved branch structure. `Silver Queen' Seedless S.M. Round Seedless. `Wieri' Cutleaf S.M. Shredded leaves, pendulous branches. Aesculus
hippocastanum Horsechestnut M Round Urban; coarse; showy, white, May flowers; litter problem; no fall color; difficult to transplant; pest or disease problems may limit use. Alnus glutinosa European Alder 
Black Alder F Oval Rich or wet soils; produces catkins; possible winterkill. Betula lutea RF Yellow Birch M Round Drooping branches; moist well drained soils; yellow-orange bark; rusty yellow fall color. Catalpa speciosa Northern Catalpa F Oval Poor, dry soil; showy, white, June flowers; coarse; litter problem; no fall color. *Celtis occidentalis RF Common Hackberry M Vase Tolerates alkaline soils; "pebbled" bark; yellowish fall color; pest or disease problem may limit use. *Fagus grandifolia RF American Beech S Oval Moist, rich soil; smooth, gray bark; yellow-bronze fall color; difficult to transplant; salt sensitive; sensitive to soil compaction. Fagus sylvatica European Beech S Round Moist, rich soil; less difficult to transplant than above; several cultivars available; excellent lawn tree. *Fraxinus americana RF White Ash M Round Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage; dioecious; orange to purple fall color; tolerates urban conditions. `Autumn Purple' Round Seedless, superior fall color. `Rosehill' Oval Seedless, superior fall color. Fraxinus excelsior European Ash F Round Jet black buds; no fall color. `Aurea' Golden E.A. M Round Golden, young foliage, twigs and fall color; green summer foliage. `Hessei' Hesse E.A. Round Simple leaves. Fraxinus nigra RF Black Ash M Irregular Deep, rich, moist soils; tolerates wet soils; yellow fall color, scaly bark. Fraxinus pennsylvanica RF Green Ash 
Red Ash F Oval; 
irregular Dry to wet soils; tolerates poor drainage; slat tolerant; twiggy and weak-wooded; yellow fall color; pest or disease problem may limit use; tolerates urban conditions. `Marshall`s Seedless' Oval Seedless; glossy, dark green foliage; improved habit of growth. `Summit' Upright Finer textured foliage. *Gleditsia
triancanthos inermis Thornless honeylocust F Vase Tolerates poor drainage; thornless, as are all the following; pest or disease problem may limit use; salt tolerant; yellow fall color. `Imperial' Round Podless; low-growing; flat-topped; pest or disease problem may limit use. `Shademaster' Irregular Podless; vase shape in age; pest or disease problem may limit use. `Skyline' Upright Podless; tends to form central leader; good golden fall color; pest or disease problem may limit use. `Sunburst' Irregular Podless; yellow new foliage; poor branch structure; pest or disease problem may limit use. *Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky 
Coffeetree M Upright Moist, rich soil; coarse and rugged; dioecious; yellowish fall color. Juglans cinerea RF Butternut S Needs good soil and consistent moisture; fairly good shade tree; susceptible to butternut decline. Larix decidua European Larch F Pyramidal Full sun; graceful, fine-textured; transplant in spring before buds open; yellow fall color. `Pendula' F Interesting weeping branches. Larix kaempferi Japanese Larch F Wide- 
Pyramidal Similar to above, more picturesque. Larix laricina RF American Larch Tamarack M Narrow- 
Pyramidal Hardy; drought tolerant; used in shelterbelts. Liriodendron
tulipifera Tuliptree F Upright Rich, moist soil; unique leaves and interesting June flowers; yellow fall color; purchase from northern source. *Platanus
occidentalis Sycamore 
American Planetree F Pyramidal Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage; mottled bark; coarse, maple-like leaves; no fall color; pest or disease problem may limit use. Populus alba 
`Pyramidalis' White Poplar F Fastigiate Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage; mottled bark; coarse, maple-like leaves; no fall color; pest or disease problem may limit use. Populus deltoides RF Eastern Poplar VF Fastigiate Hardy, fast growing; golden yellow fall color; tolerates drought; brittle; may produce "cotton"; too large for homes. `Robusta' VF Upright Seedless. `Siouxland' VF Larger greener leaves; seedless; uniform in shape; hardy. `Cottonless' VF Seedless; many similar species available. Populus 
grandidentata RF Bigtooth Aspen F Narrow Moist, sandy, gravelly soils; not shade tolerant; yellow fall color. *Prunus serotina RF Black Cherry M Oval Dry soil; white flowers and black fruits in drooping racemes; orange fall color; pest or disease problem may limit use. Taxodium distichum Baldcypress F Pyramidal Moist, intolerant of alkaline soil; tolerates poor drainage; sun; bronze fall color; fine texture; purchase from northern source. *Tilia americana RF American Linden Basswood Linden Tree Linn Tree M Round Sensitive to soil compaction; salt-sensitive; coarse; rich soils. Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden S Pyramidal Urban; moist soil; fragrant flowers; poor branch structure, needs training while young; yellow fall color. `Chancellor' Uniform, upright habit. `Greenspire' Improved branching habit. Tilia x euchlora 
`Redmond' Redmond Linden M Pyramidal Urban; dark green foliage.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Medium Deciduous Trees 
(15 Landscaping Points) KEY: *Wisconsin native;  S=Slow;  M=Medium;  F=Fast Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks Aesculus x carnea 
`Briotii' RubyHorsechestnut S Round Rich, moist soil; red flowers. Aesculus glabra Ohio Buckeye S Round Rich, moist soil; yellow-green flowers; orange fall color. Alnus glutinosa European Alder F Oval Wet; tolerates poor drainage; catkins; cone-like fruits; no fall color. *Betula nigra RF River Birch M Vase Wet to dry, intolerant of alkaline soils; tolerates poor drainage; pinkish, peeling bark. *Betula papyifera RF Paper Birch M Oval Cool, moist soil; white, peeling bark; golden yellow fall color; pest or disease problem. Betula pendula 
`Gracilis' Cutleaf European Birch M Weeping Cool, moist soil; dissected leaves; yellow fall color; pest problem. Betula platyphylla
japonica Japanese White 
Birch M Pyramidal White bark; appears to posses resistance to bronze birch borer. Cercidiphyllum
japonicum Katsuratree M Columnar Moist soil; dioecious; form controlled by pruning, wide spreading if multi-trunked; yellow to red fall color. Cladrastis lutea American 
Yellowwood S Round Moist, rich soil; smooth, light gray bark; fragrant, white June flowers in large, pendulous clusters; yellow fall color. Magnolia acuminata Cucumbertree F Pyramidal Inconspicuous, greenish flowers; pink to red fruits; coarse foliage; no fall color. *Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum S Pyramidal Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage; dense habit; orange to scarlet fall color; difficult to transplant. Phellodendron
amurense Amur Corktree M Round Urban; dry soil; dioecious; compound leaves; corky bark; yellow fall color. Prunus maackii Amur Chokecherry M Round Amber exfoliating bark; does well in containers. Prunus padus
commutata Harbinger 
European Bird 
Cherry S Round Sun; early to leaf out in spring; pest or disease problem. *Prunus 
pennsylvanica RF Pin Cherry M Upright Poor, dry soil; sun; graceful; shortlived; suckering; red fruits; orange to red fall color. Prunus sargentii Sargent Cherry M Upright Sun, well-drained soil; early, pink flowers; red fall color. Salix alba tristis Golden Weeping 
Willow F Weeping Wet soil; tolerates poor drainage; bright yellow twigs; fine-textured; litter problem. Ulmus parvifolia Chinese Elm M Vase Disease resistant; exfoliating bark.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Low Deciduous Trees 
(10 Landscaping Points) KEY: *Wisconsin native;  S=Slow;  M=Medium;  F=Fast Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks Acer ginnala Amur Maple M Round Sun, shade; red fruit; red fall color. *Alnus rugosa Speckled Alder F Round Wet soil; tolerates poor soil; lenticeled bark. *Amelanchier arborea RF Downy Serviceberry S Upright Dry soil; shade; gray bark; white flowers; yellow to red fall color; edible fruits. Amelanchier x grandiflora Apple Serviceberry S Spreading Semi-shade; large, white flowers, edible fruits. *Amelanchier laevis Allegany Serviceberry S Upright Moist soil; shade; white flowers; orange to red fall color, edible fruits. *Carpinus caroliniana RF American Hornbeam S Spreading Moist soil; shade; smooth, gray muscle-like trunks; orange fall color. Cercis canadensis Eastern Redbud M Spreading Sun or shade; purplish-pink flowers; yellow fall color; purchase form northern source. *Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood M Spreading Cool, moist soil; shade; blue-black berries on red stalks; early, maroon fall color. *Crataegus crus-galli
`Inermis' Thornless Cockspur Hawthorn Spreading Urban; sun; persistent, brick red fruits; orange to red fall color; no thorns. Crataegus laevigata
`Paulii' Paul`s Scarlet 
Hawthorn S Upright Heavy soil; sun; double, scarlet flowers in late May; no fall color; pest or disease problem. `Superba' Crimson Cloud 
Hawthorn Single, scarlet flowers; resistant to leaf spot. Crataegus x lavallei Lavalle Hawthorn S Upright Urban; sun; glossy foliage; bronzy-red fall color. *Crataegus mollis Downy Hawthorn S Upright Sun; large, red, early-ripening fruit; yellow fall color; pest or disease problem. Crataegus
phaenopyrum Washington 
Hawthorn M Upright Urban; sun; latest blooming; small, persistent, orange-red fruits in clusters; orange fall color. *Crataegus punctata Dotted Hawthorn S Spreading Moist, heavy soil; sun; picturesque; pest or disease problem may limit use. Crataegus x `Toba' Toba Hawthorn S Sun; double, pink, fragrant flowers; glossy leaves; red fruits; dwarf-15. Elaeagnus
angustifolia Russianolive F Round Dry, alkaline soil; sun; fragrant,inconspicuous flowers; silver-gray foliage; no fall color; pest or disease problem may limit use. Magnolia x loebneri 
`Merrill' Dr. Merrill 
Magnolia M Pyramidal Rich soil; sun; white, many-petaled flowers; difficult to transplant. Magnolia x
soulangiana Saucer Magnolia S Round Rich soil; sun; large pink flowers; difficult to transplant. Malus species & cultivars Flowering Crabapples All require sun and well drained soil. They all possess a high degree of resistance to the apple scab disease. M. `Adams' Adams F.C. M Spreading Slightly susceptible to fire blight; rose-red flowers; 5/8" diam., persistent, deep red fruits. M. baccata jackii Jack F.C. M Upright spreading Slightly susceptible to fire blight; white flowers; tiny 1/3-1/2"diam., dark red fruits. M. `Bob White' Bob White F.C. M Rounded Moderately susceptible to fire blight; white flowers; 5/8" diam., persistent, yellow fruits. M. `Candied Apple' Weeping Candied Apple F.C. Weeping Slightly susceptible to scab; pink flowers; 5/8" diam., persistent cherry-red fruits; foliage tinged with red. M. `Centurian' Centurian F.C. Narrow-Upright Disease resistant; rose-red flowers; 5/8" diam., persistent, cherry-red fruits. M. `David' David Flowering Crabapple M Rounded Slightly susceptible to fire blight and scab; white glowers; 1 1/4-1 1/2" diam., reddish fruits for culinary purposes in alt. years. M. `Dolgo' Dolgo F.C. M Upright-Spreading Slightly susceptible to fire blight and scab; white flowers; 1 1/4-1 1/2" diam., persistent red fruits. M. `Donald Wyman' Donald Wyman F.C. M Rounded Disease resistant; white flowers; 3/8" diam., persistent red fruits. M. `Dorothea' Dorothea F.C. S Horizontal Moderately susceptible to scab; clear pink semi-double flowers; 1/2" diam., yellow fruits. M. `Gibb`s Golden Gage' Gibb`s Golden Gage F.C. Rounded Disease resistant; white flowers; 1" diam., persistent, yellow fruits. M. `Indian Summer' Indian Summer F.C. Rounded Disease resistent; rose-red flowers; 5/8-3/4" diam., red fruits. M. `Mary Potter' Mary Potter F.C. S Horizontal Moderately susceptible to fire blight and scab; white flowers; 1/2" diam., red fruits; 10` height. M. `Ormiston Roy' Ormiston Roy F.C. M Rounded Slightly susceptible to fire blight; white flowers, 3/8" diam., persistent, yellow fruits. M. `Profusion' Profusion F.C. M Rounded-Spreading Slightly susceptible to fire blight; rose-red flowers; 1/2" diam., deep red fruits; bronze-green foliage. M. `Red Jewel' Red Jewel F.C. Horizontal Moderately susceptible to scab; white flowers; 1/2" diam., persistent, bright red fruits. M. `Robinson' Robinson F.C. Upright-Spreading Disease resistant; rose-red flowers; 3/8" diam, persistent, bright red fruits, bronze-green foliage. M. `Sentinel' Sentinel F.C. Narrow-upright Slightly susceptible to fire blight and scab; pale pink flowers; 1/2" diam., persistent, bright red fruits. M. `White Cascade' White Cascade F.C. S Weeping Disease resistant; white flowers, 1/2" diam., yellowish fruits. *Ostrya virginiana RF Hophornbeam S Pyramidal Dry soil; shade; catkins; elm-like leaves; yellow fall color. *Prunus americana RF American Plum F Horizontal Dry soil; sun; suckering habit; white flowers; yellow to orange fall color. Prunus cerasifera 
`Newportii' Newport Plum M Round Sun; reddish-purple summer foliage. *Prunus virginiana RF Chokecherry M Upright Dry, infertile soil; suckering habit; white flowers; yellow to orange fall color. `Canada Red` or 
`Shubert' Shubert Chokecherry Sun; foliage changes from green to purple in early summer. Pyrus calleryana and cultivars Callery Pear M Oval Sun; early, white flowers; late red fall color. Saliz matsudana 
`Tortuosa' Corkscrew or 
Contorted Willow F Upright Wet soil; tolerates poor drainage; sun; twisted branches; pest or disease problem may limit use. Saliz pentandra Laurel Willow M Round Wet soil; sun; foliage glossy, dark green; dense habit. Sorbus alnifolia Korean Mountainash S Oval Cool soil; simple leaves; small flowers and fruits; orange to red fall color; pest or disease problem. Sorbus aucuparia and cultivars European Mountainash M Oval Cool soil; orange fruits; pest or disease problem *Sorbus decora Showy Mountainash S Upright Cool Soil; large, reddish fruits; pest or disease problem. Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree 
Lilac S Horizontal Sun; large, pyramidal, cream-white flower clusters in June; tan fruits.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Tall Evergreen Trees 
(40 Landscaping Points) KEY: *Wisconsin native;  S=Slow;  M=Medium;  F=Fast Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks Abies concolor White Fir M 70' Dry soil; heat; gray-green foliage. Picea abies Norway Spruce F 75' Deep soil; dark green foliage; long cones; pendulous branchlets *Picea glauca RF White Spruce M 50' Moist soil; sun; light green needles. Picea omorika Serbian Spruce S 50' Sun; narrow habit; pendulous branchlets. Picea pungens 
glauca Blue Colorado Spruce S 60' Sun; urban; blue needles; stiff, formal habit. Pinus cembra Swiss Stone Pine S 50' Sun; narrow habit. Pinus nigra Austrian pine M 50' Sun; urban; stout, dark green needles, pest or disease problem. *Pinus resinosa RF Red Pine F 50' Dry soil; sun; reddish bark; yellow-green winter color. *Pinus strobus RF Eastern White Pine M 75' Moist soil; sun; picturesque; soft, green foliage, pest or disease problem. Pinus sylvestris Scots Pine F 50' Dry soil; sun; orange bark; bluish needles. Pseudotsuga
menziesii Douglasfir M 70' Half-shade; flat, dark green needles. *Tsuga Canadensis RF Canada Hemlock M 75' Moist soil; soft, feathery foliage.  
  
  
  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Medium Evergreen Trees 
(20 Landscaping Points) KEY: *Wisconsin native;  S=Slow;  M=Medium;  F=Fast Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks *Thuja occidentalis RF American Arborvitae M 40' Wet soil; half-shade; light green, soft, scale-like foliage.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Low Evergreen Trees 
(12 Landscaping Points) KEY: *Wisconsin native;  S=Slow;  M=Medium;  F=Fast Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks Juniperus chinnensis 
`Keteleeri' Keteleer Juniper S 20' Dry soil; sun; green foliage; large fruits. `Mountbatten' Mountbatten 
Juniper S 20' Dry soil; sun; narrow, columnar form; large fruits. *Juniperus 
virginiana RF Eastern Redcedar S 20' Dry soil; sun; brownish winter color. `Burkii' Burke E.R. Fine-textured, gray-green foliage. `Canaertii' Canaert E.R. Dark green, tufted foliage. `Glauca' Silver E.R. Silver-gray foliage; informal habit. Hillii' Hill Dundee E.R. Gray-green foliage turns purple in winter, no fruits. *Picea glauca RF 
Densata Black Hills Spruce S 20' Dry soil; sun; narrow, dense habit. Taxus cuspidata Japanese Yew S 20' Shade; urban, deep green needles; often sold a T. cuspidata `Capitata` *Thuja occidentalis RF 
`Fastigiata' Pyramidal 
Arborvitae M 25' Narrow columnar form. `Techny' Techny Arborvitae S 20' Deep green foliage, year round.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Tall Deciduous Shrubs 
(5 Landscaping Points) KEY: *Wisconsin native Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks *Amelanchier sp.
(see low trees) Serviceberry Upright Shade; alkaline soil; white flowers; edible purple fruits; smooth, gray bark; yellow to orange fall color; fireblight sometimes a problem. Caragana
arborescens Siberian Peashrub Erect, Oval Dry, alkaline soils; yellow flowers; greenish twigs. Chionanthus virginicus Fringetree Spreading Moist soil; shade; white flowers; dioecious; blue fruits; coarse. *Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood Spreading Moist soil; shade; white flowers; blue fruits; horizontal branches; early, maroon fall color. Cornus mas Corneliancherry 
Dogwood Oval Shade; urban; yellow flowers in April; flower buds may be injured or killed during some winters; edible red fruits. *Cornus racemosa Gray Dogwood Erect Dry or wet soils; shade; white flowers; white fruits; purple fall color. *Cornus sericea Redosier Dogwood Spreading Wet, moist soils; tolerates poor drainage; white flowers; white fruits; red twigs; often sold a C. stolonifera. baileyi Bailey R.D. Erect Cotoneaster multiflora Manyflowered 
Cotoneaster Mounded Sun; well-drained soil; white flowers; red fruits; very wide-spreading; pest problem. Elaeagnus umbellata Autumnolive Spreading Poor, dry soil; sun; fragrant flowers; edible, red fruits; twiggy. Euonymus alata Winged Euonymus Spreading Sun or shade; well-drained soil; corky, winged twigs; pink to rose fall color. *Euonymus atropurpurea Eastern Wahoo Tree-like Moist soil; shade; tiny, purplish flowers; orange to purple fall color. Euonymus europaea Spindletree of 
European Euonymus Tree-like Dry-soil; urban; striped bark; persistent pink fruit; orange to purple fall color. `Aldenhamensis' Aldenham E.E. Bright pink fruit; shrubby form. `Redcap' Redcap E.E. Bright red fruit. Exochorda racemosa Pearlbush Leggy Sun; pearl-like flower buds; tan fruit capsules. *Hamamelis virginiana Common Witchhazel Spreading Shade; yellow flowers in October; yellow fall color. Hydrangea
paniculata 
`Grandiflora' Peegee Hydrangea Upright Moist soil; white to pink flowers in August; persistent, tan flower clusters. Kolkwitzia amabilis Beautybush Upright Alkaline soil; sun; pink flowers in June; shredded bark; leggy. Ligustrum amurense Amur Privet Erect Dry soil; white flowers; black fruits; hedge plant. Ligustrum vulgare 
`Cheyenne' Cheyenne Privet Erect Dry soil; urban; white flowers; black fruits; hedge plant. Lonicera x bella 
`Candida' White Belle 
Honeysuckle Upright-mounded Dry soil; white flowers; red fruits; may become weedy, pest problem. Lonicera tatarica 
zabelii Zabel Honeysuckle Rounded Dry soil; urban; red flowers; dense, red fruits; may become weedy, pest or disease problem, may be sold as L. korolkowii zabelii. Magnolia stellata Star Magnolia Rounded Rich soil; white flowers; orange fruits; finest textured magnolia. *Physocarpus opulifolius Eastern Ninebark Vase Dry soil; semi-shade; white flowers; red, capsular fruit; shredded bark; course. Prunus tomentosa Manchu Cherry Rounded Dry soil; sun; white flowers; edible, red fruits. Prunus triloba Double Flowering Plum Rounded Sun; double, pink flowers; no fruit. Rhamnus frangula
`Columnaris' Tallhedge Glossy Buckthorn Columnar Moist soil; shade; red to black fruits; holds leaves late. *Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac Suckering Dry soil; sun; persistent red fruits; smooth stems; scarlet fall color. Rhus typhina Staghorn Sumac Suckering Dry soil; sun; persistent red fruits; felty stems; orange to red fall color. `Dissecta' Shredleaf S.S. Picturesque Dry soil; sun; red fruits; dissected leaves, orange to red in fall. Salix caprea Goat Willow or 
French Pussy Willow Oval Wet or dry soil; sun; large silver catkins in early spring. Shepherdia argentea Buffaloberry Irregular Dry soil; sun; yellowish flowers; dioecious; edible red fruits; silvery foliage. *Staphylea trifolia American Bladdernut Upright Moist soil; shade; whitish flowers; green to brown, bladder-like fruits; white-striped bark. Syringa x chinensis Chinese Lilac Vase Dry, alkaline soil; purple-lilac flowers; fine texture. Syringa x
hyacinthiflora cvs. Hyacinth Lilacs Upright Sun; white, pink, lilac, purple flowers; early blooming. Syringa x prestoniae
cvs. Preston Lilacs Rounded Sun; pink to purple flowers; late-blooming; coarse textured. Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac Tree-like Sun; white flowers in June; tan fruits; cherry-like bark; often sold as S. amurensis japonica. Syringa vulgaris cvs. Common Lilac Upright Well-drained soil; sun; white, pink, lilac, purple, fragrant flowers; pest or disease problem may limit use. Tamarix ramosissima Tamarisk Irregular Dry soil; sun; tiny, pink flowers; very fine texture; often sold as T. pentandra. Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood Viburnum Vase Moist soil; shade; white flowers in June; blue fruits; maroon fall color. Viburnum lantana Wayfaringtree V. Upright Dry soil; shade; white flowers; red to black fruits; late maroon fall color. *Viburnum lentago Nannyberry V. Upright Moist or dry soil; sun or shade; white flowers; black fruits; leggy; maroon fall color; pest or disease problem. *Viburnum
prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum Spreading Dry soil; shade; white flowers; black fruits; single or multi-trunked; maroon fall color. Viburnum sieboldii Siebold Vibernum Tree-like Rich soil; white flowers; red to black fruits; large, coarse leaves. *Vibernum trilobum American 
Cranberrybush 
Vibernum Upright Moist soil; shade; lacy, white flowers; persistent, edible fruits.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Medium Deciduous Shrubs 
(3 Landscaping Points) KEY: *Wisconsin native Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry Erect Wet soil; shade; tolerates poor drainage; white flowers; red fruits; red fall color. Cornus alba 
`Argenteomarginata' Creamedge 
Dogwood Mounded Moist soil; white flowers; white fruit; variegated foliage. *Corylus americana American Filbert or 
Hazelnut Rounded Dry soil; shade; catkins in March; orange fall color. Cotoneaster
divaricatus Spreading Cotoneaster Mounded Dry alkaline soil; red fruits; fine texture; late maroon fall color; not fully hardy in zone indicated - needs a special site or ideal conditions. Cotoneaster lucidus Hedge Cotoneaster Upright Dry soil; shade; black fruits; orange to maroon fall color; good hedge plant; C. acutifolius is similar. Euonymus alatus 
`Compacta' Dwarf Winged Euonymus Spreading Sun or shade; pink and orange fruits; red fall color. Forsynthia x
intermedia cvs. Border Forsythia Vase Sun; urban; large, pale to yellow flowers; flower buds may be injured or killed at termperatures lower than -14°F Forsythia ovata Early Forsythia Mounded Sun; urban; smaller, earlier, yellow flowers; flower buds may be injured or killed at temperatures lower than -25°F. Forsythia suspensa Weeping Forsythia Mounded Sun; urban; yellow flowers; slender, drooping twigs; flower buds may be injured or killed at temperatures lower than -15°F. *Ilex verticillata Winterberry Upright Wet, acid soil; tolerates poor drainage; dioecious; red fruits. Ligustrum
obtusifolium
regelianum Regel`s Border Privet Spreading Dry soil; shade; white flowers; blue-black fruits; late, purple fall color. Malus sargentii 
`Tina' Sargent Crabapple Spreading Disease resistant; 5` mature height. Myrica pensylvanica Bayberry Upright Dry soil; sun; gray, fragrant fruits; dioecious; semi-evergreen; suckering. Philadelphus x
virginalis `Glacier' Glacier Mockorange Rounded Sun; double, white, fragrant flowers. Prunus x cistena Purple-leaved Sand Cherry Rounded Dry soil; sun; white flowers; purple foliage all season. Rhodotypos
scandens Jetbead Spreading Dry soil; shade; white flowers; sparse red fruits; fine texture. Rosa hugonis Father Hugo Rose Vase Poor soil; sun; yellow flowers; sparse red fruits; fine texture. Rosa rugosa cvs. Rugosa Rose Rounded Dry soil; sun; white, yellow, pink, or red flowers; large edible red fruits; fall color; wrinkled leaves; tolerant of salt. *Rosa setigera Prairie Rose Sprawling- 
mounded Sun; pink flowers in July; red fruits; orange fall color; can be used as a climber. Spiraea prunifolia Bridalwreath Spirea Upright Sun; double, white flowers; orange to red fall color. Spiraea thunbergii Thunberg Spirea Vase Sun; white flowers; yellow to orange fall color; fine-textured. Spiraea x vanhouttei Vanhoutte Spirea Vase Sun; white flowers; arching branches. Syringa meyeri 
`Palibin' Palibin Lilac Rounded Sun; purple flowers; dense; fine-textured; good informal hedge plant often sold as S. palibiniana. Viburnum carlesii Koreanspice Viburnum Rounded Shade; urban; pink to white, fragrant flowers; blue-black fruits; red fall color. *Viburnum cassinoides Witherod Viburnum Rounded Wet, acid soil; tolerates poor drainage; white flowers; pink to red to blue fruits; red fall color. Weigela florida Old-fashioned Weigela Spreading Well-drained soil; pink, funnel-shaped flowers. Weigela x `Vanicekii' Vanicek Weigela Spreading Well-drained soil; red flowers.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Low Deciduous Shrubs 
(1 Landscaping Point) KEY: *Wisconsin native Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaptation and Remarks Acanthopanax
sieboldianus Fiveleaf Aralia Upright Dry soil; shade; urban; leaves palmately compound; thorny. *Amelanchier
stolonifera Running Serviceberry Suckering Dry soil; shade; white flowers; edible fruits; orange fall color. *Aronia
melanocarpa Black Chokeberry Suckering Wet soil; shade; white flowers; black fruits; red fall color. Berberis
thunbergii Japanese Barberry Mounded Dry soil; shade; red fruits; orange fall color; thorns; good hedge plant. `Atropurpurea' Redleaf J.B. Sun; red summer foliage. `Crimson Pygmy' Crimson Pygmy J.B. Low-mound Sun; red summer foliage; 2`tall. Buxus microphylla 
koreana Korean Littleaf Box Rounded Shade; broadleaf evergreen; good hedge plant. Chaenomeles
japonica alpina Dwarf Japanese Floweringquince Spreading Dry soil; urban; orange flowers; yellow, edible fruits; dense; 1` tall; flower buds may be injured or killed during some winters. Cotoneaster
apiculatus Cranberry Cotoneaster Mounded Dry soil; red fruits; red fall color. Deutzia x lemoinei
`Compacta' Compact Lemoine Deutzia Rounded Well-drained soil; white flowers. *Diervilla lonicera Dwarf Bushhoneysuckle Mounded Dry soil; shade; yellow flowers; good bank cover. Forsythia viridissima 
`Bronxensis' Bronx Forsythia Low-mound Sun; small yellow flowers; fine texture; purple fall color. Hydrangea
arborescens 
`Annabelle' Annabelle Hydrangea Mounded Moist soil; shade; white, clustered flowers; dense; blooms on new wood. `Grandiflora' Snowhill Hydrangea Mounded Smaller flower clusters and less dense than above. *Hypericum
kalmianum Kalm`s St. Johnswort Rounded Dry soil; sun; yellow flowers; shiny brown twigs. Lonicera x
xylosteoides 
`Clavey`s Dwarf' Clavey`s Dwarf 
Honeysuckle Rounded Dense growth; good hedge or screening plant. Lonicera xylosteum
`Nanum' Emerald Mound 
Honeysuckle Mounded Similar to, but lower growing than preceding; 2`-3`. Mahonia aquifolium
`Mayhan' Mayhan Oregongrape Suckering Shade; urban; yellow flowers; blue fruits; holly-like evergreen foliage; not fully hardy - needs a special site or ideal conditions. Philadelphus
coronarius 
`Aureus' Golden Mockorange Rounded Sun; white flowers; yellow summer foliage. Philadelphus x
lemoinei 
`Mont Blanc' Mont Blanc 
Mockorange Mounded Sun; single; white, fragrant flowers; dense. Physocarpus
opulifolius 
`Nanus' Dwarf Common Ninebark Rounded Dry soil; shade; creamy-white flowers; red capsular fruits; shredded bark. *Potentilla fruticosa
cvs. Bush Cinquefoil Mounded Dry soil; sun; yellow and white flowers; blooms all summer. Prunus glandulosa
`Sinensis' Pink Dwarf 
Floweringalmond Rounded Sun; light soil; double, pink flowers; no fruits; narrow leaves. Rhododendron x
kosteranum Mollis Hybrid Azaleas Spreading Moist, acid soil; salmon-pink flowers; red fall color. Rhododendron x
`PJM Hybrid' PJM Hybrid 
Rhododendron Rounded Moist, acid soil; shade; profuse lavender flowers; evergreen leaves turn purple in autumn. *Rhus aromatica Fragrant Sumac Mounded Dry soil; sun; red fruits; fragrant foliage; turns orange-maroon in fall. `Gro-Low' Gro-low Fragrant 
Sumac Uniform 2 1/2` height; glossy leaves. Ribes alpinum Alpine Currant Rounded Shade; urban; good hedge plant. Rosa virginiana Virginia Rose Suckering Dry soil; pink flowers; red fruits; red stems; good bank cover. Salix repens
argentea Silver Creeping Willow Spreading Moist soil; sun; silvery foliage. Spiraea x arguta
`Compacta' Compact Garland Spirea Mounded Sun; white flowers; fine texture. Spiraea x billiardii Billiard Spirea Upright Sun; pink flowers, in July and August. Spiraea x bumalda 
`Anthony Waterer' Anthony Waterer Spirea Rounded Dry soil; sun; raspberry red flowers; unattractive fruits. `Froebelii' Froebel Spirea Rounded Dry soil; sun; raspberry red flowers; orange to maroon fall color. Spiraea japonica alpina Daphne Spirea Low-mound Sun; pale pink flowers in July; 10" height. Spiraea nipponica 
`Snowmound' Snowmound Spirea Mounded Sun; white flowers; blue-green foliage; possible disease problem. Symphoricarpos
rivularis Snowberry Vase Dry soil; shade; tiny pink flowers; showy white fruits; often sold as S. albus laevigatus. Symphoricarpos
orbiculatus Indiancurrant Coralberry Suckering Dry soil; shade; pink fruits; good bank cover. Viburnum opulus 
`Compactum' Compact European 
Cranberrybush V. Rounded Shade; white flowers; persistent, red fruit; dense habit. Viburnum opulus 
`Nanum' Dwarf European 
Cranberrybush V. Globe Shade; no flowers or fruits; twiggy.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Tall to Medium Evergreen Shrubs 
(5 Landscaping Points) Botanical Name Common Name Height Form Adaptation and Remarks Juniperus chinensis 
`Ames' Ames Juniper 9' Broad pyramid Sun; bluish green foliage. `Blaauw' Blaauw Juniper 4' Upright-vase Sun; grayish blue foliage. `Herzii' Herz Blue Juniper 15' Ascending-Spreading Sun; silvery blue foliage. `Maney' Maney Juniper 6' Upright, bushy Sun; bluish green foliage. `Old Gold' Old Gold Juniper 4' Spreading Sun; green with gold tips. `Pfitzerana' Pfitzer Juniper 6' Wide-spreading Sun; green foliage; no fruits. `Pfitzerana Glauca' Blue Pfitzer J. 5' Spreading Sun; blue-gray foliage. *Juniperus
communis depressa Oldfield Common Juniper 4' Spreading Dry soil; sun; light green; brownish in winter. Juniperus sabina 
`Von Ehren' Von Ehren 
Savin Juniper 4' Spreading Dry soil; sun; light green; brownish in winter. Juniperus squamata 
`Meyeri' Meyer Singleseed Juniper 5' Picturesque Sun; blue foliage. Picea glauca RF 
`Conica' Dwarf Alberta Spruce 7' Pyramidal Shelter from winter sun; light green foliage. Pinus mugo mugo Mugo Pine 4' Mounded Dry soil; sun; green foliage. Taxus cuspidata 
`Expansa' Spreading 
Japanese Yew 6' Spreading Shade; urban; dark green foliage; needs ideal conditions. `Nana' Dwarf Japanese Yew 4' Mounded Shade; urban very dark green foliage; needs ideal conditions. Taxus x
hunnewelliana Hunnewell Yew 6' Spreading Shade; green. Taxus x media cvs. Anglojapanese Yew 1-10' Round or upright Shade; very dark green; needs ideal conditions. Thuja occidentalis RF 
`Robusta' Ware American 
Arborvitae 8' Broad Pyramid Wet soil; half-shade; dark green foliage. Often sold as T.o. `Wareana`. `Woodwardii' Woodward Globe 
American 
Arborvitae 6' Globe Wet soil; half-shade; bright green.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Low Evergreen Shrubs 
(3 Landscaping Points) Key *Wisconsin native Botanical Name Common Name Height Form Adaptation and Remarks Juniperus chinensis
procumbens Japanese Garden Juniper 2' Creeping Sun; blue-green, year-round foliage. Juniperus chinensis
sargentii Sargent Juniper 1' Creeping Sun; green; or blue-green in cv. `Glauca` *Juniperus
horizontalis Creeping Juniper 1' Creeping Dry soil; sun; variable color-brown in winter. `Bar Harbor' Bar Harbor Juniper 8" Creeping Dry soil; sun; bluish green foliage; slaty in winter. `Douglasii' Waukegan Juniper 18" Creeping Dry soil; sun; steel blue; purplish in winter. `Plumosa' Andorra Juniper 18" Radial- 
creeping Dry soil; sun; gray-green; purplish in winter. `Prince of Wales' Prince of Wales 
Juniper 4-6" Prostrate Dry soil; sun; bright green; bronzed in winter. `Wiltonii' Blue Rug Juniper 4-6" Flat-trailing Dry soil; sun; silvery blue. `Youngstown' Youngstown 
Juniper 18" Radial- 
creeping Dry soil; sun; gray-green; purplish in winter. Juniperus sabina 
`Arcadia' Arcadia Savin 
Juniper 18" Low- 
spreading Sun; green. `Broadmoor' Broadmoor Savin 
Juniper 2' Mounded Sun; soft grayish green; fine textured. `Skandia' Skandia Savin 
Juniper 12" Low- 
spreading Sun; grayish blue. `Tamariscifolia' Tamarix Savin 
Juniper 2' Dense, spreading Sun; bluish green; pest or disease problem.  
APPENDIX 1: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT SPECIES - Non-Contributing Species 
(0 Points) KEY: *Wisconsin native;  S=Slow;  M=Medium;  F=Fast Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaptation and Remarks Acer negundo Boxelder Weed tree. Buckthorn Invasive Crown Vetch Invasive ground cover; aggressive. *Crataegus crus-galli Cockspur 
Hawthorn S Spreading Urban; sun; persistent, brick red fruits; orange to red fall color; evil thorns. *Gleditsia 
triacanthos RF Common Honeylocust F Vase Urban; tolerates poor drainage; salt tolerant; dioecious, females produce pods; fine-textured foliage; wicked thorns; yellow fall color; pest or disease problems may limit use. Lonicera x
bella Belle Honeysuckle Dry soil, white flowers; red fruits; may become weedy, pest problem. Lonicera tatarica Tatarian 
Honeysuckle Dry soil; urban, pink to white flowers; dense, red fruits; may become weedy, pest or disease problem. Lonicera morrowi Morrow 
Honeysuckle Urban, dense, white flowers, pest and disease problem, weedy. Purple Loosestrife Perennial, common marsh plant, may choke out native plants. Rhamnus cathartica Common 
Buckthorn Becomes weak. Rhamnus frangula Glossy Buckthorn Becomes weak.  
The following sources were used in compiling the preceding lists of plant species: 
Department of Natural Resources. Forest Trees of Wisconsin: How to Know Them. Madison, Wisconsin: Department of Natural Resources, 1987. 
Hasselkus, E.R. A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin: College of Agricultural and Life Sciences University of Wisconsin - Extension, Cooperative Extension Programs, 1982. 
Hightshoe, Gary L. Native Trees, Shrubs, and Vines for Urban and Rural America: A Planting Design Manual for Environmental Designers. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1988. 
Iowa State University. Landscape Plants for Iowa. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Cooperative Extension Service, May 1984. 
LIST OF AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP Zoning Map ID # File # Property 
Description From To Date of 
Board 
Action Ord. 
No.   
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
LIST OF AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE Map ID # File # Section # Amendment 
Description Date of 
Board 
Action Ord. 
No. Ch. 17 Rep. & recr. Ch. 17 2/28/94 94-2 17.035, 17.053, 17.056 Animal Boarding as a Conditional Use in Suburban Office District 7/19/94 94-5 17.035(3)(c) Regulating Conversion of Existing Residences to Nonresidential Uses 3/19/96 96-3 17.056(9) Temporary Uses 5/6/96 96-5 17.152 Landscaping Surety 5/20/97 97-4 17.229(3)(a) Occupancy Permit Surety and Zoning Administrator Authority 5/20/97 97-5 17.059 Minimum Design Standards 1/19/99 99-1 17.230, 17.254 Variances and Board of Appeals 2/2/99 99-2 17.056(7)(c) Communication Tower 4/6/99 99-3 17.228(3)(c) Site Plan Requirements - Surveys 4/20/99 99-9 17.256(2) Zoning and Subdivision Code Violation Penalties 5/4/99 99-10 17.056(8)(d) Zoning Regulations for Private Residential Garages, Carports or Utility Sheds 3/21/00 00-03 Ch. 17 Rep. & recr. Ch. 17 12/19/00 00-11 17.230(5), (6) Variances 6/19/01 01-05 17.255 Zoning Fees 8/29/01 01-08 17.056(4)(k) Commercial Land Use 4/16/02 02-01 17.024, 
17.056(8) Definition and Accessory Land Use 5/6/03 03-03 17.255 Zoning Fees 12/16/03 03-10 17.099 Nonconforming Structures 3/16/04 04-05 17.098(1) 
  
17.099 Nonconforming Lot Regulations 
Nonconforming Structures 5/4/04 04-06 17.056(9)(e) Unclassified Uses 7/5/05 05-02 17.024 Definitions 12/18/07 07-03 17.024, 
17.059(1)(a)7., (3) Definitions 
Land Use Regulations 12/18/07 07-04 17.229(5) Procedural Regulations 12/18/07 07-05 17.255 Zoning Fees 1/15/08 08-01 17.056(2)(g)1. Land Use Regulations 5/6/08 08-06 17.217(6) Signage Regulations 5/20/08 08-07 17.056(8)(d)3.b. Land Use Regulations 9/2/08 08-11 17.056(4)(q) Land Use Regulations 9/2/08 08-12 17.114 Wetland Overlay District 3/17/09 09-01 17.213(1)(c-1) 
17.214(1)(c) 
17.215(1) Signage Regulations 5/19/09 09-02 17.024 
17.032 
17.035(1) 
17.035(2)(a), (b) 
17.035(2)(a)-(f) 
17.035(2)(c)-(i) 
17.053 
17.056(2) 
17.056(2)(e)2. 
17.056(3)(b)2., (c)3., (g)2. 
17.056(4)(i)3., (j)3., (l)3. 
17.056(5)(f)3. 
17.056(6)(b)3. 
17.056(7)(c)3.c.1., (d)3. 
17.056(8)(f)1., (g)3., (u)1., (v)3., (x)3. Modifications Relating to Animal Siting 7/7/09 09-05 17.095(2) Side Yard Setback Adjustments 4/6/10 10-01 17.056(8) Accessory Land Uses 5/3/11 11-02 17.190(3)(a)4., 
(c)4., (f), (4) Fencing Standards 3/20/12 12-05 17.056(7)(c)3.c.1. Communication Towers 7/12/12 12-06 17.056(8)(x) Detached Energy Systems 2/5/13 13-01 17.255(1)(f) Fees for Requested Procedures 4/2/13 13-08 17.056(7)(c) Communication Towers 1/21/14 14-01 17.056(8)(x) Detached Energy Systems 1/21/14 14-02 17.213 Sign Definitions and Regulations 3/18/14 14-04 17.217 Temporary Signs 3/18/14 14-06 17.190(3)(a)1, 2 
17.190(3)(c)4 
17.190(5), (6) Fencing Standards 3/15/16 2016-02 17.056(8)(x)3 
17.056(8)(x)4, 5 Detached Energy Systems Regulations 10/4/16 2016-09 17.213(1)(c-1), (c-2) 
17.213(1)(k) 
17.214(3) Electronic Message Sign Regulations 11/1/16 2016-10  
CHAPTER 18 - SUBDIVISION AND PLATTING 
18.01 Title 18.02 Purpose and Intent 18.03 Jurisdiction 18.04 Rules and Definitions 18.05 Interpretation and Separability 18.06 Procedure for Approval 18.07 General Requirements 18.08 Design Standards 18.09 Preliminary Plats 18.10 Final Plats 18.11 Official Map 18.12 Administration and Enforcement 18.13 Application Fees  

18.01 - TITLE . 
This chapter shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as "The Town of Rib Mountain Subdivision Regulations". 
18.02 - PURPOSE AND INTENT . 
(1)  PURPOSE. This chapter is adopted for the following purposes: 
(a)  To promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  To further the orderly layout and use of land. 
(c)  To avoid undue concentration of population and overcrowding of land. 
(d)  To lessen congestion in the streets and highways. 
(e)  To facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public requirements. 
(f)  To provide for proper ingress and egress. 
(g)  To insure proper legal description and proper monumenting of subdivided land. 
(h)  To facilitate the further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(2)  INTENT. It is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and development standards contained in other Town regulatory codes and plans. 
18.03 - JURISDICTION . 
This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions of land as defined herein located within the Town. 
18.04 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS . 
(1)  RULES. In the construction of this chapter the rules and definitions contained herein shall be observed and applied except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(2)  DEFINITIONS. 
Alley. Public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street. 
Arterial Major. A major, high capacity street or road designed to carry large volumes of traffic. 
Block. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways or boundary lines of the Town. 
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to the land. 
Building Setback Line. A line within a lot or other parcel of land so designated on the preliminary plat, between which line and the adjacent boundary of the street upon which the lot abuts, the erection of a building is prohibited as prescribed by Ch. 18 of this General Code. 
Crosswalk. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use and intended primarily for pedestrians, but which may include utilities where necessary, and from which motor propelled vehicles are excluded. 
Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
Developer. (Cr. #93-1) A subdivider as defined herein, contractor, builder or developer who is responsible for contracting with the Town and/or the sanitary district for the payment and installation of public improvements in any plat or certified survey, subject to platting regulations. 
Easement. A grant by a property owner for the use of land for a specific purpose. 
Final Plat. The map or plan of record of a subdivision and any accompanying material as described in §18.10. 
Frontage. The length of the front property line of the lot, lots or tract of land abutting a public street, road, highway or rural right-of-way. 
Grade. The slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in percent. 
Health Officer. That Town officer or employee authorized by the Town Board and qualified to review water supply and sewage disposal facilities and to make determinations in all matters concerning public health. 
Improvement, Public. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip, off-street parking area or other facility for which the Town may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
Large Scale Development. A proposed complete new, large neighborhood unit which, due to its magnitude and comprehensiveness, warrants special consideration by the Town planning agency. 
Limited Access Expressway or Highway. A trafficway, including toll roads, for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except only at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway. 
Lot. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the intersection of 2 streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135°. 
Lot, Through. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along 2 substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a "through lot" both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
Owner. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought to be subdivided under this chapter. 
Preliminary Plat. A map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision, submitted to the Town planning agency for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
Right-of-Way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
Roadway. The paved portion of the street available for vehicular traffic. 
Service Drive. A public street, generally paralleling and contiguous to a main traveled way, primarily designed to promote safety by eliminating promiscuous ingress and egress to the right-of-way and providing safe and orderly points of access at fairly uniformly spaced intervals. 
Sewage Disposal System, Individual. A septic tank seepage tile sewage disposal system or any other sewage treatment device approved by the Town Board or Town planning agency as being in accordance with the rules of the State Board of Health and servicing only one lot. 
Sidewalk. That portion of a street or crosswalkway, paved or otherwise surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only. 
Street. A public or private right-of-way which affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway or however otherwise designated, but excepting driveways to buildings. 
Street, Collector. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the system of major streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and the principal circulating streets within such a development. 
Street, Half. A street bordering one or more property lines of a tract of land in which the subdivider has allocated but part of the ultimate right-of-way width. 
Street, Marginal Access. A minor street which parallels and is adjacent to a major street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Street, Minor. A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting properties and local needs of a neighborhood. 
Subdivider. Any person, corporation or authorized agent who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein. 
Subdivision. A division of a lot, parcel or tract of land for the purpose of sale or of building development where: 
1.  The act of division creates 5 or more parcels or building sites of 11/2 acres each or less in area; or 
2.  Five or more parcels or building sites of 11/2 acres each or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of 5 years. 
Subdivision Design Standards. The basic land planning standards established as guides for the preparation of preliminary plats. 
Throughfare. A street with a high degree of continuity, including collectors, major arterials and limited access highways. 
Town Engineer. That Town officer or employee (Building Inspector, Director of Public Works, etc.) authorized by the Town Board and qualified to examine subdivision plats, make design and engineering determinations and inspect subdivision sites. 
Town Planning Agency. The Town Park Commission, Town Zoning Committee or any agency created by the Town Board and authorized by statute to plan land use or review plats. 
Water Supply, Individual. A well and appurtenances supplying only one lot and subject to the approval of the Town Board or the Town planning agency. 
Zoning Ordinance. Chapter 17 of this General Code. 
18.05 - INTERPRETATION AND SEPARABILITY . 
(1)  INTERPRETATION. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter upon the subdivision of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this chapter or of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(c)  This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. 
(2)  SEPARABILITY. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Board that the several provisions of this chapter be separable in accordance with the following: 
(a)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not specifically included in such judgment. 
(b)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular subdivision of land, such judgment shall not affect the application of such provision to any other subdivision of land not specifically included in such judgment. 
18.06 - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL . 
(1)  PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION. At least 30 days prior to the submission of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall make known his intentions to the Town Engineer and the Town planning agency. 
During this preapplication stage, the subdivider shall consult the Town Engineer to determine any special problems or conditions affecting his property and shall supply the Town Engineer with a written letter of intent and a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. The Town Engineer shall forward copies of the letter of intent and sketch plan to the Town planning agency. 
(2)  DESIGNATION OF APPROVAL AUTHORITY. 
(a)  Subdivisions Within City Extraterritorial Jurisdiction . If the proposed subdivision is located within the Town, but within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of any municipality, the subdivider may elect to designate such municipality as approval authority to which the subdivision plats are submitted. In such event the Town becomes an objecting agency to which copies of the subdivision plats are submitted by the municipality involved. The Town Board shall notify the subdivider and all approving or objecting authorities of any objection, or if there is no objection, it shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and return that copy to the municipality. If such action is not taken by the Town Board within 20 days of the date of receipt of the plat it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat. However, all required improvements in those subdivisions located within the Town and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of any municipality shall comply with the required improvements specified in sub. (6) below, unless the Town Board waives this requirement in favor of the improvements required by the municipality involved. 
(b)  Subdivisions Outside City Extraterritorial Jurisdiction . All proposed subdivisions located within the Town and outside the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of any municipality shall be submitted to the Town planning agency for approval and shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  FILING OF PRELIMINARY PLAT. The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the requirements of §18.09 of this chapter and shall file with the Town planning agency an application in writing for the tentative approval of such plat, accompanied by at least 8 blueprints or other acceptable reproductions, at least 2 weeks prior to the meeting of the Town planning agency at which action is desired. The subdivider shall indicate in his application that the Town planning agency is to be deemed the approving authority as defined in §236.12(2), Wis. Stats., as amended, and sufficient copies of the plat shall be furnished for transmittal to the Director of Regional Planning of the State, who shall forward 2 copies to the State Board of Health, 2 copies to the Marathon County Park Board if the subdivision abuts a county park or parkway and 2 copies to the State Highway Commission if the subdivision abuts a State trunk highway or connecting street. 
(4)  REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATIONS. The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Town planning agency to determine its conformity to this chapter and all other ordinances and regulations in force which affect the subdivision or platting of land. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be transmitted to the Town Engineer for his recommendations concerning matters within his jurisdiction. His recommendation in respect thereto shall be transmitted to the Town planning agency not later than 2 weeks from the date the plat is filed. 
(5)  DISPOSITION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT. The Town planning agency shall, within 40 days of the receipt of an application for the approval of a preliminary plat tentatively approve or disapprove the plat or approve it with modifications, noting thereon any changes that will be required. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider with the date of the tentative approval or disapproval and the reasons therefore endorsed on the plat. 
(6)  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS. (Rep. & recr. #93-1) 
(a)  Preliminary Plan . The developer shall submit the preliminary plan to the Town Engineer to design or to approve the design of streets, water drainage, street lights, water and sewer improvements and any other public improvements. Submission of the design or application for a design for all public improvements may be made at the same time as application for approval of the preliminary plat. Costs for the design or review shall be paid in accordance with §18.13 of this chapter. 
(b)  Agreement . Upon approval of the design for public improvements in the plat by the Town Engineer, Town planning agency and the Town Board, the developer shall enter into a written agreement for the payment for the design and construction of the required public improvement. The agreement shall substantially conform to an agreement form adopted by the Town Board by written resolution. The agreement shall provide that payment shall be by special assessment and for waiver of notice and hearing in accordance with §66.60(18), Wis. Stats., and for deposit of funds covering the total amount of the improvements prior to any notice to proceed or any contract between the Town and the construction contractor. If water and sewer improvements are required, the agreement shall include the Town sanitary district. No final plat shall be approved, unless the agreement for public improvements has been signed by all parties. 
(c)  Assessment . The developer shall be assessed for 100% of all improvements. The method of assessment shall be as determined by the Town Board in accordance with §66.60, Wis. Stats. 
(d)  Required Improvements . The required improvements are as follows: 
1.  Sanitary sewer mains and laters when within sewer service area. 
2.  Storm sewers and inlets. 
3.  Water mains and laterals, including fire hydrants, when within Water Utility service area. 
4.  Streets, both finished grade and paving. 
5.  Monuments. 
6.  Street lighting. 
7.  Street and traffic control signs. 
(e)  Compliance . All improvements shall comply with written standards and specifications prepared by the Town Engineer and approved by the Town Board and any subsequent amendments or revisions of the standards and specifications approved by the Town Board. The standards and specifications for improvements shall be filed with the Town Clerk and available for public inspection. 
(f)  Monuments . The subdivider shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required in Ch. 236, Wis. Stats. 
(g)  Exemptions from Improvements . The Town Board may by resolution waive and exempt the subdivider from compliance with all or any of the provisions of this subsection, both inclusive as to any or all of the subdivided premises. Such action shall be only by written resolution made a part of the minutes of the Town Board. 
(7)  FILING OF FINAL PLAT. (Rep. & recr. #93-1) After he has entered into an agreement under sub. (6) above, the subdivider shall file with the Town Clerk, within 6 months of the date of approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the final plat and at least 6 reproductions thereof which shall conform to the requirements of §18.10 of this chapter and Ch. 236, Wis. Stats. The Town Clerk shall immediately transmit all but 2 copies of the final plat to the Town planning agency. Two copies of the final plat shall be forwarded to the Director of Regional Planning of the State as required by Ch. 236, Wis. Stats. 
(8)  ACTION BY THE TOWN BOARD. (Rep. & recr. #93-1) 
(a)  Upon receipt thereof, the Town planning agency shall examine the final plat, the improvement contract and all necessary certificates to determine its conformance to the preliminary plat and the requirements established in this chapter and shall recommend either approval or disapproval of such final plat. The Town planning agency shall transmit the plat, together with its recommendations, to the Town Board for the necessary action on the final approval of the plat and on any proposed dedication within 30 days of its submission, unless the time is extended by the Town Board. 
(b)  The Town Board shall approve or reject the final plat within 60 days of its submission to the Town planning agency unless the subdivider is notified of the objections to the plat or the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. 
(c)  After the final plat shall have been approved by the Town Board, the Town Clerk shall cause a certified copy of the resolution approving such plat to be attached to the plat and returned to the subdivider. 
(d)  Copies of the resolution and plat shall also be transmitted to the Town planning agency, Town Engineer and Building Inspector for their files and, where applicable, to the municipality within whose extraterritorial jurisdiction the subdivision is located. 
18.07 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS . 
(1)  PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES. In all subdivisions due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural features, such as large trees, watercourses, historical and similar features. 
(2)  UNSUITABLE LAND. No land shall be subdivided for residential use which is held by the Town planning agency, after investigation by the Town Engineer, to be unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or bad drainage, adverse earth or rock formation or topography or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community. 
(3)  RESERVED. (Dltd. #07-01) Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 07-01, adopted Feb. 20, 2007, specifically provided for §18.07(3) to be superceded by §19.16. Former §18.07(3) pertained to the dedication of land for public use. 
(4)  RESERVATION OF PUBLIC SPACES AND SITES. 
(a)  Required . Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a proposed street, highway or parkway or proposed site for a park, playground, school or other public use as indicated on any officially adopted and authorized by State Statute map or plan, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the developer into his subdivision plat after proper determination of its necessity by the Town Planning Commission and the appropriate Town body or other public agency involved in the acquisition and use of each such site. 
(b)  Requirements for Adequate Open Spaces . 
1.  Floodplain Areas. The Town Board may, when it deems it necessary for the health, safety or welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage and sanitary facilities, prohibit subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course. These floodplain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading or dumping of earth, waste material or stumps. 
2.  School, Park and Playground Sites. Unless appropriate provision for dedication or donation of school, park or playground sites has been made by the Town Board in a previous action, such as in the case of a large scale development involving multiple land uses, any required school sites or parks or playgrounds shall be acquired by the school district of the appropriate city, Town or county agency. 
(c)  Acquisition of Land for Public Use . 
1.  Determination of Need. The Town planning agency shall consider all preliminary plats and adopted or proposed studies related thereto to determine the need for acquisition for public use of any of the land included in the preliminary plat. Land may be acquired for public school sites, parks, playgrounds or other public recreation areas or other public purposes as provided by law. 
2.  Referral to Public Body. The Town planning agency shall refer the plat to the public body concerned with acquisition for its consideration and report. The Town planning agency may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency 30 days for reply. The agency's recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time required to complete the acquisition. 
3.  Notice to Property Owner. Upon receipt of an affirmative report, the Town planning agency shall notify the property owner and shall designate on the preliminary and final plats that area proposed to be acquired by the public body. 
4.  Duration of Land Reservation . The acquisition of land designated on the preliminary or final plat as reserved for acquisition by a public agency shall be instituted by the public agency involved within 18 months of notification in writing by the owner of the property that he intends to develop the property. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a sketch plan of the proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the part of the public agency to institute acquisition within the prescribed 18 months shall result in the removal of the "reserved" designation from the property involved and the freeing of the property for development. 
(5)  VACATION OF A PLAT OF SUBDIVISION. 
(a)  Application for Vacation . The owner of a subdivision or of any lot in a subdivision may apply to the Circuit Court of Marathon County for the vacation or alteration of all or part of the recorded plat of that subdivision. 
(b)  Notice of Application . Notice of the application for the vacation or alteration of the plat shall be given at least 3 weeks before the application: 
1.  By posting a written notice thereof in at least 2 of the most public places in the county. 
2.  By publishing a copy of the notice once each week for 3 weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
3.  By service of the notice, in the manner required for service of a summons in the circuit court, on the Town. 
4.  By mailing a copy of the notice to the owners of record of all the lots in the subdivision or the part of the subdivision proposed to be vacated or altered at their last known address. 
(c)  Hearing and Determination . 
1.  After requiring proof that the required notices have been given and after hearing all interested parties, the court may, in its discretion, grant an order vacating or altering the plat or any part thereof, except: 
a.  The court shall not vacate any alleys immediately in the rear of lots fronting on county truck highways without the prior approval of the county board or on State trunk highways without the prior approval of the State Highway Commission. 
b.  The court shall not vacate any parts of the plat which have been dedicated to and accepted by the public for public use, except as provided in sub. (6) below. 
2.  The vacation or alteration of a plat shall not affect any restrictive covenant applying to any of the platted land, unless otherwise stipulated by judgment of the court. 
(6)  VACATION OF DEDICATED AREAS. 
(a)  Parts of a plat dedicated to and accepted by the Town for public use may be vacated or altered by the Circuit Court of Marathon County if: 
1.  Plat was recorded more than 40 years previous to the filing of the application for vacation or alteration. 
2.  During all that period the areas dedicated for public use were not improved as such. 
3.  In the case of dedicated streets, the areas are not necessary to reach other platted property. 
4.  All the owners of the land in the plat or part thereof sought to be vacated have joined in the application for vacation. 
(b)  The conditions established in paragraph (a) above may be waived if the application is for the vacation of a street, alley or public walkway entirely within the boundaries of the Town. In such instances, the circuit court may grant the vacation upon the following conditions: 
1.  A resolution is passed by the Town Board requesting such vacation or alteration. 
2.  The owners of all lands fronting on or abutting the portion sought to be vacated or altered request in writing that such action be taken. 
(c)  The court may also vacate land platted as a public square upon the application of the Town Board if: 
1.  The land was conveyed to the Town prior to January 1, 1853. 
2.  The land was never, in fact, utilized by the Town as a public square. 
(d)  In addition, the court may vacate land in the Town platted as a public playground upon the application of the Town Board where the land has never been used as a playground and is too small for such use. 
(e)  The Town Board may, by ordinance adopted by a majority of the members thereof and in conformity with the provisions of §66.296, Wis. Stats., vacate alleys located in the Town, provided that no alleys located in the rear of lands fronting on a State or county truck highway shall be vacated without the prior approval of the county board of supervisors. 
(7)  Land Divisions (Rep. & recr. #97-03) 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this subsection is to specify the requirements and procedures for the review and approval of any division of property resulting in the creation of not more than 4 parcels or building sites each of which is less than 35 acres in size. Said division shall be made by the preparation and recording of a certified survey Map (CSM). 
(b)  Definitions: 
1.  Divider. A "divider" is any person or corporation or other legal entity or their duly authorized agent who undertakes a land division as defined herein. 
2.  Land Division. "Land division" is the division of a lot or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development where the act of division creates four or fewer parcels or building sites of thirty-five acres each or less in area, but does not include: 
a.  Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order; 
b.  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages, or easements; 
c.  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the remaining lots are not reduced or further reduced below the minimum size required by the Rib Mountain Municipal Code. 
(c)  Applicability and Requirements: Within the Town of Rib Mountain no divider shall create a land division or record a certified survey map in the Marathon County Register of Deeds Office without meeting all the requirements of §236.34, Wis. Stats., relating to certified survey maps, this subsection of the Rib Mountain Municipal Code and all other applicable town ordinances, policies, regulations and plans. To the extent reasonably practicable, the land division shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 18 of the Rib Mountain Municipal Code governing general requirements, design standards and required improvements. 
(d)  Procedure for Approval. 
1.  Submission of Certified Survey. The divider shall have prepared a certified survey map of the proposed division and shall submit said certified map to the zoning administrator with a completed application and the fee as specified in §18.13. 
2.  Preparation of Certified Survey Map. All certified survey maps shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of §236.34, Wis. Stats., and shall show the location of all existing buildings within and adjacent to the parcels created by the survey and the distance of said buildings from adjacent lot lines. All certified survey maps required under this ordinance shall have a certificate of zoning administrator approval letter or reproduced legibly on the face of the survey. Said certificate shall state, "I being duly appointed by the Town Board do hereby certify the attached certified survey map has been reviewed and there are no objections to recording this certified survey in the Register of Deeds Office. This instrument shall be recorded by or the Town's approval thereof shall terminate." 
3.  Zoning Administrator's Review. If the zoning administrator finds the certified survey map is not in conflict with any town ordinance, plan, official map, or other policy or regulation, the zoning administrator shall sign the certificate of zoning administrator approval. If the zoning administrator finds the certified survey map is in conflict with any town ordinance, plan, official map, other policy or regulation, he shall submit the certified survey to the plan commission for their review and recommendations. 
4.  Plan Commission Review. If the zoning administrator submits a certified survey to the plan commission, the plan commission shall review the same with the property owner or surveyor and shall recommend to the Town Board measures that will make the certified survey conform with applicable town ordinances, plans, official map, or other policies and regulations. 
5.  Town Board Action. All certified survey recommendations from the plan commission shall be forwarded to the Town Board for final action. If deemed appropriate by the Town Board, the CSM may be transmitted to other Town committees, commissions or boards for review and recommendations prior to Town Board action. 
Certified surveys approved by the Town Board shall be signed by the zoning administrator. Certified surveys which are submitted by the zoning administrator to the Plan Commission and not approved by the Town Board may be amended by the surveyor and property owner and resubmitted to the zoning administrator. 
6.  Parkland Ordinance. All CSM's are subject to the requirements of RMMC §18.07(2)(c) regarding the "Dedication for Parks and Playgrounds." Said dedication or fee payment shall be completed prior to the zoning administrator signing the certificate of zoning administrator approval which appears on the face of the CSM. 
7.  Improvements. The divider shall be considered a "Developer", and shall be subject to all subdivision improvement requirements of this chapter to the extent reasonably practicable. 
8.  Recording CSM. The divider shall have the CSM recorded by the Marathon County Register of Deeds within ninety (90) days after it has been approved and shall file a copy of the recording map with the Town Clerk within ten days after the CSM is recorded. 
9.  Permits. No Land Use or Building permit shall be issued and no improvement may be made until the approved certified survey map is recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds. 
(8)  SUBDIVISIONS CREATED BY SUCCESSIVE DIVISIONS. Where it is not practicable to require that a final plat of a subdivision created by successive divisions be filed in accordance with this chapter, the Town Board may, in lieu thereof, order an assessor's plat to be made under the provisions of §70.27, Wis. Stats., and may assess the cost thereof as provided in such section, or to the subdivider. Regardless of the type of plat filed, any such subdivision shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter to the extent that they may reasonably be applied. 
(9)  LAND ABUTTING A PRIVATE WAY. No person shall sell any parcel of land of one acre or less in size if it abuts a road which has not been accepted as a public road, unless the seller informs the purchaser in writing of the fact that the road is not a public road and is not required to be maintained by the Town or county. 
(10)  REPLATS. A replat of all or any part of a recorded subdivision may not be made or recorded, except after proper court action has been taken to vacate the original plat or the specific part thereof. However, a replat may be made and recorded without taking court action to vacate the original plat or part thereof when all the parties interested in such replat agree thereto in writing and the replat is in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter and has been approved by the Town Board. 
18.08 - DESIGN STANDARDS . 
(1)  CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS. In addition to the design standards established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, ordinances, rules and regulations: 
(a)  The provisions of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats. 
(b)  Chapter 17 of this General Code and all other applicable ordinances of the appropriate jurisdictions. 
(c)  Any officially adopted plans or maps of the Town or any portion thereof. 
(d)  The rules of the State Board of Health relating to lot size and lot elevation if the subdivision is not served by a public sewer and provision for such service has not been made. 
(e)  The rules of the State Highway Commission relating to safety of access and the preservation of the public interest and investment in the streets if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a State trunk highway or connecting street. 
(2)  STREETS AND ALLEYS. 
(a)  General Considerations . Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and planned streets; topographical conditions and natural terrain features, such as streams and existing tree growth; public convenience and safety; and in appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Arrangement . 
1.  All streets shall be properly integrated with any existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way. 
2.  All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic generators, such as industries, business districts, schools, churches and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
3.  Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography to discourage use by through traffic, permit efficient drainage and sewer systems and to require the minimum amount of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
4.  The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not necessarily be adhered to and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable layout. 
5.  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the Town planning agency, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. 
6.  In business and industrial developments, the streets and other access ways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings; location of rail facilities; the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas; walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian. 
(c)  Access to Major Streets . (Rep. & recr. #92-05) The number of residential and non-residential streets and access points entering a major street shall be kept to a minimum. Where a subdivision or individual parcel borders on or contains an existing or proposed major street the Town planning agency shall require and access to such street to be limited by utilizing one or more of the following means: (as illustrated in the Appendix to this ordinance, which is incorporated herein by reference.) 
1.  Spacing of driveways to avoid crowding access point near street intersections and to have adequate distance between driveways, including sharing of driveways by adjacent land uses so that the total number of driveways is minimized. 
2.  Spacing of intersecting streets to avoid creating such minor street intersections near intersections of major streets, and to minimize the total number of street intersections. 
3.  Control of lateral access (turning movements) along intersecting drives or streets to prevent improper traffic flow that may impact upon the major street, such as formation of traffic queues on or backing into the major street. 
4.  A parallel street (called a reverse frontage road) supplying frontage for lots backing onto the major street, such lots if used for residential purposes to be provided with a screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the major street property line. 
5.  A series of U-shaped streets or short cul-de-sacs entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a reverse frontage road, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the major street and containing nonaccess reservations as in 4. preceding. 
6.  A marginal access street, called a frontage road or service drive, separated from the major street by a planting or grass strip and having access to the major street at suitable points, and with adequate lateral access design as in 3. preceding. 
(d)  Width of Streets . Right-of-way and paving widths of all streets shall be as indicated below: 
Paving R.O.W. Residential or Minor Street 28'-32'* 60' Marginal Access Street 28'-32'* 60' Collector Street 40' 80' Major Arterial 48' 100'   
* The Town planning agency, upon recommendation of the Town Engineer, shall establish the definite paving and right-of-way widths within these ranges for each particular subdivision. 
(e)  Street Grades . The grade of major streets shall not exceed 6% unless necessitated by exceptional topography and approved by the Town planning agency. The grade of all other streets shall not exceed 10%. The minimum grade of all streets shall be .3% Pedestrian ways or crosswalks shall not exceed 12% unless steps of an approved design are to be constructed. 
(f)  Vertical Curves . All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length in feet equivalent to 15 times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade for major arterials and 1/2 of this minimum length for all other streets. No vertical curve less than 50' in length is required. 
(g)  Horizontal Curves . The minimum sight distance with clear visibility measured along the centerline shall be provided as follows: 
1. Major Arterials. 500'. 2. Collector Streets. 300'. 3. Minor Streets. 150'.  
(h)  Tangents . A tangent of at least 100' in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on major arterials and collector streets. 
(i)  Cul-de-sacs or Dead-End Streets . 
1.  The use of cul-de-sacs in street layouts shall be limited to portions of developments which due to unusual shape, size, location or topography may better be served by cul-de-sacs than by continuous streets. A layout making unrestricted use of cul-de-sacs or courts will not be acceptable. 
2.  A cul-de-sac shall not be longer than 500' measured on its centerline unless, by reason of topography or other circumstances beyond the control of the developer the Town planning agency, upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer, finds a greater length to be justifiable. 
3.  The diameter of a cul-de-sac turn around, measured as the outside right-of-way, shall not be less than 100'. 
(j)  Half Streets . Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid half streets. Where a half street is adjacent to a new subdivision the other half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. Where a new subdivision abuts an existing street of inadequate right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width may be required to be dedicated by the subdivider to meet the requirements of this section. 
(k)  Street Intersections . 
1.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of 2 new streets at an angle of less than 70° shall not be acceptable. Not more than 2 streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the Town planning agency. 
2.  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerlines offsets of less than 125' shall not be permitted. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. 
3.  Where the grade of any street at the approach of an intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than 4% grade a distance of 50' measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
4.  Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation, including trees, in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide adequate sight distance. 
(l)  Alleys . 
1.  Alleys shall be provided in all business, commercial and industrial districts, except that the Town planning agency may waive this requirement where other definite and suitable provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed and in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 17 of this General Code. 
2.  The width of alleys shall be not less than 24'. 
3.  Dead-end alleys are prohibited, except under very unusual circumstances, and crooked and "T" alleys shall be discouraged. Where dead-end alleys are unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead end. 
4.  Alleys shall not be approved in residential areas. 
(3)  EASEMENTS. 
(a)  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where required by the Town planning agency, such easements to be at least 10' wide. 
(b)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse and of such width or construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
(4)  BLOCKS. 
(a)  Residential Blocks . 
1.  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for 2 tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads or waterways. 
2.  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1,800' nor be less than 400' in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials and collector streets shall be not less than 1,000' in length. 
3.  Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 10' wide may be required by the Town planning agency through the center of blocks more than 900' long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. 
(b)  Nonresidential Blocks . Blocks designed for business, commercial or industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined suitable by the Town planning agency for the prospective use. 
(5)  LOTS. 
(a)  In general, the size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Ch. 17 of this General Code. 
(b)  All plats shall indicate building setback lines or yards equivalent to those required in Ch. 17 of this General Code. 
(c)  Residential lots to be served by private or individual sewerage disposal facilities shall comply with the rules of the State Board of Health. 
(d)  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type and use and development contemplated as established in Ch. 17 of this General Code. 
(e)  Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit full building setback as required in Ch. 17 of this General Code. 
(f)  Every lot shall front on or abut a public street. Lots with access only to private drives or streets shall be permitted only with the approval of the Town planning agency. 
(g)  Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. 
(h)  Lots at right angles to each other shall be avoided wherever possible, especially in residential areas. 
(i)  In case a tract is subdivided into parcels containing one or more acres, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the resubdivision of any parcels into smaller lots in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(j)  Lot lines shall follow Town boundary lines, whenever practicable, rather than cross them. 
(k)  Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided, except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
18.09 - PRELIMINARY PLATS . 
Every proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the Town planning agency for tentative or conditional approval in the form of a preliminary plat prior to the submission of a final plat. The preliminary plat is not intended to be a final plat and must be prepared in such form as not to be confused with a final plat. Its purpose is to show graphically all facts needed to enable the Town planning agency and other public bodies to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a qualified surveyor, trained and experienced in the layout of subdivisions. The following graphic and descriptive items are normally required to be shown on the preliminary plat and the accompanying application for approval. The lack of information under any item specified herein or improper information supplied by the applicant shall be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plat. 
(1)  APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL. Written application by the owner or his agent for approval on forms furnished by the Town planning agency shall accompany each preliminary plat and contain the following information: 
(a)  Name for File Identification . 
1.  Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision. 
2.  Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in the county. 
3.  Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is commonly the name by which the property is locally known.) 
(b)  Location and Description of Property . Location and description of property by government lot, section, township, range and county. 
(c)  Basic Facts and Proposals Pertaining to the Property . 
1.  Size of tract in acres or of existing lots, if any, in square feet. 
2.  Existing zoning classification of property and any rezoning proposed to be requested. 
3.  Number of lots proposed in subdivision. 
4.  Area of lots proposed; minimum, average and maximum. 
5.  Proposed sanitary facilities; water and sewage disposal. 
6.  Any other proposals, such as parcels of land intended to be dedicated, conveyed or reserved for public use, and the conditions proposed for such disposal and use. 
(d)  Information as to Ownership, Preparation of Plat and Submission Thereof . 
1.  Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner or agent of property and citation of last instrument conveying title to each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor, grantee, date and land records reference. 
2.  Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
3.  Existing covenants on the property, if any. 
4.  Name and address, including telephone number, of technician responsible for subdivision design and surveyor responsible for surveys shown on preliminary plat as submitted. 
(2)  THE DRAWING. The preliminary plat shall be drawn with waterproof, nonfading black ink or legibly drawn with pencil on tracing cloth or tracing paper of good quality at a scale of not more than 100' to the inch and shall show correctly on its face the following information: 
(a)  Date, scale and north point. 
(b)  The proposed subdivision name which must be same as that specified in the application. 
(c)  Name and address of the owner, subdivider and the surveyor preparing the plat. 
(d)  Location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter section, section, township, range and county. 
(e)  A vicinity sketch or small scale drawing of the section or government subdivision of the section in which the subdivision lies with the location of the subdivision indicated thereon. 
(f)  The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision. Dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. 
(g)  Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
(h)  Zoning on and adjacent to the subdivision. 
(i)  Location, width and names of all existing and platted streets, alleys and other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, bridges and other pertinent data as determined by the Town planning agency. 
(j)  The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such lakes or streams. All elevations shall be referred to the Town datum plane. 
(k)  If the subdivision borders a lake, river or stream, the distances and bearings of a meander line established not less than 20' back from the ordinary high watermark of such waterway. 
(l)  Layout, width and grades of all new streets and rights-of-way, including alleys, highways, easements for sewers and water mains and other public utilities. 
(m)  Existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto. The location and size of the nearest water main and sanitary and storm sewers are to be indicated in a general way upon the preliminary plat. 
(n)  Approximate dimensions and areas of lots. 
(o)  Proposed building setback lines. 
(p)  Approximate radii of all curves and length of tangents and central angles on all streets. 
(q)  Approximate location and area of all property proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision with the conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservation. 
(r)  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than 5' or at more frequent intervals if required by the Town planning agency for land of unusual topography. 
(s)  Street profile plans for all existing and proposed streets containing information specified by the Town planning agency. 
18.10 - FINAL PLATS . 
(1)  FINAL PLAT MAY CONSTITUTE A PORTION OF APPROVED PRELIMINARY PLAT. A final plat may constitute only a portion of the approved preliminary plat, provided that the public improvements to be constructed in the area covered by the plat are sufficient by and of themselves to accomplish a proper development and to provide adequately for the health, safety and convenience of the proposed residents therein and for adequate access to contiguous areas. 
(2)  APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL. Written application by the owner or his agent for approval on forms furnished by the Town planning agency shall accompany each final plat and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name of subdivision, which is subject to approval of the Town Board and should be cleared with the Town planning agency prior to submission of the plat, and description of blocks and lots included on plat. 
(b)  Location of subdivision by government lot, section, township, range and county. 
(c)  Name, date of approval and file number of the preliminary plat upon which the final plat is based. 
(d)  Zoning classification of the property. 
(e)  Total number of lots and/or parcels included on the plat. 
(f)  Total area shown on the plat, including streets, and total area dedicated to public use, if any. 
(g)  Existing or proposed covenants, if any. 
(h)  Name and address, including telephone number, of the owner or his agent and the surveyor who prepared the plat. 
(3)  THE DRAWING. The final plat shall be drawn with waterproof, nonfading black ink at a scale of not more than 100' to the inch, on muslin backed white paper 22" wide by 30" long. When more than one sheet is used for any plat, each sheet shall be numbered consecutively and shall contain a notation giving the total number of sheets in the plat and showing the relation of that sheet to the other sheets and each sheet shall bear the name of the subdivision. Each plat shall show correctly on its face the following information: 
(a)  Map and Engineering Information . 
1.  Date, scale and north point. 
2.  The exterior boundaries of the land surveyed and divided. 
3.  All monuments erected, corners and other points established in the field in their proper places. The material of which the monuments, corners or other points are made shall be noted at the representation thereof or by legend, except lot corners need not be shown. The legend for metal monuments shall indicate the kind of metal, the diameter, length and weight per lineal foot of the monuments. 
4.  The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries, the boundary lines of all blocks, public grounds, streets and alleys and all lot lines, except that when the lines in any tier of lots are parallel it shall be sufficient to mark the bearings of the outer lines on one tier thereof. Easements shall be shown by centerline and width. 
5.  Blocks, if designated, shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively through the several additions. 
6.  All lots in each block consecutively numbered. Outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or lettered, outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block. 
7.  The exact width of all easements, streets and alleys. 
8.  All lake or stream shore meander lines established by the surveyor in accordance with §18.06(6)(e) of this chapter, the distances and bearings thereof and the distance between the point of intersection of such meander lines with lot lines and the ordinary high watermark. 
9.  The centerline of all streets. 
10.  The number of degrees and minutes in all exterior boundary and block angles. When such angles are between a curve and its tangent, the angle shown shall be that between the tangent and the main chord of the curve. When between curves of different radii, the angle shown shall be that between the main chords. 
11.  When a street is on a circular curve, the main chords of the right-of-way lines shall be drawn as dotted lines in their proper places and either on them or in an adjoining table shall be noted their bearings and lengths, the radius of the circle of which the curve is a part, the central angle subtended and the tangent bearing at either the point of curve or point of tangency. The lot lines may be shown in the same manner or by bearings and distances. When a circular curve of 30' radius or less is used to round off the intersection between 2 straight lines, it shall be tangent to both straight lines. It shall be sufficient to show on the plat the radius of the curve and the tangent distances from the points of curvature to the point of intersection of the straight lines. 
12.  When strict compliance with a provision of this section will entail undue or unnecessary difficulty or tend to render the plat more difficult to read and when the information on the plat is sufficient for the exact retracement of the measurements and bearings or other necessary dimensions, the Town planning agency, upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer, may waive such strict compliance. 
(b)  Name, Location and Position . The name of the subdivision shall be printed on the plat in prominent letters and the following information relating to the position and location of the subdivision shall be shown thereon: 
1.  The location of the subdivision by government lot, recorded private claim, quarter section, section, township, range and county noted immediately under the name given the subdivision. 
2.  The exact location of the subdivision indicated by distances and bearings with reference to a corner or corners established in the U.S. public land survey. 
3.  A small drawing of the section or governmental subdivision of the section in which the subdivision lies with the location of the subdivision indicated thereon. This drawing shall be oriented on the sheet in the same direction as the main drawing. 
4.  Where provisions are made for access from any lake or stream, the plat shall show the area over which access is provided to the lake or stream, together with a small scale drawing clearly indicating the location of the subdivision in relation to the lake or stream and the location of the area over which access is provided. 
5.  The names of adjoining streets, State highways and subdivisions shown in their proper location and underscored by a dotted line. 
6.  Abutting street and State highway lines of adjoining plats shown in their proper location by dotted lines. The width of these streets and highways shall be given also. 
(c)  Roads and Public Spaces . 
1.  The name of each road or street in the plat shall be printed thereon in prominent letters. 
2.  All lands dedicated to public use, except roads and streets, shall be clearly marked "Dedicated to the Public". 
3.  All roads or streets shown on the plat which are not dedicated to public use shall be clearly marked "Private Road" or "Private Street" or "Private Way". 
(d)  Site Conditions and Topography . 
1.  All existing buildings. 
2.  All watercourses, drainage ditches and other existing features pertinent to proper subdivision. 
3.  The water elevations of adjoining lakes, rivers or streams at the date of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such lakes, rivers and streams. All elevations shall be referred to the Town datum plane. 
(4)  REQUIRED CERTIFICATE. To entitle a final plat to be recorded, the following certificates, lettered or printed legibly with black durable ink or typed legibly with black ribbon shall appear on it: 
(a)  Surveyor's Certificate . The certificate of the surveyor who surveyed, divided and mapped the land shall accompany the plat, supplying the following information, which shall have the same force and effect as an affidavit: 
1.  By whose direction he made the survey, subdivision and plat of the land described on the plat. 
2.  A clear and concise description of the land surveyed, divided and mapped by government lot, recorded private claim, quarter section, section, township, range and county and by metes and bounds commencing with some corner marked and established by the U.S. public land survey or, if such land is located in a recorded subdivision or recorded addition thereto, then by the number or other description of the lot, block or subdivision thereof, which has previously been tied to a corner marked and established by the U.S. public land survey. 
3.  A statement that the plat is a correct representation of all the exterior boundaries of the land surveyed and the subdivision of it. 
4.  A statement that he has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter and Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., in surveying, dividing and mapping of the land. 
(b)  Owner's Certificate . 
1.  A certificate by the owner of the subdivided land shall accompany the plat and shall take substantially the following form. This certificate shall be signed by the owner, his wife and all persons holding an interest in the fee of record or by being in possession and, if the land is mortgaged, by the mortgagee of record. 
As owner, I hereby certify that I caused the land described on this plat to be surveyed, divided, mapped and dedicated as represented on the plat. I also certify that this plat is required, by §236.10 or 236.12, Wis. Stats., to be submitted to the following for approval or objection: (list of governing bodies required to approve or allowed to object to the plat). 
2.  In addition to the certificate required in subpar. 1. above, the owner may be required to furnish an abstract of title certified to date of submission for approval or, at the option of the owner, a policy of title insurance or certificate of title from an abstract company for examination in order to ascertain whether all parties in interest have signed the owner's certificate on the plat. 
(c)  Tax Certificate . Also accompanying the plat, there shall be a certificate of the Town Clerk and a certificate of the county treasurer stating that there are no unpaid taxes or unpaid special assessments on any of the lands included in the plat. 
18.11 - OFFICIAL MAP . 
(1)  ADOPTION. There is hereby established and adopted an official map of the Town. 
(2)  OFFICIAL MAP. (Am. #09-03) The official map shall be dated June 16, 2009; shall be designated "Town of Rib Mountain Official Map"; shall be in the custody of the Town Clerk and shall be filed at the Town Hall. Such official map may be combined with the zoning map of the Town. 
(3)  FILING. The Town Clerk shall file a certificate with the Register of Deeds for Marathon County, stating that the Town has adopted an official map. 
18.12 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT . 
(1)  ORGANIZATION. The following offices of the government of the Town are concerned with the administration of this chapter: 
(a)  Town Board . The Town Board is vested with the following responsibilities in regard to subdivision control: 
1.  Approval or disapproval of all final plats referred to it by the Town planning agency. 
2.  Approval or disapproval of all variations and exceptions recommended by the Town planning agency. 
3.  Amend the regulations of this chapter when found necessary and desirable as hereinafter provided. 
4.  Institute appropriate proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Town Planning Agency . The Town planning agency shall administer the provisions of this chapter and, in addition thereto and in furtherance of such authority, shall: 
1.  Forward with recommendations to the Town Board all final plats. 
2.  Make all other determinations required by the regulations herein. 
(c)  Town Engineer . The Town Engineer is hereby vested with the duty and responsibility of reviewing all preliminary subdivision plats and making determinations in the areas of design standards and engineering specifications as stipulated herein. His determinations and recommendations shall be forwarded to the Town planning agency. The Town Engineer shall, in addition, in furtherance of such authority: 
1.  Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including amendments thereto. 
2.  Receive and file all preliminary plats and final plats, together with applications. 
3.  Forward copies of the preliminary plat to other appropriate offices and agencies for their recommendations and report. 
4.  Receive and file all final plats and check their compliance with the preliminary plat. 
(2)  ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  No owner, or his agent, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the Town Board in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and filed with the Register of Deeds of Marathon County. 
(b)  The subdivision of any lot or parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description with the intent of evading this chapter for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease shall be subject to all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the regulations of this chapter. 
(d)  No plat of subdivision shall be approved which does not comply with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  Hardships . Where the Town planning agency finds that extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may recommend variations or exceptions to the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variation or exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter and further provided that the Town planning agency shall not recommend variations or exceptions unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
1.  The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located. 
2.  The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property. 
3.  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out. 
4.  The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property. 
(b)  Large Scale Developments . The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of large scale developments when the Town planning agency finds that a plan and program for a new neighborhood unit provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and public utilities service needs of the tract when fully developed and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity and achievement of the plan. 
(c)  Conditions . In recommending variations and exceptions, the Town planning agency may require such conditions as will in its judgment secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Recommendations . Such variations and exceptions as may be recommended by the Town planning agency shall be forwarded to the Town Board in writing, substantiating the recommended variations and/or exceptions. The Town Board may approve such variations or exceptions from the requirements of this chapter in specific cases as listed on the final plat, which in its opinion do not adversely affect any land use or transportation plans or the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(4)  APPEALS. Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve a plat may appeal therefrom within 30 days of notification of such objection or rejection of the plat by presenting to a court of record a petition for a writ of certiorari directed to the approving authority or objecting agency as provided in §62.23(7)(e)10. to 15., Wis. Stats. The court shall direct that the plat be approved if it finds that the action of the approving authority or objecting agency is arbitrary, unreasonable or discriminatory. 
(5)  AMENDMENTS. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare, the Town Board may from time to time amend the regulations imposed by this chapter. 
The Town Board shall hold public hearings on proposed amendments. Notice of such hearings shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town once a week for 3 weeks preceding the hearing. 
(6)  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. (Am. #99-10) 
(a)  Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, omits or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution and all applicable assessments, penalties, and fees. Any person in default of such payment may be imprisoned in the County Jail until such payment is made, not to exceed 30 days for each violation. Each day, after one week from the date of conviction, that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The remedies provided by §§236.30, 236.31, 236.32 and 235.335, Wis. Stats., shall also be available to the Town. 
(7)  FEES. All public improvements to be made under the provisions of this chapter shall be examined on the plat and inspected in the field by the Town Engineer or other designated Town official or authorized representative. As prescribed in §18.06 of this chapter, the cost of such engineering and inspection services shall be determined on the basis of actual time devoted to the project at current Town wage scales and shall be charged to the subdivider. 
18.13 - APPLICATION FEES . (Rep. & recr. #04-02) 
(1)  Application for approval of a preliminary plat or subdivision shall be accompanied by a $200.00 fee. (Am. #13-09) 
(2)  Application for approval of a final plat or subdivision shall be accompanied by a $300.00 fee. 
(3)  Application for approval of a certified survey map providing for the subdivision or creation of a new parcel shall be accompanied by a $100.00 fee. There is no charge for approval of a certified survey map which is a clarification of an existing lot of record. (Am. #09-03) 
(4)  In addition, the applicant shall pay all professional review fees including, but not limited to, professional planning, engineering, and legal review fees. The fees shall be submitted at the time of application and are nonrefundable. 
CHAPTER 19 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
19.01 General, Administrative and Terms 19.02 Public Meetings and Sales 19.03 Unnecessary Noise 19.04 Destruction, Entry, Cleaning and Refuse 19.05 Vehicles 19.06 Fires, Fireworks, Firearms and Missiles 19.07 Animals 19.08 Athletics 19.09 Jurisdiction over Minors and Underage Persons 19.10 Schedule of Cash Deposits, Town Parks 19.15 Penalty 19.16 Park Impact Fees 19.17 Dog Parks  

19.01 - GENERAL, ADMINISTRATIVE AND TERMS . 
(1)  DEFINITIONS. The terms "Town Park" and "Township Parks" mean all lands and water previously and subsequently acquired by the Town for park or recreational purposes or placed under the jurisdiction of the Town Park Commission and include, without limitation, parks, boulevards, triangles, swimming pools and privately owned lands, the use of which has been granted or leased to the Town for park, recreational or like public purposes. Liberty Park is designated as a Rib Mountain park. 
(2)  SCOPE. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to lands, structures and property owned, leased or administered by the Town and under the management, supervision and control of the Town Park Commission. 
(3)  CLOSING HOURS. (Am. #18-03) No person shall be within any Town park between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., excluding public trails. Camping and overnight use of Town parks, public trail system and municipal owned facilities is strictly prohibited. The Town Administrator or his/her designee may issue a temporary permit as an exception to this prohibition for periods of no longer than twenty-four (24) hours. No person shall receive more than two permits in any single year. 
(4)  PERMIT TO PLANT, REMOVE, MAINTAIN AND PROTECT TREES AND SHRUBS. No person shall plant trees or shrubs in any public area within the Town, unless a written permit is first obtained from the Town Board. No person shall trim, prune, remove, treat, spray, inject, fertilize, brace, do surgery work, cut above or below ground or otherwise disturb any tree or shrub in any public area without obtaining a written permit from the Town Board. The permittee shall adhere to the arboricultural specifications and standards of workmanship set forth in the permit. A permit shall not be required to water trees and shrubs. 
19.02 - PUBLIC MEETINGS AND SALES . 
(1)  PUBLIC MEETINGS. No person shall give or take part in any entertainment or exhibition or hold any public meeting or engage in public speaking in any Town park without written consent of the Town Park Commission. 
(2)  SALES. No person shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise in any Town park, except as authorized by the Town Park Commission and when holding proper licenses. 
(3)  POSTING BILLS OR ADVERTISING. No person shall distribute or post bills or advertisements in any Town park without written consent of the Town Park Commission. 
19.03 - UNNECESSARY NOISE . 
No person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or disturb another in or about any public street adjacent to any Town park or within any Town park. No person shall operate a loudspeaker from any vehicle within any Town park, except upon written permit issued by the Town Board and the Town Park Commission upon such terms and conditions as will ensure that the public peace and order will not be disturbed. 
19.04 - DESTRUCTION, ENTRY, CLEANING AND REFUSE . 
(1)  DAMAGE TO TREES AND SHRUBS. No person shall in any public area of the Town break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub; permit any animal under his control to do so; permit any fire to injure any portion of any tree or shrub; permit any leak to exist in any gas line within the root zone of any tree or shrub; permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain or be emptied on or about any tree or shrub; or permit electric wires to come in contact with any tree or shrub. During building operations, the builder shall erect suitable protective barriers around public trees and shrubs which may be injured after first giving written notice to the Town Board. 
(2)  FASTENING MATERIALS TO TREES AND SHRUBS. No person shall fasten any sign, rope, wire or other materials to or around or through any public trees or shrubs in the Town without obtaining a written permit from the Town Board, except in emergencies. 
(3)  LITTERING. No person shall throw any glass, rubbish, waste or filth upon the streets, public parks or upon the surface of any body of water within the Town. 
(4)  HOT ASHES AND COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS. No person shall deposit hot ashes, cinders, smoldering coals or greasy or oily substances liable to spontaneous ignition into any combustible receptacle or place the same within 10' of any combustible material within any Town park. 
(5)  DISPENSING BEVERAGES. All beverages, except milk and coffee, sold, served, dispensed or given away at any outdoor fair, game, attraction, event, public function or in any park located within the limits of the Town shall be served in a paper or plastic container and the original container shall be retained by the vendor. 
19.05 - VEHICLES . 
(1)  VEHICULAR TRAFFIC. The following regulations shall apply to vehicles using the Town parks: 
(a)  Vehicles shall park only in designated spaces. 
(b)  Vehicles shall not be operated off the driveways and roads. 
(c)  Heavy traffic is prohibited. 
(2)  STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED. See §7.01 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  DISORDERLY CONDUCT WITH A MOTOR VEHICLE. No person shall, within any Town park, by or through the use of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile or minibike under circumstances which tend to cause or provoke a disturbance or annoy one or more persons; engage in violent, abusive, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct including, but not limited to, unnecessary or deliberate or unintentional spinning of wheels; squealing of tires; revving of the engine; blowing the horn; causing the engine to backfire; or causing the vehicle, while commencing to move or in motion, to raise one or more of its wheels off the ground. 
(4)  PENALTY. (Rep. & recr. #99-7) Violations of any provision of this section shall be subject to the provisions, including the penalty and deposit provisions, of §7.10 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  ENFORCEMENT. This section shall be enforced according to the provisions of §§345.20 to 345.53, Wis. Stats. 
19.06 - FIRES, FIREWORKS, FIREARMS AND MISSILES . 
(1)  FIRES. No fires shall be permitted in any Town park, except for cooking purposes at designated places. 
(2)  FIREWORKS. Section 167.10, Wis. Stats., regulating the sale and use of fireworks, exclusive of penalties, is adopted by reference as part of this chapter. 
(3)  FIREARMS. No person, except a peace officer, shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle, spring or air gun of any description within Town parks or have any firearm, rifle, spring or air gun in his possession or under his control, unless it is unloaded and knocked down or enclosed within a carrying case or other suitable container, provided that this subsection shall not prevent the maintenance and use of supervised rifle or pistol ranges or shooting galleries authorized by the Town Board. This subsection shall be deemed to prohibit hunting within Town parks. 
(4)  THROWING OR SHOOTING MISSILES. No person shall throw or shoot any object, arrow, stone, snowball or other missile or projectile by hand or any other means at any other person or at, in or into any building, street, sidewalk, park, playground or other public place within the Town. This subsection shall not apply to archery ranges under the supervision of the Town Park Commission. 
19.07 - ANIMALS . 
(1)  ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat or other animal and allow such animal to run at large within Town parks. 
(b)  Under the provisions of this section, the animal shall be considered as running at large when it is not on the premises of its owner, unless it is on a leash, is being exercised, is in or upon a vehicle or is in or on the property of another who does not object to the presence of such animal. 
(2)  EXERCISING ANIMALS. No person shall exercise or walk a dog on a leash more than 6' in length in any Town park, except that no leash is required where the dog has such training that the person who is conducting the exercise shall be able to cause the dog to heel upon command. Evidence that such training is not present includes, but is not limited to, the dog touching other dogs, cats, animals or human beings after the order to heel or an equivalent command has been or should have been given. 
(3)  ANIMAL EXCRETA. 
(a)  Any owner or person having immediate care, custody or control of any animal shall promptly remove and dispose of in a sanitary manner any excreta left or deposited by the animal upon any Town park. 
(b)  No person shall permit an animal to be in any Town park, unless such person has in his immediate possession an appropriate means of removing animal excreta. 
(4)  VICIOUS ANIMALS. The owner of any vicious animal shall keep it muzzled when exercising it in any Town park. Where there is evidence such animals intimidate persons from the use of some or all of park property, any law enforcement officer may order the animal muzzled, leashed or restrained. 
19.08 - ATHLETICS . 
No person shall play or practice golf in any Town park. 
19.09 - JURISDICTION OVER MINORS AND UNDERAGE PERSONS . 
(1)  Section 48.17(2), Wis. Stats., including any amendments and/or revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Subject to Ch. 48, Wis. Stats., and as amended and/or revised, complaints alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter against persons 14 to 18 years of age in Town parks may be brought in Marathon County Circuit Court. 
(3)  The court shall not impose incarceration as a penalty. 
(4)  In addition to any other provisions of this chapter, no person under the legal drinking age shall own, possess, ingest, buy, sell, trade, use as a beverage, give away or otherwise control any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in any Town park in violation of §125.07, Wis. Stats., or any amendments and/or revisions thereto. 
19.10 - SCHEDULE OF CASH DEPOSITS, TOWN PARKS . 
Section Title Deposit 19.01 Closing Hours $30 19.02 Public Meetings 40 19.02 Sales 40 19.02 Posting Bills or Advertising 40 19.03 Unnecessary Noise 20 19.04 Damage to Trees and Shrubs (Plus Restitution for Damages) 40 19.04 Fastening Materials to Trees and Shrubs 10 19.04 Littering 50 19.04 Hot Ashes and Combustible Materials 50 19.04 Dispensing Beverages 50 19.05 Vehicular Traffic 40 19.05 Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle 40 19.06 Fires 30 19.06 Fireworks 30 19.06 Firearms 30 19.06 Throwing or Shooting of Missiles 30 19.07 Animals Running at Large 10 19.07 Exercising Animals 10 19.07 Animal Excreta 10 19.07 Vicious Animals 10 19.08 Athletics 10  
19.15 - PENALTY . 
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter or any order, rule or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in §25.04 of this Code of Ordinances. 
19.16 - PARK IMPACT FEES . (Cr. #07-01; Am. #16-01) 
(1)  PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purpose of this ordinance is to create a mechanism for the provision of funds for the construction, expansion, and improvement of park and recreational facilities and related amenities, including but not limited to, parks, recreational areas, special use facilities, tot lots, and multi-use trails, which are necessary to serve land development. Accordingly, the Town hereby shall impose the following impact fee in compliance with the requirements of Wis. Stat. § 66.0617. This fee will provide adequate park and recreational facilities as described above to serve the public interest, convenience, health, and recreational needs of the Town and to provide for the financing of said improvements and facilities. 
(2)  NEEDS ASSESSMENT. The Town of Rib Mountain establishes this impact fee ordinance for the purposes of providing for the effect of continued growth and development as outlined in the Town of Rib Mountain Park and Outdoor Recreation Plan, which was originally created in 1977 and amended and supplemented from time to time thereafter. In addition, pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0617(4), the Rib Mountain Park Impact Fee Needs Assessment was updated in February of 2016 and made available for inspection 20 days prior to adoption of this ordinance. 
(3)  IMPACT FEE ASSESSED. 
(a)  Method of Calculation. In accordance with the Needs Assessment, park impact fees were determined and imposed based on a persons per lot equivalent unit basis, with one single-family residence being 2.6 persons per residential lot, 5.2 for a duplex and 2.6 times the area of the lot in square feet divided by 5,000 square feet for multiple unit developments. 
(b)  Amount of Impact Fee. Any developer who, after the effective date of this ordinance, seeks to create, subdivide, and/or otherwise develop additional residential dwelling units within the Town shall pay a fee to the Town to provide for the necessary park facilities to accommodate said development. 
i.  The determination of the fee shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  Single Family: $650.00 
2.  Duplex: $1,300.00 
3.  Multiple Unit: $650.00 per Dwelling Unit 
ii.  The fee shall be imposed as a condition of approval of any building permit for land development and the payment thereof shall be made to the Town prior to the issuance of such building permit. 
iii.  Zone Change. If an owner of any lot existing prior to the date of this paragraph requests a zone change which, if granted, results in a zone with more families per lot, the owner as a condition of such grant of zone change shall pay the difference between the fee required of the existing zone and the fee required for the new zone, based on the fees as set forth in subpar. i., above. 
19.17 - DOG PARKS . (Cr. #18-06) 
(1)  DOG PARK LOCATION. Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection (2), dogs are permitted to run unleashed in the posted areas of the following location: 
a.  Sandy's Bark Park - 2201 Oriole Ln. Intersection of CTH R (Hummingbird Ln) and Oriole Ln. 
(2)  CONDITIONS OF DOG PARK USE. All users of the designated dog park set forth in Subsection (1) must comply with the following conditions: 
a.  Park Hours: Dawn until Dusk. 
b.  Dog owners are legally and financially liable for injuries or damages caused by their dog(s). Wis. Stat. Ann. 174.02(1). 
c.  All dog waste must be cleaned up and placed in the proper receptacle by the owner/handler. Please help keep the Dog Park clean by picking up any litter or waste. Rib Mtn. ORD. Sec. 19.07 Animals (3). 
d.  All dogs must be legally licensed, vaccinated, and neutered/spayed. Dogs are required to wear a visible owner identification tag on collar. Rib Mtn. ORD. Sec. 12.07(1). 
e.  Aggressive, sick, in season (heat), or dogs under 4 months old are prohibited from the Dog Park. Any dogs exhibiting these types of behavior must be removed from the park immediately. Rib Mtn. ORD. Secs. 12.07(5) and (7). 
f.  Owner/handler must be present and in control of their dog(s) at all times. The dog(s) must be within view and under voice control of owner/handler. 
g.  Dogs must be leashed and restrained by a 6-foot static leash when entering and leaving off-leash area. Owner/handler must have leash in possession at all times. Rib Mtn. ORD Sec. 19.07(2). 
h.  Food (dog or human), smoking, glass, and sharing of dog water bowls is prohibited. 
i.  No owner/handler may enter the Dog Park with more than 3 dogs. 
(3)  OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. The Town of Rib Mountain shall comply with the following conditions: 
a.  Dog Park Rules are posted at entrance vestibules. 
b.  Public education signs for pet waste removal and dog handling are located on the perimeter loop trail and at entrance vestibules. 
c.  A perimeter fence encloses the stormwater management wet pond area. A 10-foot wide grass filter strip is maintained between the fence and the ordinary high water level of the stormwater pond. 
d.  Woody vegetation around stormwater management pond and surrounding property will be removed annually. 
e.  Town of Rib Mountain staff and/or volunteers will inspect trails, open areas, and stormwater management filter strip for uncollected pet waste and damage to property including erosion. Pet waste will be removed and eroded areas restored on a bi-weekly basis or as needed. 
f.  Trail areas will be mowed when grass is above 8 inches high. 
g.  Low flat areas are to be mowed a minimum of two times per year. 
h.  Garbage containers and pet waste bag dispensers will be located throughout the park at a minimum of three locations. 
i.  Garbage containers will be emptied weekly and pet waste bag dispensers refilled as needed. 
j.  Fencing and gates will be inspected monthly to insure property operation. 
Chapter 20 - LAKES AND BEACHES 
20.01 Wausaqua Water Ski Show 20.02 Bulkhead Lines Established 20.03 Boating Equipment, Use and Operation on Lake Wausau, Big Rib River and Little Rib River 20.05 Penalty  

20.01 - WAUSAQUA WATER SKI SHOW . 
Pursuant to § 30.69(3), Wis. Stats., there is hereby designated a water ski pick-up and drop area in the Wisconsin River on the easterly side of Everest Landing for the Wausaqua Water Ski Show, Inc., during times of practice and performance and for the general public at all other times. 
20.02 - BULKHEAD LINES ESTABLISHED . 
Bulkhead lines have been established at the following locations as described on maps on file in the office of the Town Clerk: 
(1)  McCleary Bridge. 
(2)  Rib River/Lake Wausau. 
20.03 - BOATING EQUIPMENT, USE AND OPERATION ON LAKE WAUSAU, BIG RIB RIVER AND LITTLE RIB RIVER . 
(1)  INTENT. This section is enacted for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety and welfare in accordance with the legislative intent set forth in § 30.77(3)(a), Wis. Stats. The intent of this section is to provide safe and healthful conditions for the enjoyment of aquatic recreation consistent with public rights and interest and the capability of the water resource. 
(2)  APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT. The provisions of this section shall apply to the waters of Lake Wausau, Big Rib River and Little Rib River within the jurisdiction of the City of Wausau, Village of Rothschild, City of Schofield and Town of Rib Mountain and, where applicable, by the officers of the Marathon County Sheriff's Department and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in accordance with the authority vested in such cities, towns and villages pursuant to § 30.77, Wis. Stats. 
(3)  STATE BOATING AND SAFETY LAWS ADOPTED. All terms, provisions and conditions of §§ 30.50-30.71, Wis. Stats., are incorporated herein in their entirety by specific reference as if set forth in full. Any subsequent amendments to such sections are likewise incorporated herein in their entirety by specific reference as if set forth in full insomuch as it is the intent of this section to be in conformity with the above cited State Statutes. 
(4)  DEFINITION. "Slow-no-wake" means that speed at which a boat moves as slowly as possible while still maintaining steerage control. 
(5)  CONTROLLED AREAS. The following areas are slow-no-wake areas: 
(a)  On the Big Rib River beginning at the upstream (west) edge of the U.S. 51 southbound bridge and proceeding downstream (east) to a line 600' downstream (east) of the U.S. 51 northbound bridge. 
(b)  On Big Rib River beginning at a point 2,400' upstream of the confluence of the Little Rib River (also described as the common corner of Secs. 32 and 33, T29N, R7E and Secs. 4 and 5, T28N, R7E) and proceeding upstream (westerly) 3,100'. 
(c)  Under CTH "N" bridge, commonly known as Snake Bridge. 
(d)  The Bluegill Bay County Park lagoon. 
(e)  Within 100' of the boat launch dock and/or boat launch at D.C. Everest County Park in the City of Wausau. 
(f)  Within 100' of the boat launch at Oak Island Park in the City of Wausau. 
(g)  Within 150' of the boat launch and/or dock at Memorial Park in the City of Wausau. 
(h)  Within 200' of the boat launch on Kort St. in the Village of Rothschild, commonly known as St. Therese's. 
(i)  Within 150' of the shoreline beginning at the boat launch pier and proceeding southeast approximately 250' to the lagoon inlet at Bluegill Bay County Park in the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(j)  From the dam on the Eau Claire River proceeding west to a line 75' west of the Grand Ave. bridge. 
(6)  PENALTY. The penalty provisions of § 30.80, Wis. Stats., and any subsequent amendments thereto, are incorporated herein in their entirety by specific reference as if set forth in full. It is the intent of this penalty provision to be in conformity with State Statutes. 
20.05 - PENALTY . 
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order, rule or regulation made hereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 25.04 of this Code of Ordinances. 
CHAPTER 22 - REFUSE AND RECYCLING REGULATIONS 
22.01 Title 22.02 Purpose and Scope 22.03 Statutory Authority 22.04 Abrogation and Greater Provisions 22.05 Interpretation 22.06 Applicability 22.07 Administration 22.08 Definitions 22.09 Public Education 22.10 Drop-Off Facilities, Materials Recovery Facilities, Curbside Collection 22.11 Separation of Wastes 22.12 Processing and Marketing Reports 22.13 Grants and Assurances 22.14 Enforcement and Penalties 22.15 Effective Date 22.16 Severability 22.17 Disposal of Non-Town-Owned Personal Property  

22.01 - TITLE . 
This chapter shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the "Town of Rib Mountain Refuse and Recycling Regulations". 
22.02 - PURPOSE AND SCOPE . 
Whereas it is the principal purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety and welfare of Rib Mountain citizens, and whereas the Town determined that the collection of recyclables is an environmentally sound practice and an economically viable act, it is the intent of this chapter to encourage and achieve a successful recycling effort on the part of its citizens and suppliers of services. It is the further intent of this chapter to meet the requirements of Ch. 159, Wis. Stats. and Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code, pertaining to recycling of certain materials and the establishment of a timetable of bans for land filling and incineration. Whereas the Town does not operate its own landfill, the further intent of this chapter is to ensure the continued success of the Marathon County Ordinance pertaining to recycling and landfill use. Whereas, there are commercial handlers of refuse and recyclables, it is the further intent of this chapter to encourage the success of these haulers to further the cause of recycling in the Town. 
22.03 - STATUTORY AUTHORITY . 
(1)  Authority for this chapter is granted by Ch. 159, Wis. Stats. 
(2)  The Town is the responsible unit for waste management within the Town and in the manner as defined under § 159.09, Wis. Stats. 
(3)  The Town Board by resolution will authorize an official to file grant applications, sign necessary documents and submit reports in accordance with § 149.09, Wis. Stats. 
22.04 - ABROGATION AND GREATER PROVISIONS . 
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
22.05 - INTERPRETATION . 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where any terms or requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision of this chapter is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard in Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the chapter provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in the light of the Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard of Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code in effect on the date of the adoption of this chapter, or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this chapter. The Refuse and Recycling Coordinator shall be consulted regarding interpretations of this chapter. 
22.06 - APPLICABILITY . 
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all residential and non-residential buildings and facilities within the Town. 
22.07 - ADMINISTRATION . 
This chapter will be administered by the Refuse and Recycling Coordinator, as appointed by the Town Board. The Refuse and Recycling Coordinator shall be authorized to act on behalf of the Town, to submit applications for grants, sign necessary documents, make interpretations of said chapter, and submit required reports. 
22.08 - DEFINITIONS . 
Bi-metal container means a container for carbonated or malt beverages that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum. 
Container board means corrugated paper-board used in the manufacture of ship- ping containers and related products. 
Drop-off point. A location licensed for the receipt of waste and/or recyclable materials. 
Foam polystyrene packaging means packaging made primarily from foam poly- styrene that satisfies one of the following criteria: 
1.  Is designed for serving food or beverages. 
2.  Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container. 
3.  Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container. 
Hauler. The term hauler refers to waste, refuse and/or recyclable collector(s) contracted with by the Town. 
HDPE means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4. 
LDPE means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4. 
Magazines means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper. 
Major appliance means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator, stove, furnace, boiler, dehumidifier, water heater, and allowing for the disposal of microwaves in a solid waste facility if the capacitor has been removed. 
Materials recovery facility means a facility where 2 or more of the materials specified in § 159.07(3) or (4), Wis. Stats., not mixed with other solid waste, are processed for reuse or recycling by conversion into a consumer product or are used as a raw material in a commercial or industrial process. 
Multiple-family dwelling means a property containing 5 or more residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally. 
Newspaper means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint. 
Non-residential facilities and/or properties means commercial, retail, industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This term does not include multiple-family dwellings. 
Office paper means high-grade printing and writing papers from offices in non-residential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer print- outs are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This term does not include industrial process waste. 
Other resins or multiple resins means plastic resins labeled by the SPI code #7. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or local governmental unit, as defined in § 66.299(l)(a), Wis. Stats., state agency or authority or federal agency. 
PETE means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1. 
Recyclable materials. All materials banned from land filling (or incineration) in the Marathon County Landfill or in the State of Wisconsin, including lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bi-metal containers. 
Refuse. All materials legally accepted for land filling at licensed landfills. 
Resident. For purposes of this chapter and related contract agreements, a resident is defined as a person who occupies a dwelling within the Town and has intent to remain within the Town for a period of time, including seasonal periods of time. 
Waste. Any solid waste, including garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, and other discarded or salvageable materials, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include hazardous waste, solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or point sources subject to permits under Ch. 147, (1990) Wis. Stats, or special nuclear or by-product material as defined under § 130.52, (1990) Wis. Stats. 
Waste facility is for handling or storing waste as defined above for future disposal. This does not include vehicles used by haulers. 
Waste tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush, including clean, woody vegetative material no greater than 6 inches in diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls, or Christmas trees, wreaths, and roping. 
Town. The name Town will mean Town of Rib Mountain throughout this chapter. 
Undefined terms. When interpreting any term in this chapter, if the term is not defined in the section in question or in this definition section, the ordinary meaning of the term will apply unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning is intended. 
22.09 - PUBLIC EDUCATION . 
Recycling education will be divided into 2 general areas: 
(1)  The Town Board will create a general education plan using direct mailings, news releases, postings, meetings and advertisements to promote basic recycling know- ledge within the Town. General information pieces will be made available to waste haulers in the Town. 
(2)  Recycling information to meet specific legal requirements and specific market requirements will be handled by the contracted waste hauler(s) in communications with their residential and commercial customers. 
22.10 - DROP-OFF FACILITIES, MATERIALS RECOVERY FACILITIES, CURBSIDE COLLECTION . 
The Town does hereby designate the Rib Mountain Yard Waste Site as its official drop-off location for yard wastes. 
(1)  Other material recovery facilities, waste facilities or recycling operations certified by the State of Wisconsin may be established and used by residents and commercial establishments in the Town. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a materials recovery facility that serves either Town residents or contracted haulers of the Town shall certify to the State DNR that the materials recovery facility meets the requirements of § 544.16, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(b)  The owner or operator of any other waste facility or recycling operation that serves either Town residents or contracted hauler in the Town shall certify to the Town that the waste facility or recycling operation meets the requirements of Wisconsin Statutes or the Wisconsin Administrative Code and ordinances of Marathon County and the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Haulers contracted with the town will collect and market recyclable materials or dispose of same at facilities licensed to receive same. Recyclable materials shall be recycled through the contracted hauler. 
(4)  The Town Board may mandate curbside collection for all residents. 
(5)  Users of the Marathon County Landfill must comply with all regulations in effect at said location. 
22.11 - SEPARATION OF WASTES . 
(1)  SOURCE SEPARATION REQUIRED. Occupants of single-family residences, buildings containing 2 or more dwelling units, non-residential facilities and governmental facilities shall separate recyclable materials from refuse. Owners of commercial, retail and industrial facilities shall separate recyclables from refuse or encourage tenants/occupants to separate recyclables from refuse. These materials include, but may not be limited to the following: 
(a)  Lead acid batteries. 
(b)  Major appliances. 
(c)  Waste oil. 
(d)  Yard waste. 
(e)  Aluminum containers. 
(f)  Bi-metal containers. 
(g)  Corrugated papers or other container board. 
(h)  Foam polystyrene packaging. 
(i)  Glass containers. 
(j)  Magazines and other materials printed on similar glossy paper. 
(k)  Newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint. 
(l)  Office paper. 
(m)  Rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE (#1), HDPE (#2), PVC (#3), LDPE (#4), PP(#5), PS (#6), and other resins or multiple resins (#7). 
(n)  Steel containers. 
(o)  Waste tires. 
(2)  SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS EXEMPTED. The separation requirements above do not apply to the following: 
(a)  Occupants of single-family and 2- to 4-unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties that send their post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the State DNR that recovers the materials specified above from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible. 
(b)  Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less than 30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned as supplemental fuel. 
(c)  A recyclable material for which a variance has been granted by the State DNR under Ch. 159.ll(2m), Wis. Stats, or § NR 5444.14, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(3)  CARE OF SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. To the greatest extent practical, the recyclable materials separated in accordance with the above shall be clean and kept free of contaminants such as food or products residue, oil or grease, or other non-recyclable materials, including but not limited to household hazardous waste, medical waste, and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain, and other inclement weather conditions. 
(4)  PROHIBITIONS ON DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS SEPARATED FOR RECYCLING. No person may dispose of in a solid waste facility or burn in a solid waste treatment facility any aluminum containers, bi-metal containers, corrugated paper or other container board, foam polystyrene packaging, glass containers, magazines, newspaper, office paper, rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple resins, steel containers, or waste tires which have been separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility. 
(5)  PREPARATION AND COLLECTION OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. The Town Board may promulgate rules and regulations regarding the requirements for preparation and collection of refuse and recyclable materials. The rules and regulations may change with the demands of the market to ensure the marketability of recycled materials. Collection requirements shall comply with NR 544.05, Wis. Adm. Code. 
22.12 - PROCESSING AND MARKETING REPORTS . 
(1)  Haulers contracted by the Town shall provide written reports for each calendar year by February 1 in order that the Refuse and Recycling Coordinator can provide the necessary timely reports to the State. 
(2)  Reports will include a description of the hauler's system for collecting separated waste from their customers. 
(3)  Reports will include a description of the hauler's system for processing and marketing recyclable materials. 
(4)  Reports will include waste tonnages from Town according to the following breakdown: 
(a)  Number of Town households served, including seasonal. 
(b)  Tons of non-recyclable refuse disposed of in licensed landfills. 
(c)  The amount of recyclable materials collected, including newspaper, corrugated paper, magazines, aluminum containers, steel and bi-metal containers, plastic containers, glass containers, foam PS packaging. 
(5)  Reports will include the hauler's schedule of fees for collecting refuse and recyclables. 
22.13 - GRANTS AND ASSURANCES . 
(1)  The Town shall comply with Marathon County Ordinances, Wisconsin Statutes and administrative rules pertaining to refuse and recycling materials to the best of its ability. 
(2)  Agreements with waste haulers and waste and recyclable facility operators shall require that said haulers comply with all Federal, State and local statutes, ordinances and administrative rules. 
(3)  Agreements with waste haulers, and materials recovery facility, waste facility and recyclable facility operators shall include assurances sufficient to allow the Town to properly report recycling action to the State. 
22.14 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES . 
(1)  For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this chapter, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the State DNR, employee or representative of Marathon County Landfill, or authorized officer, employee or representative of the Town, may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties. Contracted haulers, in the Town, may inspect the same said materials of their clients. Any records relating to recycling activities shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any said authorized person who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such an inspection. 
(2)  Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be issued a citation by the Refuse and Recycling Coordinator, following a verified complaint, to collect forfeitures. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this paragraph. 
(3)  Penalties for violating this chapter may be assessed as follows: Any person who violates any section of this chapter may be required to forfeit $50 for a first violation, $200 for a second violation, and not more than $2000 for a third or subsequent violation. 
(4)  Citations may be issued to a resident serviced by a hauler, upon receipt in writing from the hauler, a statement of violation facts. The hauler will also supply the Town Refuse and Recycling Coordinator with the name and address of the violator. 
(5)  Penalty to contracted hauler and/or waste or recyclable facility operator: If the Town Board determines that a hauler or operator of a waste or recyclable facility is not engaging in a good-faith effort to enforce the provisions of this chapter or that the waste collection system does not promote the separation and recycling of recyclable materials, the Town Board may suspend, limit or revoke the hauler's contract. 
22.15 - EFFECTIVE DATE . 
This chapter shall take effect and be enforced from and after its passage, posting and publication as provided by law. Said effective date is intended to comply with the "Effective Recycling Program" date of January 1, 1995. 
22.16 - SEVERABILITY . 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion of each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
22.17 - DISPOSAL OF NON-TOWN-OWNED PERSONAL PROPERTY . (Cr. #10-02) 
(1)  DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY. The Town may dispose of any non-town-owned personal property which has been abandoned, or remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days, after the taking of possession of the property by the Town, in accordance with § 66.0139, Wis. Stats. 
(2)  METHODS OF DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY. 
(a)  The Town shall have the option of maintaining and using any unclaimed or abandoned property for its own use. 
(b)  The Town may donate to charity or any nonprofit organization any unclaimed or abandoned property not converted to Town use. 
(c)  The Town may discard any unclaimed or abandoned property that is deemed nonusable. 
(d)  Unclaimed or abandoned property not converted to Town use, donated to charity, or discarded may be disposed of by public auction at an auction house or by sealed bid. 
(e)  If the property is not disposed of in a sale open to the public, the Town shall maintain an inventory of the property, a record of the date and method of disposal, including the consideration received for the property, if any, and the name and address of the person taking possession of the property. The inventory shall be kept as a public record for a period of not less than 2 years from the date of disposal of the property. 
(3)  DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED BICYCLES. 
(a)  An authorized representative of the Town may dispose of unclaimed or abandoned bicycles through a public auction, donation to charity or other nonprofit organizations, or junking. 
(b)  The bicycle auction shall be conducted by the Town at any time the surplus of bicycles dictates and the 30-day waiting period for abandonment has expired. 
(c)  Proceeds from the sale, after deducting the necessary expenses for conducting the sale, shall be turned over to the Town Treasurer. 
CHAPTER 23 - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES (Rep. & recr. #00-01) 
23.01 Grant of Franchise 23.02 Definitions 23.03 Renewal 23.04 Termination or Expiration 23.05 Transfer Procedure 23.06 Franchise Territory 23.07 Customer Privacy 23.08 Technical Assistance 23.09 Open Books and Records 23.10 Reserved 23.11 Description of System 23.12 Rates 23.13 Conditions on Street Occupancy 23.14 Indemnity 23.15 Service Remedies 23.16 Franchise Fees 23.17 Rights of Residents 23.18 Rights of the Town 23.19 Waiver of Charges 23.20 Severability 23.21 Acceptance by Grantee 23.22 Arbitration 23.23 Incorporation of Amendments 23.24 Protection of Nonsubscribers 23.25 Grantee Rules 23.26 Waiver of Objections 23.27 Grantee without Recourse 23.28 Work Performed by Other 23.29 Contest of Validity 23.30 Level Playing Field  

23.01 - GRANT OF FRANCHISE. 
This chapter allows the Town of Rib Mountain to grant to a Franchise Grantee, its successors and assigns, a nonexclusive license to install, maintain, and operate a cable television system for the distribution of television signals, frequency-modulated radio signals and any other electronic signals capable of being transmitted on a coaxial or fiber optic network including data transmission and closed circuit television programs for a term of ten (10) years, provided that the Franchise Grantee conforms to the conditions, limitations, requirements of this Ordinance. This ordinance may be amended from time to time by the Town through the enactment of amendments thereto. 
23.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
Cable. Coaxial or fiber optic cables, wave guides, or other conductors and equipment for providing video, audio, and data frequencies by cable or through its facilities as herein contemplated, and including closed-circuit special event programs and educational television. 
Customer. Any person or entity receiving and paying for any purpose the services of a Grantee herein. 
Grantee. A person or entity to whom or which a Franchise under this chapter is granted by the Town Board and the lawful successors or assigns of such person or entity. 
Gross revenues. Any revenue, derived directly or indirectly by a Grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, and any persons or entities in which a Grantee has a financial interest of five percent or more from or in connection with the operation of a Town of Rib Mountain cable system including, but not limited to, basic subscriber service monthly fees, pay cable fees and installation and reconnect fees revenues. The term does not include any taxes on service furnished by Grantee and imposed directly upon any subscribed or used by the State, Town, or other governmental unit and collected by Grantee on behalf of said governmental unit. 
Street. The surface of and space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the Town. 
Town. The Town of Rib Mountain, State of Wisconsin, in its present incorporated form or in any later recognized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
Town board. The present governing body of the Town or any future body constituting the legislative body of the Town. 
23.03 - RENEWAL. 
(A)  A Grantee shall have the right to apply to the Town for renewal or extension of the Franchise. The Town shall grant such renewal or extension application unless it finds that: 
(1)  The Grantee has not substantially complied with the material terms of the Ordinance and with applicable law, or its officers have been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  The legal, technical, or financial qualifications of the Grantee are inadequate to provide the service proposed by it; 
(3)  The service and facilities to be provided by the Grantee are not reasonable in light of the community need for and cost of such services and facilities; 
(4)  The service quality of the cable system has not been reasonable in light of the community needs; or 
(5)  The proposals contained in the renewal application are otherwise unreasonable. 
(B)  A Grantee must file for renewal at least thirty (30) months before the expiration of the Franchise. The Town must consider the renewal application and conduct any proceedings necessary to adequately consider the application; and may not request, accept, or consider any other Franchise application until the Grantee's application is denied or approved. 
(C)  The Town shall negotiate in good faith with the Grantee regarding Franchise renewal within 60 days after the completion of proceedings pursuant to 6-9-3(b); and shall make a preliminary decision on granting or denying renewal within four (4) months after receipt of an application. If the Town denies an application it must notify the Grantee by written statement, within seven (7) days after its decision, of the reasons for the denial. 
(D)  The Grantee, if adversely affected or aggrieved by a decision of the Town made pursuant to this section, may appeal such decision in any court of competent jurisdiction. The Franchise shall remain in effect pending the completion of such appeal. 
(E)  Both the Town and Grantee shall comply with all the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984 regarding renewal procedures. 
(F)  In the event that the Act changes, the Town shall conduct renewal procedures in accordance with then applicable law. 
23.04 - TERMINATION OR EXPIRATION . (Re-enacted #01-04) 
Should a Grantee's Franchise be terminated or expire and there is no judicial or administrative review of the termination or expiration taking place, the Grantee shall begin removal within ninety (90) days of termination or expiration of all property owned by the Grantee and placed on a public right-of-way unless permitted by the Town to abandon said property to a purchaser. 
23.05 - TRANSFER PROCEDURE. 
All of the rights and privileges and all the obligations, duties and liabilities created by this Ordinance shall pass to and be binding upon the successors of the Town and the successors and assigns of any Grantee; and the same shall not be assigned or transferred without the written approval of the Town hereunder, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld without a showing of good cause; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent the assignment or pledge of a Franchise or system by a Grantee as security for debt without such approval; and provided further that transfers or assignments of a Franchise between any parent and subsidiary corporation or between entities of which at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the beneficial ownership is held by the Grantee or any parent corporation shall be permitted without the prior approval of the Town. The sale, transfer, or assignment of a material portion of the tangible assets of a Grantee to an unrelated third party shall be considered an assignment subject to the provisions of this section. 
(a)  The parties to the sale or transfer of a Franchise shall make a written request to the Town for its approval of a sale or transfer of the Franchise. 
(b)  The Town shall reply in writing within thirty (30) days of the request and shall indicate approval of the request or its determination that a public hearing is necessary due to potential adverse effect on the Franchise subscribers. 
(c)  If a public hearing is deemed necessary, the Town shall conduct such hearing within thirty (30) days of such determination and notice of any such hearing shall be given fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing by publishing notice thereof once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area being served by the Franchise. The notice shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing and shall briefly state the substance of the action to be considered by the Town. 
(d)  Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the Town shall approve or deny in writing the sale or transfer request. 
(e)  The parties to the sale or transfer of a Franchise only, without the inclusion of a cable communications systems in which at least substantial construction has been commenced, shall establish that the sale or transfer of a Franchise only will be in the public interest. 
(f)  A Grantee, upon transfer, shall within sixty (60) days thereafter file with the Town a copy of the deed, agreement or other written instrument evidencing such sale, transfer of ownership or control or lease, certified and sworn to as correct by the Grantee. 
23.06 - FRANCHISE TERRITORY. 
Any Franchise is for the present territorial limits of the Town of Rib Mountain. For any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the Franchise, service shall be extended wherever household density reaches 30 homes per plant mile, including interconnecting trunks. 
23.07 - CUSTOMER PRIVACY. 
(A)  A Grantee shall not, except as required by governmental action, provide any data concerning specific subscribers or users to their use of subscriber services without notification to the subscribers or users. 
(B)  Subscribers and users shall retain the right to deactivate their terminals, but shall continue to be responsible for charges until the Grantee is notified to terminate service. 
23.08 - TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE. 
(A)  The cable system shall be operated to comply with all guidelines and standards set by the FCC for signal quality and leakage upon proper notification. The Town reserves the right to test the system and independently measure the signal quality. The system shall comply at all times with the applicable National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association. 
(B)  The Town may inspect all construction or installation work during such construction or installation, or at any time after the completion thereof, in order to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other governing ordinances. 
23.09 - OPEN BOOKS AND RECORDS. 
The Grantee shall maintain resources sufficient and near enough to the franchise territory to provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with this section and other provisions of this Ordinance. 
(1)  SERVICE STANDARDS. The Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service between the hours of 7 a.m. and 1 a.m. only for good cause and for the shortest possible time. Service may be interrupted between 1 a.m. and 7 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance and repair, except on nights commencing on Saturday and Sunday and on holidays. Scheduled or predictable service interruptions, except for weekly routine maintenance, insofar as possible shall be preceded by notice, which may be provided across the cable system. The interruptions shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system to the extent practicable. The Grantee shall maintain a written log or an equivalent capable of access and reproduction of all service interruptions and requests for service, which log shall be available for Town inspection during the franchise period. 
(2)  TELEPHONE LINES. The Grantee shall provide local toll-free or collect call telephone access to its subscribers within the franchise territory. Any calls should be answered by a customer service representative during normal business hours; calls outside this period may be answered by an automated response mechanism, but such calls should be processed by a Grantee's representative within 12 hours. The Grantee shall provide sufficient phone answering capacity that customer calls are answered on average within 30 seconds 90% of the time; and that customers receive a busy signal no more than 3% of the time. Violations of these standards shall be subject to penalties under provisions of Section 23.16. 
(3)  INSTALLATION. The Grantee shall complete requests for subscriber installations within seven business days of order placement when the installation is within 150 feet of the existing cable system. Installation requests required to be honored under this Ordinance beyond the 150 foot standard must be completed within 14 days. If the Grantee fails to meet these standards the Grantee shall provide the subscriber with a free month of the requested service. The Grantee may request the Town toll these periods for reasonable circumstances beyond its control. 
(4)  REPAIR STANDARDS. The Grantee shall maintain a repair force capable, under normal operating circumstances, of responding to service interruption and degradation complaints made during normal business hours within four hours. For complaints made outside normal business hours, the Grantee must respond within 16 hours. For the purpose of this subsection, "response" shall mean at a minimum contacting the subscriber by phone or in person. Where a Grantee misses either of these deadlines, Grantee must provide the subscriber with one free month's service. The Grantee may request the Town toll the repair period for reasonable circumstances beyond its control. 
(5)  SERVICE CALL SCHEDULING. When the Grantee needs to arrange a service appointment at a subscriber's location, the Grantee must offer the subscriber a service window not to exceed four hours in duration. Grantee may not cancel a service window without the subscriber's consent. Where a Grantee misses a service window, Grantee must provide the subscriber with one free month's service. The Grantee may request the Town toll the service call period for reasonable circumstances beyond its control. 
(A)  The Grantee shall provide a line, either staffed or with answering capabilities, available 24 hours a day. 
(B)  The Grantee shall answer service requests for service interruptions within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays. Problems should be rectified in forty-eight (48) hours or in the case of a dispute, in fewer than thirty (30) days. Customers shall be able to request from the Grantee that a service visit occur during a four-hour block of time in either the morning or the afternoon. 
23.10 - RESERVED. 
23.11 - DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM. 
Upon request by the Town, the Grantee shall as part of the acceptance of a Franchise, provide a complete written description or map of the cable system in the Town of Rib Mountain. Such written description or map shall be updated as additions or changes are made. 
23.12 - RATES. 
All rates and charges shall be established by a Grantee. Provided however, the Town reserves its right to the maximum extent possible to regulate the rates of a Grantee, as permitted by Federal or State law, regulation or rule. In the event after the effective date of this Ordinance any Federal or State law, regulation or rule is at any time changed, modified, amended or repealed so as to allow for increased authority of the Town to regulate a Grantee's rates, the Town shall be permitted to do so to the maximum extent possible. 
(a)  A Grantee shall provide the Town with a rate schedule of the Grantee's charges at the time of Grantee's acceptance of a franchise. Subsequent additions or amendments to rates and service charges shall be filed with the Utility Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the implementation of the addition or amendment. The Grantee shall give subscribers at least thirty (30) days advance written notice before instituting a rate increase. 
(b)  Pending such modification, amendment or repeal of current Federal and State laws regarding regulation of a Grantee's rates, the following procedure shall apply, to the extent permitted by law; 
At this time this ordinance is being adopted, the Federal Communications Commission, has developed rules whereby municipalities are given the limited right to regulate rates for basic cable service. A Grantee shall not increase its basic cable service rates without giving the Town Board written notice of any proposed basic cable service rate increase at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such increase. The Town Board may deny the Grantee such increase based upon the procedures and standards to be developed by the Federal Communications Commission. In the event the Town would certify to the FCC to regulate the basic service rate and at the discretion of the Town Board, the Town Board may schedule a public hearing to determine whether the Grantee's proposed basic rate increase should be granted. Grantee will cooperate fully with the Town Board in connection with such proceedings and, upon request, to supply to the Town Board, within twenty (20) days, any additional information as may be reasonably required for determining whether the proposed increase should be granted, provided such disclosure will not violate any applicable law, confidentiality obligation or contract to which the Grantee is a party. A Grantee shall be permitted to participate in the public hearing and present its case for the proposed rate increase. Should the Town Board fail to deny the proposed rate increase prior to its taking effect, but determines within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the increase that the increase should be denied or modified under the standards to be developed by the Federal Communications Commission, then the previous basic rate charge shall be the effective basic cable service rate charge from the first day of the month following the Town Board's action. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Grantee from challenging before any court of appropriate jurisdiction that the action of the Town Board in denying the basic cable service rate increase is arbitrary and capricious and/or violates applicable law. 
23.13 - CONDITIONS ON STREET OCCUPANCY. 
(A)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a Grantee within the Town shall be so located as not to cause interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and not to cause interference with the rights of or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoining any of the streets, alleys, or other public ways and places. 
(B)  In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing, the Grantee shall first give notice to the Director of Public Works of any contemplated disturbances of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing, and shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the Director of Public Works, replace and restore all pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surface of any street or alley disturbed in as good condition as before such work commenced. The Grantee shall otherwise comply with Town ordinances relating to street openings. 
(C)  If, at any time during the period of a Franchise, the Town shall elect to alter or change the location or grade of any street, alley, or other public way, the Grantee, upon reasonable notice by the Town, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. If any construction by the Grantee is in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the Grantee shall likewise, upon reasonable notice by the Town, remove, relay and relocate its property in such a manner as to remedy such violation at its own expense. 
(D)  The Grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any existing gas, electric, telephone, or other fixture, water hydrant, or main. All such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed between the outer edge of sidewalk and the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on such alley in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on the streets, alleys, and public ways. However, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use by the Grantee of existing public utility poles where practical. 
(E)  A Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the Town, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expenses of such temporary raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Grantee may require such payment in advance. The Grantee shall be given not less than seventy-two (72) hours in advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(F)  The Grantee, to the same extent that the Town has such authority, may trim trees that overhang streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the Town so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Grantee. 
23.14 - INDEMNITY. 
(A)  The Grantee shall defend and save the Town and its agents and employees harmless from all claims, damages, losses, and expenses, including attorney's fees sustained by the Town on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim, or demand whatsoever arising out of: 
(1)  The enactment of this Ordinance and granting of a franchise thereunder, except such claims as may arise from the Town's section of a Grantee to be awarded a franchise pursuant to this ordinance. 
(2)  The installation, operation or maintenance of the cable system except for acts of the Town, its agents or employees, unless said acts are at the request of and under the direction or supervision of the Grantee. 
(B)  The Town shall notify the Grantee within ten (10) days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise made against the Town on the part of the Grantee. The Grantee shall furnish to the Town, before any franchise becomes effective, satisfactory evidence in writing that the Grantee has in force and will maintain in force during the term of the franchise public liability insurance. 
(C)  All Grantees shall maintain throughout the term of the permit a general comprehensive liability insurance policy naming as additional insured the Town, its officers, Boards, commissions, agents, and employees in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney. The policy shall protect the Town and its agencies and employees against liability for loss or damages for personal injury, death or property damage occasioned by the operations of Grantee under any franchise granted hereunder, in the amounts of (a) $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to any one person with the limit however of $2,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident, and (b) $ 1,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident. The Town shall be named as an additional insured under such insurance and a copy of the current in-force policy shall be deposited with the Town Clerk. 
23.15 - SERVICE REMEDIES. 
(A)  SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS AND SIGNIFICANT DEGRADATION. When the Grantee has failed to provide a subscriber with appropriate service due to service outage or significant audio or video degradation not due to the subscriber's equipment or action, the subscriber may request a rebate of any fees paid for the affected service(s) under the following schedule, and the Grantee must provide such rebates. For the purposes of this section the outage or degradation period shall begin when the subscriber provides notice to the Grantee of the outage or degradation. The Town shall waive or modify the rebate provisions or reasonable circumstances beyond the control of the Grantee. Outages for initial construction, upgrading and normal maintenance shall be exempt from this section. 
(1)  For periods at least four hours long but under 24 hours, a rebate of one-thirtieth of the monthly fee for affected services for each instance. 
(2)  For periods of at least 24 hours, a rebate of one-tenth of the monthly fee for affected services for each 24 hour period or portion thereof. 
23.16 - FRANCHISE FEES. 
(Not currently applicable, ordinance can be amended to include franchise fees upon approval of a resolution by the Town Board.) 
23.17 - RIGHTS OF RESIDENTS. 
(A)  An owner or operator of an apartment building, condominium, nursing home, mobile home park, or any other rental facility may not interfere with or charge a fee for the installation of Cable System facilities for the use of a lessee of said property or premises, except that such owner or operator may require: 
1.  Installation to conform to reasonable conditions necessary to protect the safety, appearance and functioning of the premises; 
2.  The Grantee, occupant, or tenant to pay for the installation, operation, or removal of such facilities; 
3.  The Grantee, occupant, or tenant to agree to indemnify the owner or operator for any damages caused by the installation, operation or removal of such facilities. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for the Grantee to reimburse or offer to reimburse any person, or for any person to demand or receive reimbursement from the Grantee, for the placement upon the premises of such person of Grantee's facilities necessary to connect such person's premises to the distribution lines of Grantee to provide Cable Service to said premises. 
(C)  A landlord may not discriminate in the amount of rent charged to tenants or occupants who receive Cable Service and those who do not. 
23.18 - RIGHTS OF THE TOWN. 
(A)  The right is hereby reserved by the Town to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained in this chapter and existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police powers. Such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not be in conflict with the laws of the State. 
(B)  The Town may, during the term of a Franchise, free of charge where aerial construction exists, maintain upon the poles of the Grantee within the Town limits wire and pole fixtures necessary for a police and fire alarm system, such wires and fixtures to be constructed and maintained to the satisfaction of the Grantee and in accordance with its specifications. 
23.19 - WAIVER OF CHARGES. 
During the term of a Franchise, the Grantee shall provide free service to any and all schools whether private, public, or parochial, within the area of the Franchise. Grantee may charge for usual installation costs. 
23.20 - SEVERABILITY. 
Should any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or portion of this Ordinance and/or a Franchise be declared to be invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance and the Franchise as a whole, but shall only affect the portion thereof declared to be invalid; and the Town Board hereby expressly states and declares that it would nonetheless have passed this Ordinance and granted the Franchise had it known that any such word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or portion of said Ordinance of Franchise were invalid. 
23.21 - ACCEPTANCE BY GRANTEE. 
Any Franchise granted under this ordinance shall be effective upon acceptance by both parties within thirty (30) days from the adoption hereof, and the Franchise shall continue in force for a period of ten (10) years. 
23.22 - ARBITRATION. 
(A)  Controversies arising from a Grantee's performance under the terms of this Ordinance may be submitted to arbitration. Arbitration shall not be demanded by any party until such time as that party has served written notice upon the opposing party, setting forth its proposed determinations or actions which are to be the subject matter of the arbitration. Such notice shall be in writing and mailed to the other party by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(B)  In the event of arbitration, the parties shall select the arbitrator or if they fail to do so a Circuit Judge shall select the arbitrator. The expenses of the arbitration and compensation of the arbitration shall be born by the Town and the Grantee as the award shall provide, but in no event shall the Town or the Grantee be obligated to pay more than one-half such expenses and compensation. The arbitration award shall be binding upon the parties. 
23.23 - INCORPORATION OF AMENDMENTS. 
This Ordinance shall be amended to incorporate all amendments to the statutes, rules and regulations of the Federal government as they are promulgated by the Federal government. Any provision herein, in conflict with or preempted by said rules, regulations or statutes, shall be superseded. 
23.24 - PROTECTION OF NONSUBSCRIBERS. 
A Grantee shall at all times keep its cables and other appurtenances used for transmitting signals shielded in such a manner that there will be no interference with signals received by radios or televisions not connected to the Grantee's service. 
23.25 - GRANTEE RULES. 
A Grantee may promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the Grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the Franchise and to assure uninterrupted service to all its subscribers. However, such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or the laws of the State. 
23.26 - WAIVER OF OBJECTIONS. 
By the adoption of this chapter, the Town expressly waives all objections it has or may have to the legal rights of the Grantee to attach its cables, equipment, and transmission lines to the poles of the Town, pursuant to an agreement or to the poles of the public utilities and the authority of such public utilities to grant such right to the Grantee. 
23.27 - GRANTEE WITHOUT RECOURSE. 
A Grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the Town for any loss, cost or expense, or damage arising out of any provisions or requirements of a Franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the Town, or for the failure of the Town to have authority to grant all or any part of the Franchise. Grantee expressly acknowledges that in accepting any Franchise it does so relying on its own investigation and the understanding of the power and authority of the Town to grant the Franchise. By accepting a Franchise, a Grantee acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter in to the Franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the Town or by any other third person concerning any term of condition of the Franchise not expressed herein. The Grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the Franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof, and is willing to and does accept all the risks of the meeting of such terms and conditions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the event of any dispute over the meaning thereof the same shall be construed strictly against the Grantee and in favor of the Town. 
23.28 - WORK PERFORMED BY OTHERS. 
(A)  A Grantee shall give prior notice to the Town specifying the names and addresses of any entity, other than the Grantee, that performs services pursuant to the Franchise, provided, however, that all provisions of the Franchise remain the responsibility of the Grantee. 
(B)  All provisions of any Franchise shall apply to any subcontractor or other performing any work or services pursuant to the provisions of the Franchise. 
23.29 - CONTEST OF VALIDITY. 
Grantee agrees by acceptance of a Franchise that it will not at any time set up against the Town in a claim for proceeding any condition or term of the Franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void, or that the Town had no proper authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the Franchise in their entirety. 
23.30 - LEVEL PLAYING FIELD. 
The Town shall not grant any overlapping franchise for cable service within its jurisdiction on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome than those in any existing franchise within the Town. 
CHAPTER 24 - STORMWATER CODE 
24.01 Construction Site Erosion 24.02 Post-Construction Stormwater Management 24.03 Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination 24.04 Incorporated Laws  

24.01 - CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION . 
(1a)  FOREWORD. The intent of this section is to require use of best management practices to reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants resulting from land disturbing construction activities on sites that do not include the construction of a building and is otherwise regulated by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce in §COMM 21.125 or COMM 50.115, Wis. Adm. Code. Use of this section will foster consistent, Statewide application of the construction site performance standards for new development and redevelopment contained in subchs. III and IV of ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(1)  AUTHORITY. 
(a)  This section is adopted under the authority granted by §60.627, Wis. Stats. This section supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under §60.62, Wis. Stats., that relate to construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in §60.627, Wis. Stats., §60.62, Wis. Stats., applies to this section and to any amendments to this section. 
(b)  The provisions of this section are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same Town Board. 
(c)  The Town Board hereby designates the Street and Parks Superintendent to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The requirements of this section do not preempt more stringent erosion and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any of the following: 
1.  Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under §§281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats. 
2.  Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under §NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(2)  FINDINGS OF FACT. The Town Board finds that runoff from land disturbing construction activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters of the State in the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(3)  PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this section to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth, by minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the State in the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(4)  APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION. 
(a)  Applicability . 
1.  This section applies to the following land disturbing construction activities except as provided under subsection 2.: 
a.  A construction site, which has one or more acres of land disturbing construction activity. 
2.  This section does not apply to the following: 
a.  A construction project that is exempted by Federal statutes or regulations from the requirement to have a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit issued under chapter 40, Code of Federal Regulations, part 122, for land disturbing construction activity. 
b.  Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices. 
c.  Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities. 
d.  Routine maintenance for project sites under 5 acres of land disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility. 
3.  Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph 1., this subsection applies to construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the Street and Parks Superintendent, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety. 
(b)  Jurisdiction . This section applies to land disturbing construction activity on construction sites located within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(c)  Exclusions . This section is not applicable to activities conducted by a State agency, as defined under §227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also including the Office of District Attorney, which is subject to the State plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under §281.33(2), Wis. Stats. 
Note to Users: The Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT) has entered into a memorandum of understanding with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that satisfies §281.33(2), Wis. Stats., such that activities directed and supervised by WisDOT are exempt from this model ordinance. 
(5)  DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Street and Parks Superintendent means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under §60.627, Wis. Stats., that is designated by the Town Board to administer this section. 
(b)  Agricultural Facilities and Practices has the meaning in §281.16(1), Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Average Annual Rainfall means a calendar year of precipitation, excluding snow, which is considered typical. 
(d)  Best Management Practice or BMP means structural or nonstructural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the State. 
(e)  Business Day means a day the office of the Street and Parks Superintendent is routinely and customarily open for business. 
(f)  Cease and Desist Order means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit. 
(g)  Construction Site means an area upon which one or more land disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules but under one plan. 
(h)  Division of Land is the division of a lot or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development where the act of division creates 4 or fewer parcels or building sites of 35 acres each or less in area, but does not include: 
1.  Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order. 
2.  Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages, or easements. 
3.  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the remaining lots are not reduced or further reduced below the minimum size required by the Rib Mountain Municipal Code. 
(i)  Erosion means the process by which the land's surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(j)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan means a comprehensive plan developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments during construction. 
(k)  Extraterritorial means the unincorporated area within 3 miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village. 
(l)  Final Stabilization means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures. 
(m)  Town Board means Town Board of Supervisors, County Board of Supervisors, City Council, Village Board of Trustees or Village Council. 
(n)  Land Disturbing Construction Activity means any manmade alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the State. Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities. 
(o)  MEP or Maximum Extent Practicable means a level of implementing best management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified in this section which takes into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions. 
(p)  Performance Standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice. 
(q)  Permit means a written authorization made by the Street and Parks Superintendent to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the State. 
(r)  Pollutant has the meaning given in §283.01(13), Wis. Stats. 
(s)  Pollution has the meaning given in §281.01(10), Wis. Stats. 
(t)  Responsible Party means any entity holding fee title to the property or performing services to meet the performance standards of this section through a contract or other agreement. 
(u)  Runoff means stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
(v)  Sediment means settleable solid material that is transported by runoff, suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original location. 
(w)  Separate Storm Sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff. 
2.  Is not part of a combined sewer system. 
3.  Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system. 
4.  Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the State. 
(x)  Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit application. 
(y)  Stop Work Order means an order issued by the Street and Parks Superintendent which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped. 
(z)  Technical Standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method. 
(aa)  Waters of the State has the meaning given in §281.01(18), Wis. Stats. 
(6)  TECHNICAL STANDARDS. 
(a)  Design Criteria, Standards and Specifications . All BMPs required to comply with this section shall meet the design criteria, standards and specifications based on any of the following: 
1.  Applicable design criteria, standards and specifications identified in the Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook, WDNR Pub. WR-222 November 1993 Revision. 
2.  Other design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under subch. V of ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code. 
3.  For this section, average annual basis is calculated using the appropriate annual rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the R factor, or an equivalent design storm using a type II distribution, with consideration given to the geographic location of the site and the period of disturbance. 
Note to Users: The USLE and its successors RUSLE and RUSLE2, utilize an R factor which has been developed to estimate annual soil erosion, averaged over extended time periods. The R factor can be modified to estimate monthly and single-storm erosion. A design storm can be statistically calculated to provide an equivalent R factor as an average annual calculation. 
(b)  Other Standards . Other technical standards not identified or developed in subsection (a), may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the Street and Parks Superintendent. 
(7)  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. 
(a)  Responsible Party . The responsible party shall implement an erosion and sediment control plan, developed in accordance with subsection (9), that incorporates the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Plan . A written plan shall be developed in accordance with subsection (9) and implemented for each construction site. 
Note to Users: The written plan may be that specified within §NR 216.46, Wis. Adm. Code, the erosion control portion of a construction plan or other plan. 
(c)  Erosion and Other Pollutant Control Requirements . The plan required under subparagraph (b) shall include the following: 
1.  BMPs that, by design, achieve to the maximum extent practicable, a reduction of 80 percent of the sediment load carried in runoff, on an average annual basis, as compared with no sediment or erosion controls until the construction site has undergone final stabilization. No person shall be required to exceed an 80 percent sediment reduction to meet the requirements of this paragraph. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be used alone or in combination to meet the requirements of this paragraph. Credit toward meeting the sediment reduction shall be given for limiting the duration or area, or both, of land disturbing construction activity, or other appropriate mechanism. 
Note to Users: Soil loss prediction tools that estimate the sediment load leaving the construction site under varying land and management conditions, or methodology identified in subch. V. of ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code, may be used to calculate sediment reduction. 
2.  Notwithstanding subparagraph 1., if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to reduce the sediment load by 80 percent, on an average annual basis, the plan shall include a written and site-specific explanation as to why the 80 percent reduction goal is not attainable and the sediment load shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
3.  Where appropriate, the plan shall include sediment controls to do all of the following to the maximum extent practicable: 
a.  Prevent tracking of sediment from the construction site onto roads and other paved surfaces. 
b.  Prevent the discharge of sediment as part of site dewatering. 
c.  Protect the separate storm drain inlet structure from receiving sediment. 
4.  The use, storage and disposal of chemicals, cement and other compounds and materials used on the construction site shall be managed during the construction period, to prevent their entrance into waters of the State. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the State, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this paragraph. 
(d)  Location . The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located prior to runoff entering waters of the State. 
Note to Users: While regional treatment facilities are appropriate for control of post-construction pollutants, they should not be used for construction site sediment removal. 
(e)  Alternate Requirements . The Street and Parks Superintendent may establish stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if the Street and Parks Superintendent determines that an added level of protection is needed for sensitive resources. 
(8)  PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES AND FEES. 
(a)  Permit Required . No responsible party may commence a land disturbing construction activity subject to this section without receiving prior approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site and a permit from the Street and Parks Superintendent. 
(b)  Permit Application and Fees . At least one responsible party desiring to undertake a land disturbing construction activity subject to this section shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and sediment control plan that meets the requirements of subsection (9) and shall pay an application fee to the Street and Parks Superintendent. A schedule of the fees established by the Street and Parks Superintendent shall be available for review in the Rib Mountain Municipal Center. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the Street and Parks Superintendent to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(c)  Review and Approval of Permit Application . The Street and Parks Superintendent shall review any permit application that is submitted with an erosion and sediment control plan, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used: 
1.  Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of a complete permit application, as required by subparagraph (b), the Street and Parks Superintendent shall inform the applicant whether the application and plan are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this section. 
2.  If the permit application and plan are approved, the Street and Parks Superintendent shall issue the permit. 
3.  If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the Street and Parks Superintendent shall state in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
4.  The Street and Parks Superintendent may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Street and Parks Superintendent shall have 30 calendar days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan is either approved or disapproved. 
(d)  Surety Bond . As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the Street and Parks Superintendent may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved erosion control plan and any permit conditions. 
(e)  Permit Requirements . All permits shall require the responsible party to: 
1.  Notify the Street and Parks Superintendent within 48 hours of commencing any land disturbing construction activity. 
2.  Notify the Street and Parks Superintendent of completion of any BMPs within 14 days after their installation. 
3.  Obtain permission in writing from the Street and Parks Superintendent prior to any modification, pursuant to subsection (9)(c), of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
4.  Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment control plan. 
5.  Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
6.  Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainageways resulting from land disturbing construction activities and document repairs in a site erosion control log. 
7.  Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inches or more which results in runoff during active construction periods, and at least once each week, make needed repairs and document the findings of the inspections in a site erosion control log with the date of inspection, the name of the person conducting the inspection, and a description of the present phase of the construction at the site. 
8.  Allow the Street and Parks Superintendent to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan at the construction site. 
(f)  Permit Conditions . Permits issued under this section may include conditions established by the Street and Parks Superintendent in addition to the requirements set forth in subparagraph (e), where needed to assure compliance with the performance standards in subsection (7). 
(g)  Permit Duration . Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of 180 days, or the length of the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The Street and Parks Superintendent may extend the period one or more times for up to an additional 180 days. The Street and Parks Superintendent may require additional BMPs as a condition of the extension if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
(h)  Maintenance . The responsible party throughout the duration of the construction activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of this section until the site has undergone final stabilization. 
(9)  EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN, STATEMENT, AND AMENDMENTS. 
(a)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan . 
1.  An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and submitted to the Street and Parks Superintendent. The plan shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer or professional hydrologist registered in the State of Wisconsin. 
2.  The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet the performance standards in subsection (7) and other requirements of this section. 
3.  The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation during construction and up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items: 
a.  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm. The application shall also include start and end dates for construction. 
b.  Description of the site and the nature of the construction activity, including representation of the limits of land disturbance on a United States Geological Service 7.5-minute series topographic map. 
c.  A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
d.  Estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the site that is expected to be disturbed by construction activities. 
e.  Estimates, including calculations, if any, of the runoff coefficient of the site before and after construction activities are completed. 
f.  Calculations to show the expected percent reduction in the average annual sediment load carried in runoff as compared to no sediment or erosion controls. 
g.  Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils. 
h.  Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources Conservation Service soil information where available. 
i.  Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United States Geological Service 7.5-minute series topographic maps. 
4.  The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map. The site map shall include the following items and shall be at a scale not greater than 100 feet per inch and at a contour interval not to exceed 5 feet. 
a.  Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered drainage systems, roads and surface waters. Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified 100-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways shall also be shown. 
b.  Boundaries of the construction site. 
c.  Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading activities. 
d.  Areas of soil disturbance. 
e.  Location of major structural and nonstructural controls identified in the plan. 
f.  Location of areas where stabilization practices will be employed. 
g.  Areas which will be vegetated following construction. 
h.  Areal extent of wetland acreage on the site and locations where stormwater is discharged to a surface water or wetland. 
i.  Locations of all surface waters and wetlands within one mile of the construction site. 
j.  An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire construction site map. 
5.  Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a description of appropriate controls and measures that will be performed at the site to prevent pollutants from reaching waters of the State. The plan shall clearly describe the appropriate control measures for each major activity and the timing during the construction process that the measures will be implemented. The description of erosion controls shall include, when appropriate, the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices, including a practice implementation schedule. Site plans shall ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized. 
b.  Description of structural practices to divert flow away from exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise specifically approved in writing by the Street and Parks Superintendent, structural measures shall be installed on upland soils. 
c.  Management of overland flow at all sites, unless otherwise controlled by outfall controls. 
d.  Trapping of sediment in channelized flow. 
e.  Staging construction to limit bare areas subject to erosion. 
f.  Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur. 
g.  Minimization of tracking at all sites. 
h.  Cleanup of off-site sediment deposits. 
i.  Proper disposal of building and waste materials at all sites. 
j.  Stabilization of drainageways. 
k.  Control of soil erosion from dirt stockpiles. 
l.  Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as possible after final grading. 
m.  Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable. 
6.  The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that velocity dissipation devices be placed at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall channel, as necessary, to provide a nonerosive flow from the structure to a watercourse so that the natural physical and biological characteristics and functions are maintained and protected. 
Note to Users: The plan requirements of this subsection will meet the erosion control plan requirements of §NR 216.46, Wis. Adm. Code, when prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and the design criteria, standards and specifications outlined at the DNR web site: http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/nps/stormwater/techstds.htm#Construction 
(b)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Statement . For each construction site identified under subsection (4)(a)3., an erosion and sediment control plan statement shall be prepared. This statement shall be submitted to the Street and Parks Superintendent. The control plan statement shall briefly describe the site, including a site map. Further, it shall also include the best management practices that will be used to meet the requirements of this section, including the site development schedule. 
(c)  Amendments . The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following occur: 
1.  There is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the site which has the reasonable potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of the State and which has not otherwise been addressed in the plan. 
2.  The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by construction site runoff. 
3.  The Street and Parks Superintendent notifies the applicant of changes needed in the plan. 
(10)  FEE SCHEDULE. The fees referred to in other subsections of this section shall be established by the Street and Parks Superintendent and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the Street and Parks Superintendent shall be available for review in the Rib Mountain Municipal Center. 
(11)  INSPECTION. If land disturbing construction activities are being carried out without a permit required by this section, the Street and Parks Superintendent may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of §66.0119(1), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats. 
(12)  ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  The Street and Parks Superintendent may post a stop work order if any of the following occurs: 
1.  Any land disturbing construction activity regulated under this section is being undertaken without a permit. 
2.  The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in a good faith manner. 
3.  The conditions of the permit are not being met. 
Note to Users: The Street and Parks Superintendent should inspect any construction site that holds a permit under this section at least once a month during the period starting March 1 and ending October 31 and at least 2 times during the period starting November 1 and ending February 28 to ensure compliance with the approved sediment and erosion control plan. 
(b)  If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stop work order posted under this section or fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the Street and Parks Superintendent may revoke the permit. 
(c)  If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not cease the activity after being notified by the Street and Parks Superintendent, or if a responsible party violates a stop work order posted under subparagraph (a), the Street and Parks Superintendent may request the municipal attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction. 
(d)  The Street and Parks Superintendent may retract the stop work order issued under subparagraph (a) or the permit revocation under subparagraph (b). 
(e)  After posting a stop work order under subparagraph (a), the Street and Parks Superintendent may issue a notice of intent to the responsible party of its intent to perform work necessary to comply with this section. The Street and Parks Superintendent may go on the land and commence the work after issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed under this subsection by the Street and Parks Superintendent, plus interest at the rate authorized by the Town Board shall be billed to the responsible party. In the event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the Clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property pursuant to subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats. 
(f)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 and the costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Compliance with the provisions of this section may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
Note to Users: Injunctional orders are authorized pursuant to §61.35, Wis. Stats. 
(13)  APPEALS. 
(a)  Board of Appeals . The Board of Appeals created pursuant to §17.254 of the Town's zoning ordinance pursuant to §60.65, Wis. Stats.: 
1.  Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the Street and Parks Superintendent in administering this section except for cease and desist orders obtained under subsection (12)(c). 
2.  Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this section which are not contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this section will result in unnecessary hardship; and 
3.  Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances. 
(b)  Who May Appeal . Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any office, department, board, or bureau of the Town of Rib Mountain affected by any decision of the Street and Parks Superintendent. 
(14)  SEVERABILITY. If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision or portion of this section unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the section shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment. 
24.02 - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT . 
(1)  AUTHORITY. 
(a)  This section is adopted by the Town Board under the authority granted by §60.627, for towns, Wis. Stats. This section supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under §60.62, Wis. Stats., that relate to stormwater management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in §60.627, Wis. Stats., §60.62, Wis. Stats., applies to this section and to any amendments to this section. 
(b)  The provisions of this section are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same Town Board. 
(c)  The Town Board hereby designates the Street and Parks Superintendent to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The requirements of this section do not preempt more stringent stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of the following: 
1.  Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under §§281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats. 
2.  Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under §NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(2)  FINDINGS OF FACT. The Town Board finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can: 
(a)  Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature. 
(b)  Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants. 
(c)  Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads. 
(d)  Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading. 
(e)  Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways, and other minor drainage facilities. 
(f)  Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks and volumes. 
(g)  Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding. 
(3)  PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(a)  Purpose . The general purpose of this section is to establish long-term, post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to: 
1.  Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions. 
2.  Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth. 
3.  Control exceedence of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger downstream property. 
(b  Intent . It is the intent of the Town Board that this section regulates post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the State. This section may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The Town Board recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the stormwater performance standards set forth in this section is through the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level stormwater management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices or systems, any of which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the State. Where such plans are in conformance with the performance standards developed under §281.16, Wis. Stats., for regional stormwater management measures and have been approved by the Town Board, it is the intent of this section that the approved plan be used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for the community. 
(4)  APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION. 
(a)  Applicability . 
1.  Where not otherwise limited by law, this section applies after final stabilization to a site of land disturbing construction activity meeting any of the criteria in this paragraph, unless the site is otherwise exempt under subparagraph 2. 
a.  A post-construction site that had one or more acres of land disturbing construction activity. 
b.  Land development which in the opinion of the Town of Rib Mountain is likely to result in stormwater runoff and may cause channel erosion, increase water pollution, or endanger downstream property or public safety. As such, nonresidential development sites less than one acre in size are subject to Town review to determine if they will be subject to the requirements of this section. 
Note to Users: The one-acre land disturbance threshold is consistent with State and Federal laws regarding applicability of construction site erosion control permits. 
2.  A site that meets any of the criteria in this paragraph is exempt from the requirements of this section. 
a.  A post-construction site with less than 10 percent connected imperviousness based on complete development of the post-construction site, provided the cumulative area of all parking lots and rooftops is less than one acre. 
b.  Stormwater discharges from agricultural facilities and practices. 
c.  Stormwater discharges from silviculture activities. 
d.  Routine maintenance for project sites under 5 acres of land disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility. 
e.  Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and fiberoptic lines. This exemption does not apply to the construction of any aboveground structures associated with utility construction. 
3.  Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in subparagraph 1., this subsection applies to post-construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the Street and Parks Superintendent, is likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety. 
(b)  Jurisdiction . This section applies to post-construction sites within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Town of Rib Mountain. 
(c)  Exclusions . This section is not applicable to activities conducted by a State agency, as defined under §227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also including the Office of District Attorney, which is subject to the State plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under §281.33(2), Wis. Stats. 
Note to Users: The Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT) has entered into a memorandum of understanding with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that satisfies §281.33(2), Wis. Stats., such that activities directed and supervised by WisDOT are exempt from this model ordinance. 
(5)  DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Street and Parks Superintendent means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under §60.627, Wis. Stats., that is designated by the Town Board to administer this section. 
(b)  Agricultural Facilities and Practices has the meaning given in §281.16, Wis. Stats. 
(c)  Average Annual Rainfall means a calendar year of precipitation, excluding snow, which is considered typical. 
(d)  Best Management Practice or BMP means structural or nonstructural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the State. 
(e)  Business Day means a day the office of the Street and Parks Superintendent is routinely and customarily open for business. 
(f)  Cease and Desist Order means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit. 
(g)  Combined Sewer System means a system for conveying both sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff. 
(h)  Connected Imperviousness means an impervious surface that is directly connected to a separate storm sewer or water of the State via an impervious flow path. 
(i)  Design Storm means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall. 
(j)  Development means residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land uses and associated roads. 
(k)  Division of Land is the division of a lot or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development where the act of division creates 4 or fewer parcels or building sites of 35 acres each or less in area, but does not include: 
1.  Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order. 
2.  Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages, or easements. 
3.  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the remaining lots are not reduced or further reduced below the minimum size required by the Rib Mountain Municipal Code. 
(l)  Effective Infiltration Area means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment. 
(m)  Erosion means the process by which the land's surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(n)  Exceptional Resource Waters means waters listed in §NR 102.11, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(o)  Extraterritorial means the unincorporated area within 3 miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village. 
(p)  Final Stabilization means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform, perennial, vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures. 
(q)  Financial Guarantee means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the Street and Parks Superintendent by the responsible party to assure that requirements of the ordinance are carried out in compliance with the stormwater management plan. 
(r)  Town Board means Town Board of Supervisors. 
(s)  Impervious Surface means an area that releases as runoff all, or a large portion of, the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples of areas that typically are impervious. 
(t)  In-Fill Area means an undeveloped area of land located within existing development. 
(u)  Infiltration means the entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil. 
(v)  Infiltration System means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as swales or roadside channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only. 
(w)  Karst Feature means an area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets. 
(x)  Land Disturbing Construction Activity means any manmade alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the State. Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities. 
(y)  Maintenance Agreement means a legal document that provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
(z)  MEP or Maximum Extent Practicable means a level of implementing best management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified in this section which takes into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions. 
(aa)  New Development means development resulting from the conversion of previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses. 
(bb)  Off-Site means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application. 
(cc)  On-Site means located within the property boundary described in the permit application. 
(dd)  Ordinary High-Water Mark has the meaning given in §NR 115.03(6), Wis. Adm. Code. 
(ee)  Outstanding Resource Waters means waters listed in §NR 102.10, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(ff)  Percent Fines means the percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes through a #200 sieve. 
Note to Users: Percent fines can be determined using the American Society for Testing and Materials, volume 04.02, Test Method C117-95 Standard Test Method for Materials Finer than 75-um (No. 200) Sieve in Material Aggregates by Washing. Copies can be obtained by contacting the American Society for Testing and Materials, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959, or phone 610-832-9585, or on line at: "http://www.astm.org/". 
(gg)  Performance Standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice. 
(hh)  Permit means a written authorization made by the Street and Parks Superintendent to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the State. 
(ii)  Permit Administration Fee means a sum of money paid to the Street and Parks Superintendent by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit. 
(jj)  Pervious Surface means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious. 
(kk)  Pollutant has the meaning given in §283.01(13), Wis. Stats. 
(ll)  Pollution has the meaning given in §281.01(10), Wis. Stats. 
(mm)  Post-Construction Site means a construction site following the completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization. 
(nn)  Predevelopment Condition means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of land disturbing construction activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner. 
(oo)  Preventive Action Limit has the meaning given in §NR 140.05(17), Wis. Adm. Code. 
(pp)  Rainleader for the purposes of this section, shall be defined as any conduit that conveys stormwater from a rooftop to a point of discharge. 
(qq)  Redevelopment means areas where development is replacing older development. 
(rr)  Responsible Party means any entity holding fee title to the property or other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement and maintain post-construction stormwater BMPs. 
(ss)  Runoff means stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
(tt)  Separate Storm Sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff. 
2.  Is not part of a combined sewer system. 
3.  Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system. 
4.  Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the State. 
(uu)  Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity occurred. 
(vv)  Stop Work Order means an order issued by the Street and Parks Superintendent which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped. 
(ww)  Stormwater Management Plan means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater after the site has under gone final stabilization following completion of the construction activity. 
(xx)  Stormwater Management System Plan is a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale. 
(yy)  Technical Standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method. 
(zz)  Top of the Channel means an edge, or point on the landscape, landward from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the State, where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12 percent continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12 percent or less continually for the initial 50 feet, landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark. 
(aaa)  TR-55 means the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986. 
(bbb)  Type II Distribution means a rainfall type curve as established in the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published 1973. The Type II curve is applicable to all of Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern. 
(ccc)  Waters of the State has the meaning given in §281.01(18), Wis. Stats. 
(6)  TECHNICAL STANDARDS. The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak flow control and infiltration components of stormwater practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this section: 
(a)  Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under subch. V of ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(b)  Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the Street and Parks Superintendent. 
(c)  In this section, the following year and location has been selected as average annual rainfall(s) for use in water quality analysis: Green Bay, 1969 (March 29-November 25). 
(d)  Total suspended solids calculations shall utilize the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) National Urban Runoff Program (NURP) particle size distribution. 
(7)  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. 
(a)  Responsible Party . The responsible party shall implement a post-construction stormwater management plan that incorporates the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Plan . A written stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection (9) shall be developed and implemented for each post-construction site. The Town has developed a standard form for stormwater management submittal. This guide is available from the Town Engineer, the Town's website at www.townofribmountain.org, or the Rib Mountain Municipal Center. 
(c)  Requirements . The plan required under subparagraph (b) shall include the following: 
1.  Total Suspended Solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from the post-construction site as follows: 
a.  For new development, by design, reduce to the maximum extent practicable, the post-development total suspended solids load by 80 percent, based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls. No person shall be required to exceed an 80 percent total suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of this subdivision. 
b.  For redevelopment, by design, reduce to the maximum extent practicable, the post-redevelopment total suspended solids load by 40 percent, based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls. No person shall be required to exceed a 40 percent total suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of this subdivision. 
c.  Notwithstanding subparagraphs a. and b., if the design cannot achieve the applicable total suspended solids reduction specified, the stormwater management plan shall include a written and site-specific explanation why that level of reduction is not attained and the total suspended solids load shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. The Town recognizes that the use of judgment and flexibility is required to create a stormwater management plan for a development that is safe, practical, technically sound, and cost-effective. Site conditions and other factors may make it impractical to provide stormwater management that is in accordance with the standards in this section. As provided for by the Town, at the discretion of the Street and Parks Superintendent, the level of stormwater management required may be modified. Also, alternate structural and nonstructural measures may be used to meet the requirements of the ordinance, if approved by the Street and Parks Superintendent. 
Note to Users: Pollutant loading models such as SLAMM, P8 or equivalent methodology may be used to evaluate the efficiency of the design in reducing total suspended solids. 
2.  Peak Discharge. By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce the peak runoff discharge rates, to the maximum extent practicable, as compared to predevelopment conditions for the 2-year, 24-hour; the 10-year, 24-hour; and the 100-year, 24-hour design storm applicable to the post-construction site. The 25-year post-development peak shall be reduced to the 10-year pre-development peak storm. BMPs shall be employed to safely pass the 100-year, 24-hour design storm applicable to the post-construction site. Predevelopment conditions shall assume "good hydrologic conditions" for appropriate land covers as identified in TR-55 or an equivalent methodology. The meaning of "hydrologic soil group" and "runoff curve number" are as determined in TR-55. However, when predevelopment land cover is cropland, rather than using TR-55 values for cropland, the runoff curve numbers in Table 1 shall be used. Design storms shall be SCS Type II distribution or, preferably, appropriate rainfall distributions taken from, Floyd A. Huff and James R. Angel, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the Midwest, Midwestern Climate Center, Illinois State Water Survey, 1992. 
Table 1 - Maximum Predevelopment Runoff Curve Numbers for Cropland Areas Hydrologic Soil Group A B C D Runoff Curve Number 56 70 79 83  
  
Note to Users: The curve numbers in Table 1 represent mid-range values for soils under a good hydrologic condition where conservation practices are used and are selected to be protective of the resource waters. 
3.  Infiltration. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff to the maximum extent practicable in accordance with the following, except as provided in subparagraphs e. through h. 
a.  For residential developments one of the following shall be met: 
1.  Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 90 percent of the predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent of the project site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
2.  Infiltrate 25 percent of the post-development runoff from the 2-year, 24-hour design storm with an SCS Type II distribution. Separate curve numbers for previous and impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate runoff volumes and not composite curve numbers as defined in TR-55. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent of the project site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
b.  For nonresidential development, including commercial, industrial and institutional development, one of the following shall be met: 
1.  Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 60 percent of the predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2 percent of the project site is required as an effective infiltration area 
2.  Infiltrate 10 percent of the runoff from the 2-year, 24-hour design storm with an SCS Type II distribution. Separate curve numbers for pervious and impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate runoff volumes, and not composite curve numbers as defined in TR-55. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2 percent of the project site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
c.  Predevelopment condition shall be the same as in subparagraph 2. 
Note to Users: A model that calculates runoff volume, such as SLAMM, P8, or an equivalent methodology shall be used to demonstrate that the infiltration requirements are met. 
d.  Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance with subparagraph 8. Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips. 
Note to Users: To achieve the infiltration requirement for the parking lots or roads, maximum extent practicable should not be interpreted to require significant topography changes that create an excessive financial burden. To minimize potential groundwater impacts, it is desirable to infiltrate the cleanest runoff. To achieve this, a design may propose greater infiltration of runoff from low pollutant sources such as roofs, and less from higher pollutant source areas such as parking lots. 
e.  Exclusions. The runoff from the following areas are prohibited from meeting the requirements of this paragraph: 
1.  Areas associated with tier 1 industrial facilities identified in §NR 216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including storage, loading, rooftop and parking. 
2.  Storage and loading areas of tier 2 industrial facilities identified in §NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code. 
Note to Users: Runoff from tier 2 parking and rooftop areas may be infiltrated but may require pretreatment. 
3.  Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. 
4.  Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet downgradient of Karst features. 
5.  Areas with less than 3 feet separation distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock, except this subparagraph e.5. does not prohibit infiltration of roof runoff. 
6.  Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and institutional parking lots and roads and residential arterial roads with less than 5 feet separation distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock. 
7.  Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in §NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code, or within 100 feet of a private well as specified in §NR 812.08(4), Wis. Adm. Code, for runoff infiltrated from commercial, industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices for residential development. 
8.  Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in §NR 720.03(2), Wis. Adm. Code, are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur. 
9.  Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the following soil characteristics between the bottom of the infiltration system and the seasonal high groundwater and top of bedrock: at least a 3-foot soil layer with 20 percent fines or greater; or at least a 5-foot soil layer with 10 percent fines or greater. This does not apply where the soil medium within the infiltration system provides an equivalent level of protection. This subparagraph e.9. does not prohibit infiltration of roof runoff. 
Note to Users: The areas listed in subparagraph 5. are prohibited from infiltrating runoff due to the potential for groundwater contamination. 
f.  Exemption. The following are not required to meet the requirements of this paragraph: 
1.  Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6 inches per hour measured at the site. 
2.  Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial and industrial development. 
3.  Infiltration areas during periods when the soil on the site is frozen. 
4.  Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and arterial residential roads. 
g.  Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry or irrigation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by this paragraph. 
h.  1.  Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this paragraph shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards application in accordance with ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code. However, if site-specific information indicates that compliance with a preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent practicable. 
2.  Notwithstanding subd. par. a., the discharge from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard at the point of standards application. 
4.  Protective Areas. 
a.  "Protective area" means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this paragraph, "protective area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location. 
1.  For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters, and for wetlands in areas of special natural resource interest as specified in §NR 103.04, Wis. Adm. Code, 75 feet. 
2.  For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a United States geological survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more current, 50 feet. 
3.  For lakes, 50 feet. 
4.  For highly susceptible wetlands, 50 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands include the following types: fens, sedge meadows, bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps, shrub swamps, other forested wetlands, fresh wet meadows, shallow marshes, deep marshes and seasonally flooded basins. Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in accordance with §NR 103.08(1m), Wis. Adm. Code. This paragraph does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in accordance with all applicable State and Federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in accordance with all applicable State and Federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been placed. 
5.  For less susceptible wetlands, 10 percent of the average wetland width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass. 
6.  In subparagraphs a.1., 4. and 5., determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in §NR 103.03, Wis. Adm. Code. 
7.  For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130 acres, 10 feet. 
b.  This paragraph applies to post-construction sites located within a protective area, except those areas exempted pursuant to subparagraph d. 
c.  The following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area to the maximum extent practicable. The stormwater management plan shall contain a written site-specific explanation for any parts of the protective area that are disturbed during construction. 
2.  Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a protective area, and where no impervious surface is present, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70 percent or greater shall be established and maintained. The adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Nonvegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep slopes or where high velocity flows occur. 
Note to Users: It is recommended that seeding of nonaggressive vegetative cover be used in the protective areas. Vegetation that is flood and drought tolerant and can provide long-term bank stability because of an extensive root system is preferable. Vegetative cover can be measured using the line transect method described in the University of Wisconsin Extension publication number A3533, titled Estimating Residue Using the Line Transect Method. 
3.  Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention basins, that are designed to control pollutants from nonpoint sources may be located in the protective area. 
Note to Users: Other regulations, such as ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and chs. NR 103, 115, 116 and 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and their associated review and approval process may apply in the protective area. 
d.  This paragraph does not apply to: 
1.  Structures that cross or access surface waters such as boat landings, bridges and culverts. 
2.  Structures constructed in accordance with §59.692(1v), Wis. Stats. 
3.  Post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter the surface water, except to the extent that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability. 
5.  Fueling and Vehicle Maintenance Areas. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable, have BMPs designed, installed and maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, such that the runoff that enters waters of the State contains no visible petroleum sheen. 
Note to Users: A combination of the following BMPs may be used: oil and grease separators, canopies, petroleum spill cleanup materials, or any other structural or nonstructural method of preventing or treating petroleum in runoff. 
6.  Swale Treatment for Transportation Facilities. 
a.  Applicability. Except as provided in subparagraph 2., transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance and pollutant removal meet all of the requirements of this section, if the swales are designed to the maximum extent practicable to do all of the following: 
1.  Be vegetated; however, where appropriate, nonvegetative measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check dams. 
Note to Users: It is preferred that tall and dense vegetation be maintained within the swale due to its greater effectiveness at enhancing runoff pollutant removal. 
2.  Carry runoff through a swale for 200 feet or more in length that is designed with a flow velocity no greater than 1.5 feet per second for the peak flow generated using either a 2-year, 24-hour design storm or a 2-year storm with a duration equal to the time of concentration as appropriate. If a swale of 200 feet in length cannot be designed with a flow velocity of 1.5 feet per second or less, then the flow velocity shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
Note to Users: Check dams may be included in the swale design to slow runoff flows and improve pollutant removal. Transportation facilities with continuous features such as curb and gutter, sidewalks or parking lanes do not comply with the design requirements of this paragraph. However, a limited amount of structural measures such as curb and gutter may be allowed as necessary to account for other concerns such as human safety or resource protection. 
b.  Exemptions. The Street and Parks Superintendent may, consistent with water quality standards, require other provisions of this section be met on a transportation facility with an average daily travel of vehicles greater than 2,500 and where the initial surface water of the State that the runoff directly enters is any of the following: 
1.  An outstanding resource water. 
2.  An exceptional resource water. 
3.  Waters listed in § 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act that are identified as impaired in whole or in part, due to nonpoint source impacts. 
4.  Waters where targeted performance standards are developed under §NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code, to meet water quality standards. 
(d)  General Considerations for On-Site and Off-Site Stormwater Management Measures . The following considerations shall be observed in managing runoff: 
1.  Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section. 
2.  Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety. 
3.  Except as provided herein, all rainleader downspouts shall be placed so that drainage is to pervious surfaces. The owner is responsible for arranging drainage in a manner that complies with the law. Rainwater from downspouts shall be drained so as not to cause flooding of or dampness in walls, ceilings, or floors in any portion of the building or in any adjacent building, structure, or property. Downspout placement shall not be prohibited so long as no conflicts exist with this section or any other applicable City Codes. 
(e)  Location And Regional Treatment Option . 
1.  The BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional stormwater device, practice or system. 
2.  Post-construction runoff within a nonnavigable surface water that flows into a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, is not required to meet the performance standards of this section. Post-construction BMPs may be located in nonnavigable surface waters. 
3.  Except as allowed under paragraph (d), post-construction runoff from new development shall meet the post-construction performance standards prior to entering a navigable surface water. 
4.  Post-construction runoff from any development within a navigable surface water that flows into a BMP is not required to meet the performance standards of this section if: 
a.  The BMP was constructed prior to the effective date of this section and the BMP either received a permit issued under ch. 30, Wis. Stats., or the BMP did not require a ch. 30, Wis. Stats., permit; and 
b.  The BMP is designed to provide runoff treatment from future upland development. 
5.  Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and in-fill areas shall meet the post-construction performance standards in accordance with this paragraph. 
a.  To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to treat runoff prior to discharge to navigable surface waters. 
b.  Post-construction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a navigable surface water if allowable under all other applicable Federal, State and local regulations such as ch. NR 103, Wis. Adm. Code, and ch. 30, Wis. Stats. 
Note to Users: This allows the location of BMPs in navigable surface waters where necessary to augment management practices upstream of the navigable surface water to meet the performance standards. 
6.  The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, or after a series of such BMPs is subject to this section. 
Note to Users: This section does not supersede any other applicable Federal, State or local regulation such as ch. NR 103, Wis. Adm. Code, and ch. 30, Wis. Stats. 
7.  The Street and Parks Superintendent may approve off-site management measures provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The Street and Parks Superintendent determines that the post-construction runoff is covered by a stormwater management system plan that is approved by the Town of Rib Mountain and that contains management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. 
b.  The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions: 
1.  The facility is in place. 
2.  The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the performance standards of this section. 
3.  The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance. 
8.  Where a regional treatment option exists such that the Street and Parks Superintendent exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site stormwater management requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with the Street and Parks Superintendent. In determining the fee for post-construction runoff, the Street and Parks Superintendent shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment option. 
(f)  Alternate Requirements . The Street and Parks Superintendent may establish stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if the Street and Parks Superintendent determines that an added level of protection is needed to protect sensitive resources. 
(8)  PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES AND FEES. 
(a)  Permit Required . No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing construction activity without receiving a post-construction runoff permit from the Street and Parks Superintendent prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Permit Application and Fees . Unless specifically excluded by this section, any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the Street and Parks Superintendent a permit application made on a form provided by the Street and Parks Superintendent for that purpose. The Town has developed a standard form for submittal of a stormwater management permit. This guide is available from the Town Engineer, the Town's website at www.townofribmountain.org, or the Rib Mountain Municipal Center. 
1.  Unless otherwise excepted by this section, a permit application must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan, a maintenance agreement and a nonrefundable permit administration fee. 
2.  The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of subsections (7) and (9), the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of subsection (10), the financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of subsection (11), and fees shall be those established by the Town Board as set forth in subsection (12). 
(c)  Review and Approval of Permit Application . The Street and Parks Superintendent shall review any permit application that is submitted with a stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used: 
1.  Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all items as required by subparagraph (b), the Street and Parks Superintendent shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this section. 
2.  If the stormwater permit application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved, or if an agreed-upon payment of fees in lieu of stormwater management practices is made, the Street and Parks Superintendent shall issue the permit. 
3.  If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance agreement is disapproved, the Street and Parks Superintendent shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
4.  The Street and Parks Superintendent may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Street and Parks Superintendent shall have 30 calendar days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved. 
(d)  Permit Requirements . All permits issued under this section shall be subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this section shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The Street and Parks Superintendent may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the responsible party. An action by the Street and Parks Superintendent to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with subsection (14). 
1.  Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the responsibility to comply with other applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations. 
2.  The responsible party shall design and install all structural and nonstructural stormwater management measures in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit. 
3.  The responsible party shall notify the Street and Parks Superintendent at least 7 business days before commencing any work in conjunction with the stormwater management plan, and within 7 business days upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If required as a special condition under subparagraph (e), the responsible party shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the Street and Parks Superintendent so that practice installations can be inspected during construction. 
4.  Practice installations required as part of this section shall be surveyed by a Registered Land Surveyor or Professional Engineer and certified "as built" by a licensed Professional Engineer or Hydrologist. Completed stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by the Street and Parks Superintendent or its designee to determine if they are in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and ordinance. The Street and Parks Superintendent or its designee shall notify the responsible party in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this permit. 
5.  The responsible party shall notify the Street and Parks Superintendent of any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved stormwater management plan. The Street and Parks Superintendent may require that the proposed modifications be submitted to it for approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater management plan and execution by the responsible party. 
6.  The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management practices in accordance with the stormwater management plan until the practices are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved maintenance agreement. 
7.  The responsible party authorizes the Street and Parks Superintendent to perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater management measures into conformance with the approved stormwater management plan, and consents to a special assessment or charge against the property as authorized under subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or to charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted under subsection (11). 
8.  If so directed by the Street and Parks Superintendent, the responsible party shall repair at the responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainageways caused by runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
9.  The responsible party shall permit property access to the Street and Parks Superintendent or its designee for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit. 
10.  Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the Street and Parks Superintendent may require the responsible party to make appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or public safety. 
11.  The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties detailed in subsection (13), if the responsible party fails to comply with the terms of this permit. 
(e)  Permit Conditions . Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions established by Street and Parks Superintendent in addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance standards in subsection (7) or a financial guarantee as provided for in subsection (11). 
(f)  Permit Duration . Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the Street and Parks Superintendent notifies the responsible party that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under subparagraph (d)4. 
(9)  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. 
(a)  Plan Requirements . The stormwater management plan required under subsection (8)(b) shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of stormwater management practices; and person(s) responsible for maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party. 
2.  A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat. 
3.  Predevelopment site conditions, including: 
a.  One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site location and legal property description; predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition; topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed one foot; topography and drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used in hydrology determinations to show compliance with performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the 100-year floodplain; location of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project area and delineated pursuant to §NR 811.16, Wis. Adm. Code. 
b.  Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s). 
4.  Post-development site conditions, including: 
a.  Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and wetlands. 
b.  Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management measures in the development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and ordinances. 
c.  One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 40 feet showing the following: post-construction pervious areas including vegetative cover type and condition; impervious surfaces including all buildings, structures, and pavement; post-construction topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed one foot; post-construction drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of maintenance easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; location and type of all stormwater management conveyance and treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainageway; watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant loading calculations and any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site. 
d.  Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. The computations shall be made for each discharge point in the development, and the geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s). 
e.  Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the placement and design of stormwater management measures. Detailed drawings including cross sections and profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and treatment practices. 
5.  A description and installation schedule for the stormwater management practices needed to meet the performance standards in subsection (7). 
6.  A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater management practice including the required maintenance activities and maintenance activity schedule. 
7.  Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of each stormwater management practice. 
8.  Other information requested in writing by the Street and Parks Superintendent to determine compliance of the proposed stormwater management measures with the provisions of this section. 
9.  All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be certified by a professional engineer or hydrologist licensed in the State of Wisconsin to be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and requirements of this section. 
(b)  Alternate Requirements . The Street and Parks Superintendent may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site stormwater management performance standards under subsection (7)(e). 
Note to Users: The Town of Rib Mountain provides a submittal form at the Municipal Center for further guidance on the stormwater management plan content. 
(10)  MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT. 
(a)  Maintenance Agreement Required . The maintenance agreement required under subsection (8)(b) for stormwater management practices shall be an agreement between the Town of Rib Mountain and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of stormwater practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the stormwater management practices. 
(b)  Agreement Provisions . The maintenance agreement shall contain the following information and provisions and be consistent with the maintenance plan required by subsection (9)(a)6.: 
1.  Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the drainage area served by the facilities. 
2.  A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater management plan required under subsection (8)(b). 
3.  Identification of the responsible party(ies) responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater management practices identified in the stormwater management plan required under subsection (8)(b). 
4.  Requirement that the responsible party(ies) shall maintain stormwater management practices in accordance with the schedule included in paragraph 2. 
5.  Authorization for the Street and Parks Superintendent to access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater management practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement. 
6.  A requirement on the Street and Parks Superintendent to maintain public records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the responsible party responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater management practice into proper working condition. 
7.  Agreement that the party designated under paragraph 3., as responsible for long term maintenance of the stormwater management practices, shall be notified by the Street and Parks Superintendent of maintenance problems which require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set by the Street and Parks Superintendent. 
8.  Authorization of the Street and Parks Superintendent to perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the responsible party designated under paragraph 3. does not make the required corrections in the specified time period. The Street and Parks Superintendent shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the property pursuant to subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats. 
9.  Requirement that the party designated under paragraph 3., as responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater management practices, shall, if the management practices include a wet detention basin, have the basin surveyed by a Registered Land Surveyor licensed by the State of Wisconsin at least every 10 years. This survey shall compare the condition of the management practices with the as-built condition, to include depth of sediment accumulated in the basin. A copy of the survey shall be provided to the Street and Parks Superintendent. 
(11)  FINANCIAL GUARANTEE. 
(a)  Establishment of the Guarantee . The Street and Parks Superintendent may require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to the Street and Parks Superintendent. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the Street and Parks Superintendent to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of the stormwater management practices during the period which the designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the Street and Parks Superintendent the authorization to use the funds to complete the stormwater management practices if the responsible party defaults or does not properly implement the approved stormwater management plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the Street and Parks Superintendent that the requirements of this section have not been met. 
(b)  Conditions for Release . Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as follows: 
1.  The Street and Parks Superintendent shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by the Street and Parks Superintendent to complete installation of practices, upon submission of "as-built plans" by a licensed professional engineer. The Street and Parks Superintendent may make provisions for a partial pro rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various development stages. 
2.  The Street and Parks Superintendent shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section to assure maintenance of stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by the Street and Parks Superintendent, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement. 
(12)  FEE SCHEDULE. The fees referred to in other sections of this section shall be established by the Street and Parks Superintendent and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the Street and Parks Superintendent shall be available for review in the Rib Mountain Municipal Center. 
(13)  ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated after the effective date of this section by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the ordinance provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The Street and Parks Superintendent shall notify the responsible party by certified mail of any noncomplying land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action which may be taken. 
(c)  Upon receipt of written notification from the Street and Parks Superintendent under subparagraph (b), the responsible party shall correct work that does not comply with the stormwater management plan or other provisions of this permit. The responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the Street and Parks Superintendent in the notice. 
(d)  If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this section are likely to result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the State, the Street and Parks Superintendent may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the Street and Parks Superintendent plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the responsible party. 
(e)  The Street and Parks Superintendent is authorized to post a stop work order on all land disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this section, or to request the municipal attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction. 
(f)  The Street and Parks Superintendent may revoke a permit issued under this section for noncompliance with ordinance provisions. 
(g)  Any permit revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order shall remain in effect unless retracted by the Street and Parks Superintendent or by a court with jurisdiction. 
(h)  The Street and Parks Superintendent is authorized to refer any violation of this section, or of a stop work order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this section, to the municipal attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction. 
(i)  Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 or more than $500.00 per offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(j)  Compliance with the provisions of this section may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
Note to Users: Injunctional orders are authorized pursuant to §59.69(11), 61.35, or 62.23(8), Wis. Stats., for counties, villages and towns with village powers, and cities respectively. 
(k)  When the Street and Parks Superintendent determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this section has failed to follow practices set forth in the stormwater management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set forth in said stormwater management plan, the Street and Parks Superintendent or a party designated by the Street and Parks Superintendent may enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The Street and Parks Superintendent shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to subsection (11) of this section. Where such a security has not been established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed. 
(14)  APPEALS. 
(a)  Board of Appeals . The board of appeals created pursuant to §17.254 of the Town's zoning ordinance pursuant to §60.65, Wis. Stats., shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the Street and Parks Superintendent in administering this section. The board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize variances from the provisions of this section that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship. 
(b)  Who May Appeal . Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the Town of Rib Mountain affected by any decision of the Street and Parks Superintendent. 
(15)  SEVERABILITY. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this section is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment. 
24.03 - ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION . 
(1)  PURPOSE/INTENT. The purpose of this section is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Rib Mountain through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by Federal and State law. This section establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit process. The objectives of this section are: 
(a)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(b)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this section. 
(2)  DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this section, the following shall mean: 
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Street and Parks Superintendent, or representative designated in writing. 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to WPDES Construction Permits. Currently, these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in subsection (7) of this section. 
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the system, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to WPDES Industrial Permits. 
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform, and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the BMPs and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (WPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by WDNR that authorizes discharges to the waters of the State, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
(3)  APPLICABILITY. This section shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(4)  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION. The Street and Parks Superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
(5)  SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this section are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this section or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this section. 
(6)  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY. The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this section are minimum standards; therefore, this section does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(7)  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS. 
(a)  Prohibition of Illegal Discharges . 
1.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
2.  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
a.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this section: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
b.  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
c.  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
3.  The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under a WPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the WDNR, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Prohibition of Illicit Connections . 
1.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
2.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
3.  A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(8)  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS. 
(a)  Suspension Due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations . The Street and Parks Superintendent may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the State. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the State, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension Due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge . 
1.  Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this section may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
2.  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(9)  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity WPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Street and Parks Superintendent prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(10)  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES. 
(a)  Applicability . This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to Facilities . 
1.  The Street and Parks Superintendent shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this section as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
2.  Facility operators shall allow the Street and Parks Superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination, and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by State and Federal law. 
3.  The Street and Parks Superintendent shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
4.  The Street and Parks Superintendent has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
5.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Street and Parks Superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
6.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Street and Parks Superintendent access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this section. A person who is the operator of a facility with an WPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this section. 
7.  If the Street and Parks Superintendent has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this section or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(11)  REQUIREMENTS TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. The Street and Parks Superintendent will adopt requirements identifying BMPs for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the State. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the WPDES permit. 
(12)  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(13)  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the State, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Street and Parks Superintendent within 3 business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least 3 years. 
(14)  ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Notice of Violation . 
1.  Whenever the Street and Parks Superintendent finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting. 
b.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges. 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist. 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property. 
e.  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs. 
f.  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
2.  If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor, and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(15)  APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. 
(16)  ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 10 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(17)  COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 10 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the Town by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 6 percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 31st day following discovery of the violation. 
(18)  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(19)  APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this section, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(20)  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(21)  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE. The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal, State, or local law, and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
24.04 - INCORPORATED LAWS . 
Any future amendments, modifications, revisions, renumbering, recodification, additions or deletions of statutes or administrative code regulations incorporated or referenced in this chapter shall be incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter in order to secure current and uniform regulation of stormwater in the State of Wisconsin. 
Chapter 25 - CONSTRUCTION AND EFFECT OF ORDINANCES 
25.01 Rules of Construction 25.02 Conflict and Separability 25.03 Clerk to File Documents Incorporated by Reference 25.04 Penalty Provisions 25.05 Repeal of General ordinances 25.06 Effect of Repeals 25.07 Title; Effective Date; Citation 25.08 Keeping Code Current; Revisor's Amendments 25.09 Citation Procedure  

25.01 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION . 
In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the ordinance: 
(1)  WISCONSIN STATUTES. (Am. MSC '93; MCC 95) All references to "Wisconsin Statutes" or "Wis. Stats." means the current edition of the Wisconsin Statutes and includes the most recent biennial session. 
(2)  GENDER, SINGULAR AND PLURAL. Every word in this Code and in any ordinance imparting the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as males, and every word imparting the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; provided these rules of construction shall not be applied to any provision which contains any express language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or context of such provision may be repugnant thereto. 
(3)  PERSON. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons, firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic and to all entities capable of being sued, unless plainly inapplicable. 
(4)  ACTS OF AGENTS. When a provision requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
25.02 - CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY . 
(1)  CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS. If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter. 
(2)  SEPARABILITY OF CODE PROVISIONS. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof. The Board hereby declares that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
25.03 - CLERK TO FILE DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE . 
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein, and the Clerk shall file, deposit and keep in his office a copy of the Code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any person during the Clerk's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations which the Clerk may prescribe for their preservation. 
25.04 - PENALTY PROVISIONS . 
(1)  GENERAL PENALTY. Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty which shall be as follows: 
(a)  First Offense . Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $5 nor more than $500, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(b)  Second Offense . Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code, who has previously been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $500 for each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 6 months. 
(2)  CONTINUED VIOLATIONS. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(3)  EXECUTION AGAINST DEFENDANT'S PROPERTY. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of the Town, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs. 
25.05 - REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES . 
All ordinances previously adopted by the Town Board which are in conflict with any provision of this General Code are hereby repealed, except all ordinances or parts of ordinances relating to the following subjects and not conflicting with any of the provisions of this Code: 
(1)  The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the Town of whatever name or description. 
(2)  The establishment of grades, curb lines and widths of sidewalks in the public streets and alleys. 
(3)  The fixing of salaries of public officials and employees. 
(4)  Rights, licenses, franchises or the creation of any contract with the Town. 
(5)  The lighting of streets and alleys. 
(6)  The naming and changing of names of streets, alleys, public grounds and parks. 
(7)  The letting of contracts without bids. 
(8)  The establishment of wards, ward boundaries and election precincts. 
(9)  Tax and special assessment levies. 
(10)  Releases of persons, firms or corporations from liability. 
(11)  Construction of public works. 
(12)  Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations, and sewer and water main construction. 
(13)  Budget ordinances, resolutions and actions. 
(14)  The establishment of bulkhead lines. 
25.06 - EFFECT OF REPEALS . 
The repeal or amendment of any section or provision of this Code, or of any other ordinance or resolution of the Board, shall not: 
(1)  By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing at the time such repeal or amendment takes effect. 
(2)  Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed or amended, unless the privilege of repealing such obligation or privilege has been reserved by the Town. 
(3)  Affect any offense committed, or penalty or forfeiture incurred, previous to the time when any ordinance is repealed or amended; except when any forfeiture or penalty has been mitigated by the provisions of any ordinance, such provisions shall apply to and control any judgment to be pronounced after such ordinance takes effect for any offense committed before that time. 
(4)  Affect any prosecution for any offense, or the levy of any penalty or forfeiture pending at the time when any ordinance above is repealed or amended; but the right of action shall continue and the offender shall be subject to the penalty as provided in such ordinance, and such prosecution shall proceed, in all respects, as if such ordinance had not been repealed; except all such proceedings had after the time this Code takes effect shall be conducted according to the provisions of this Code. 
25.07 - TITLE; EFFECTIVE DATE; CITATION . 
These ordinances shall be known as the "General Code of the Town of Rib Mountain, Wisconsin," and shall take effect from and after passage and publication as provided in § 66.035, Wis. Stats. All references thereto shall be cited by section number (example: § 10.06, General Code of the Town of Rib mountain). 
25.08 - KEEPING CODE CURRENT; REVISOR'S AMENDMENTS . 
As each ordinance or resolution affecting this General Code becomes effective, the Town Clerk shall forward such ordinance or resolution to the Revisor, who shall incorporate them into the General Code. The Revisor shall make no substantive changes to such ordinances and resolutions, but may renumber, rearrange and edit them without first submitting them to the Town Board; and such rearranging, renumbering and editing shall not affect the validity of such ordinances and resolutions or the provisions of this General Code affected thereby. 
25.09 - CITATION PROCEDURE . (Cr. #97-06; Rep. & recr. #99-6; Rep. & recr. #08-05) 
(1)  AUTHORIZATION. (Am. #08-13) In addition to any other enforcement procedure or method authorized for a violation of the provisions of this Code, the Town Board authorizes the following Town officials and employees to issue ordinance violation citations, pursuant to § 66.119, Wis. Stats., which is incorporated here by reference, and pursuant to the procedure set forth below: 
    All County Law Enforcement Officers 
    Building Inspector 
    Refuse and Recycling Coordinator, pursuant to § 22.14(2) of this Code 
    Zoning Administrator 
    Code Enforcement Officer(s) 
(2)  FORM OF CITATION. 
(a)  The Town shall use a form of citation as is prescribed in § 66.0113(1)(b), Wis. Stats., which is incorporated by reference. This citation form may be used for violations of all Town of Rib Mountain ordinances except violations of Chapter 7, of the Town Traffic Code. 
(b)  The fact that an alleged violator has made the proper cash deposit does not and shall not prohibit a judge from ordering the alleged violator into court when it is deemed to be in the best interest of the Town of Rib Mountain or to protect the basic rights of the alleged violator. 
(3)  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS. The adoption and authorization for use of a citation under this section shall not preclude the Town from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this section. 
(4)  SCHEDULE OF CASH DEPOSITS. 
(a)  The revised Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule and Alcohol Beverages, Harassment, Safety, Tobacco, UW Rule, and Drug Paraphernalia Violation Deposit Schedule and the Uniform Misdemeanor Bail Schedule and Trespass to Land Deposit Schedule as revised and amended and including any amendments and/or revisions thereto is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(b)  For violations of all ordinances other than those governed by the afore-described Uniform State Deposit Schedule, the Cash Deposit Schedule shall be as follows: 
CASH DEPOSIT SCHEDULE 
Ordinance 
Number Charge Forfeiture 
Amount General Government 
1.07(1), (2) Acceptance of gift, gratuity or other thing of value by Town employee or official $25.00 General Government 
1.09(3) Smoking or using tobacco products within any town-owned facility or town-owned vehicle $25.00 Finance and Taxation 
3.11 Violation of room tax provisions $100.00 Fire Protection 
5.08(9)(c) (1 & 2) Failure to correct a fire hazard $25.00 Public Works 
8.01 Construction or alteration of driveway across town right-of-way without Town approval $25.00 Public Works 
8.02 Excavation of public right-of-way without Town approval $25.00 Public Works 
8.03 Depositing snow or ice upon street, alley or public way $10.00 Public Works 
8.05 Failure to obtain permit to erect container for delivery of printed material along public right-of-way $10.00 Public Works 
8.06 Failure to obtain street privilege permit $25.00 Public Works 
Chapter 8 Penalty for other violations of Chapter 8 $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.29.288 Noxious Substances $50.00 Peace and Order 
9.938.983 Purchase or Possession of Tobacco Products Prohibited $25.00 Peace and Order Causing Fires by Tobacco Smoking $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.134.66 Restrictions on Sale or Gift of Cigarettes or Tobacco Products $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.175.25 Illegal Storage of Junked Vehicles $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.940.19(1) Battery $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.941.10 Negligent Handling of Burning Material $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.941.12(2), (3) Interfering with Fire Fighting $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.941.13 False Alarms $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.941.20(1) Endangering Safety by Use of Dangerous Weapon $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.941.23 Carrying Concealed Weapon $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.941.24 Possession of Switchblade Knife $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.943.01(1) Criminal Damage to Property ($1,000 or less) $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.943.13 Trespass to Land $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.943.14 Criminal Trespass to Dwellings $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.943.20 Theft ($1,000 or less) $25.00 Peace and Order Retail Theft (Shoplifting) $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.944.20 Lewd and Lascivious Behavior $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.944.23 Making Lewd, Obscene or Indecent Drawings $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.946.40 Refusing to Aid Officer $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.946.41 Resisting or Obstructing Officer $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.946.42(2) Escape $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.946.70 Impersonating Peace Officer $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.946.72(2) Tampering with Public Records and Notices $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.947.01 Disorderly Conduct $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.947.06 Unlawful Assemblies $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.948.51(3)(a) Hazing $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.951.01-9.951.165 Crimes Against Animals $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.02(1) & (2) Discharging firearms to endanger life, health or property of another person 
Discharging firearms in unauthorized territory $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.03(1) & (2) Throwing or shooting of arrows, stones or other missiles at person or building 
Throwing or shooting of arrows, stones or other missiles in restricted territory $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.04(1) & (2) Starting a brush/grass fire without written permit 
Burning trash $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.05 Unauthorized sale or use of fireworks 
Failure to obtain permit for fireworks display $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.06 Obstructing streets and sidewalks $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.08 Making loud or unnecessary noise $25.00 Peace and Order 
9.09 False fire alarm $100.00 Peace and Order 
9.10 Resisting or interfering with officer acting in official capacity $100.00 Peace and Order 
9.12 Impersonating a police officer $100.00 Peace and Order 
9.13 Gambling 
Possession of gambling devices $100.00 Peace and Order 
9.14(1) Loitering or prowling $50.00 Peace and Order 
9.14(2) Obstructing highway by loitering 
Failure to move when requested $50.00 Peace and Order 
9.14(3) Obstructing traffic by loitering $50.00 Peace and Order 
9.14(4) Loitering after being requested to move $50.00 Peace and Order 
9.15 Using indecent language 
Exhibiting indecent behavior $50.00 Peace and Order 
9.16 Destroying property $50.00 Peace and Order 
9.17 Littering $50.00 Peace and Order 
9.19 Selling, advertising or displaying automobile for sale on property not owned by vehicle owner $25.00 Peace and Order 
Chapter 9 Penalties for other violations of Chapter 9 $50.00 Peace and Order 
9.21 Exceeding noise levels $50.00 Public Nuisances 
10.02 Causing public nuisance - general $25.00 Public Nuisances 
10.03(1)-(11) Causing a public nuisance affecting health 
(REMINDER: MANY SEPARATE OFFENSES UNDER THIS HEADING) $25.00 Public Nuisances 
10.04 Causing a public nuisance offending morals and decency 
(REMINDER: MANY SEPARATE OFFENSES UNDER THIS HEADING) $25.00 Public Nuisances 
10.05 Causing a public nuisance affecting peace and safety 
(REMINDER: MANY SEPARATE OFFENSES UNDER THIS HEADING) $25.00 Public Nuisances 
10.06 Causing a public nuisance by storage of junk, vehicles and recreational equipment $25.00 Public Nuisances 
Chapter 10 Penalties for other violations under Chapter 10 $25.00 Licenses and Permits 
12.02 Failure to comply with licensing provisions $25.00 Licenses and Permits 
12.03 Violation of liquor, beer laws, or ordinances $25.00 Licenses and Permits 
12.04 Failure to register as direct seller 
Failure to comply with regulation of direct sellers' provisions (12.04(7) (all)) $25.00 Licenses and Permits 
12.06 Failure to obtain cigarette license $25.00 Licenses and Permits 
12.07 Improper pet control $25.00 Licenses and Permits 
12.08 Failure to obtain or renew mobile home permit $25.00 Licenses and Permits 
12.09 Failure to obtain permit for temporary sales 
Failure to obtain for outdoor assembly $25.00 Licenses and Permits 
Chapter 12 Penalties for other violations of Chapter 12 $25.00 Building Code 
14.10 Penalties for violations of Chapter 14 $100 - 1st 
$250 - 2nd 
$500 - 3rd Zoning Code 
17.256 Penalties for violations of Chapter 17 $100- 1st 
$250 - 2nd 
$500 - 3rd Subdivision Code 
18.12(6) Penalties for violations of Chapter 18 $25.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.01(3) Unauthorized presence in Town park during closed hours $30.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.01(4) Failure to obtain a permit to plant, remove, maintain, protect trees and shrubs in Town park $25.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.02(1) Holding public meeting in Town park without written consent $40.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.02(2) Selling in Town park without authorization $40.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.02(3) Posting bills or advertising in Town park without written permission $50.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.03 Causing or causing to be made loud, disturbing or unnecessary noises in Town park $20.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.04 Damage to trees and shrubs in Town park $40.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.04 Fastening materials to trees and shrubs in Town park $10.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.04 Littering in Town park $50.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.04 Hot ashes and combustible materials in Town park $50.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.05 Vehicular traffic in Town park $50.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.05 Disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle in Town park $40.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.06 Fires in Town park $40.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.06 Fireworks in Town park $30.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.06 Firearms in Town park $30.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.06 Throwing or shooting of missiles in Town park $30.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.07 Animals running at large in Town park $10.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.07 Exercising animals in Town park $10.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.07 Animal excreta in Town park $10.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.07 Vicious animals in Town park $10.00 Parks and Recreation 
19.08 Golfing in Town park $10.00 Parks and Recreation 
Chapter 19 Penalties for other violations under Chapter 19 $25.00 Lakes and Beaches 
Chapter 20 Boating and safety violations $25.00 Solid Waste Management 
Chapter 22 Refuse/recycling violation $25.00 Cable Television 
Chapter 23 Penalties for violations of Chapter 23 $25.00  
(c)  In addition to the appropriate cash deposit amount as established above, all citations issued under this ordinance shall further specify and include as part of the deposit, any costs under Wis. Stat. § 814.63 and any penalty surcharge applicable under Wis. Stat. § 814.78. 
(d)  Cash deposits shall be made to the appropriate court clerk. 
(5)  The fact that a defendant has posted the proper monetary bond for the offenses, shall not prohibit the judge from ordering the defendant into court when it is deemed to be in the best [interest] of the Town or to protect the basic rights of the defendant, or to make alternate dispositions than the recommended bond deposits. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since May 20, 1997, Ord. No. 97-06. Ordinances that were adopted before Ord. No. 97-06 and its adoption date will be noted by an asterisk (*) to indicated that they were inadvertently omitted from the Code and are now included. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption
Date Section   Section
this Code *94-02  2-28-94 1       Rep. & recr. Ch. 17 *94-05  7-19-94 1 17.035(3)(b)(2)(c) 2       Rep. & recr. 17.056(4)(j)(4) 3 17.053 *95-02  3-23-95 1       Rep. & recr. 5.06 *96-03  3-19-96 1       Cr. 17.035(3)(c)2.c. *96-05  5- 6-96 1       Rep. 17.056(9)(a)(1)(e) 17.056(9)(b)(1)(d) 17.056(9)(c)(1)(c) 17.056(9)(d)(1)(e) 17.056(9)(e)-(g) 17.226 2 12.09 *97-04  5- 4-97 1       Rep. & recr. 17.152(1)(a), (b) *97-05  5-20-97 1       Rep. & recr. 17.229(3)(a) 2       Cr. 17.252(2)(p), (q) 97-06  5-20-97 1       Cr. 25.09 97-07  6- 3-97 1       Cr. 14.08 97-08  7-15-97 1       Rep. 7.03(2)(g) 97-09 12- 2-97 1 5.09(2)(a) 98-01  5- 5-98 1       Rep. & recr. 5.09(2)(b) 98-02  3- 3-98 1       Rep. & recr. 1.02 98-03  6- 1-98 1       Cr. 9.02(2a) 2       Cr. 9.03(3a) 98-04  8- 4-98 1       Cr. 9.21 98-05  8-18-98 1       Cr. 5.09(2)(d) 99-01  1-19-99 1       Cr. 17.059 99-02  2- 2-99 1       Rep. & recr. 17.230 2       Rep. & recr. 17.254(3)(a)(3) 3       Rep. & recr. 17.254(5) 4       Rep. & recr. 17.254(7) 5       Rep. & recr. 17.254(9) 6       Rep. & recr. 17.254(3)(c) 99-03  4- 6-99 1       Rep. & recr. 17.056(7)(c) 99-04  4- 6-99 1       Rep. & recr. 5.01(5) 99-05  4- 6-99 1       Cr. 1.101 99-06  4- 6-99 1       Rep. & recr. 25.09 99-07  4- 6-99 1       Rep. & recr. 7.10 2       Rep. 7.11 3       Rep. & recr. 19.05(4) 99-08  4- 6-99 9.29.29- 
9.951.165 99-09  4-20-99 1       Cr. 17.228(3)(c)18. 99-10  5- 4-99 1 17.256(2) 2 18.12(6) 99-11  6- 1-99 1       Rep. & recr. 1.17(2) 99-12  7- 6-99 1 7.04 2 7.04 3 7.04 4       Cr. 7.12 99-13 10-19-99 1       Rep. & recr. 12.01(3) 99-14 10-19-99 1 9.02(2a) 2 9.03(3a) 99-15 11- 2-99 1       Cr. 7.12(2) 99-16 11-16-99 1 7.02(1) 00-01  1-18-00 1       Rep. & recr. Ch. 23, 23.01-23.30 00-02  2-15-00 1       Rep. & recr. 3.11(2) 00-03  3-21-00 1       Rep. & recr. 17.056(8)(d) 00-04  6- 6-00 1 12.07(2)(c) 00-05  6- 6-00 1 7.02(1) 2 7.02(2) 00-06  6- 6-00 1       Rep. & recr. 5.09(2)(c) 00-07  8-15-00 1       Cr. 1.21 00-08  8-15-00 1       Cr. 5.09(2)(e) 00-09  9- 5-00 1       Rep. & recr. 1.21 00-10 11- 6-00 1 9.02(2a) 2 9.03(3a) 00-11 12-19-00 1       Rep. & recr. Ch. 17 01-01  2- 6-01 1       Rep. & recr. 12.03(9)(a)(1) 01-02  3-20-01 1       Rep. & recr. 12.03(9)(a)(1)(a) 01-03  4-17-01 1       Rep. & recr. 5.01 01-04  6- 5-01 1 23.04 01-05  6-19-01 1 17.230(5) 2       Rpld. 17.230(6) 01-06  7- 2-01 1 12.07(4) 01-07  8-23-01 1       Cr. 10.13 01-08  8-29-01 1 17.255(1) 01-09 11- 5-01 1 9.02(2a), 9.03(3a) 01-10 12-18-01 1 12.01(7) 01-11 12-18-01 1 5.09(2)(b) 02-01  4-16-02 1 17.056(4)(k) 02-02  8- 6-02 1 5.09(2)(a) 02-03 11-19-02 1 9.02(2a) 2 9.03(3) 03-01  2- 4-03 1       Cr. 7.12(1)(f)-(i) 2       Cr. 7.12(3) 03-02  5- 6-03 1 1.17(2)(b) 03-03  5- 6-03 1 17.024 2       Cr. 17.056(8)(x) 03-04  6- 3-03 1 10.03(8) 03-05  6- 3-03 1       Cr. 7.12(4) 03-06  7- 1-03 1       Cr. 3.13 2       Rpld. 12.03(5)(i) 03-07 10-21-03 1 9.02(2a) 2 9.03(3) 03-08 11- 4-03 1 12.01(7) 03-09 12- 2-03 1       Cr. 12.01(8) 03-10 12-16-03 1 17.255 03-11 12-16-03 1 18.07(3)(c)3. 04-01  1-20-04 1 7.03(1) 04-02  2-17-04 1       Rep. & recr. 18.13 04-03  3- 2-04 1       Cr. 12.12 2       Cr. 12.01(9) 04-04  3- 2-04 1 12.01(1)(e) 04-05  3-16-04 1       Rep. & recr. 17.099 04-06  5- 4-04 1 17.098(1) 2       Rep. & recr. 17.099 04-07  5-18-04 1 12.12 04-08  6- 1-04 1 8.02(1)(a) 04-09  7-20-04 1       Cr. 7.12(5 04-10  8-17-04 1       Rep. & recr. 9.02(2a) 2       Rpld. 9.03(3a)       Cr. 9.03(3)(a) 04-11  8-17-04 1       Cr. 7.03(2)(g) 05-01  5-17-05 1       Cr. 12.01(1)(h) 2       Cr. 12.03(3)(h) 05-02  7- 5-05 1       Cr. 17.056(9)(e) 05-03 10-18-05 1, 2       Rep. & recr. 5.08 05-04 11-15-05 1       Cr. 2.10 05-10  9- 6-05 1 7.05 05-11  9- 6-05 1 8.02(1)(a) 06-01  5-16-06 1       Cr. 7.12(1)(j) 06-02  6-19-06 1       Rpld. 5.08(G)(5) 06-03  7-18-06 1, 2 5.09(1), (2)(a), (b) 06-04  9- 5-06 1       Cr. 7.03(2)(h) 06-05 11- 7-06 1 3.11(2) 06-06 11- 7-06 1       Cr. 10.14 07-01  2-20-07 1       Cr. 19.16 2       Dltd. 18.07(3) 07-02  6- 5-07 1       Cr. 24.01-24.04 2007-03 12-18-07 1 17.024 2007-04 12-18-07 1 17.024       Cr. 17.059(1)(a)7., 17.059(3) 2007-05 12-18-07 1 17.229(5) 08-01  1-15-08 1 17.255(1) 08-02  2- 2-08 1       Cr. 7.05(2) 08-03  3- 4-08 1       Cr. 5.09(2)(a)3. 08-04  3- 4-08 1 7.02(1) 2 7.02(2) 08-05  4-15-08 1       Rep. & recr. 25.09 08-06  5- 6-08 1 17.056(2)(g)1. 08-07  5-20-08 1       Cr. 17.217(6) 08-11  9- 2-08 1 17.056(8)(d)3.b. 08-12  9- 2-08 1       Cr. 17.056(4)(q) 08-13  9- 2-08 1       Rep. & recr. 1.17 2, 5 10.06(7) 3 10.10(1), (2)(a) 4       Rpld. 9.11 6 25.09(1) 7 12.04(5)(a) 08-16 10-21-08 1 3.11(2) 09-01  3-17-09 1 17.114 09-02  5-19-09 1       Cr. 17.213(1)(c-1) 2 17.214(1)(c) 3 17.215(1) 09-03  6-16-09 1 18.11(2) 2 18.13(3) 09-04  6-16-09 1       Cr. 7.03(2)(i) 09-05  7- 7-09 1 17.024 17.032 17.035(1)       Cr. 17.035(2)(a), (b)       Rltd. 17.035(2)(a)-(f)       as 17.035(2)(c)-(i) 17.053 17.056(2) 17.056(2)(e)2. 17.056(3)(b)2., (c)3., (g)2. 17.056(4)(i)3., (j)3., (l)3. 17.056(5)(f)3. 17.056(6)(b)3. 17.056(7)(c)3.c.1., (d)3. 17.056(8)(f)1., (g)3., (u)1., (v)3., (x)3. 09-06  8-18-09 1 14.06(6)(b) 09-07  8-18-09 1 12.09(3) 09-08 11- 3-09 1       Cr. 9.05(3), (4) 09-09 11-17-09 1 5.09(2)(b) 10-01  4- 6-10 1 17.095(2) 10-02  6-15-10 1       Cr. 22.17 10-03 12- 7-10 1 5.09(2)(a)(1), (2), (e) 11-01  4-19-11 1 5.09(2)(b) 11-02  5- 3-11 1 17.056(8) 11-03 10-18-11 1       Cr. 9.025 11-04 11- 1-11 1       Cr. 8.11 12-01  2- 7-12 1 3.11(4)(a), (5) 2 8.06(4) 3 12.01(1)(e), (4) 12-02  2-21-12 1       Cr. 12.01(9)(c) 12-04  3- 6-12 12.03(9)(a)1. 12-05  3-20-12 1 17.190(3)(a)4., (c)4., (f)       Cr. 17.190(4) 2012-06  7-17-12 1 17.056(7)(c)3.c.1. 12-07 10- 2-12 1       Cr. 7.03(2)(j) 13-01  2- 5-13 1 17.056(8)(x) 13-02  2-19-13 1 8.02(1)(a) 13-03  2-19-13 1 12.01 13-04  2-19-13 1 12.07(2) 13-05  3- 5-13 1 14.08(2)(a) 13-06  3- 5-13 1 19.16(3)(b)1.c. 13-07  4- 2-13 1 8.06(4) 13-08  4- 2-13 1 17.255(1)(f) 13-09  4- 2-13 1 18.13(1) 2014-01  1-21-14 1 17.056(7)(c) 2014-02  1-21-14 1 17.056(8)(x) 2014-03  2- 4-14 1 8.01(3) 2014-04  3-18-14 1 17.213 2014-05  3-18-14 1 12.04 2014-06  3-18-14 1 17.217 2015-1 12- 1-15 1       Cr. 10.13(1)(d)-(g) 10.13(3)(a) 2015-2 12-22-15 1 3.11(2) 2015-03 12-22-15 1 9.02 16-01  3- 1-16 1 19.16 2016-02  3-15-16 1, 2 17.190(3)(a)1, 2 3 17.190(3)(c)4 4, 5       Cr. 17.190(5), (6) 16-04  4-19-16 3.11 2016-6  8- 2-16 1 10.13(3)(a)1 2016-07  8- 2-16 1 12.03(5)(m) 16-08  8- 2-16 1       Cr. 7.03(2)(k), (l) 2016-09 10- 4-16 1 17.056(8)(x)3 2, 3       Cr. 17.056(8)(x)4, 5 2016-10 11- 1-16 1 17.213(1)(c-1) 2       Cr. 17.213(1)(c-2) 3 17.213(1)(k) 4       Cr. 17.214(3) 17-01  2- 6-17 1, 2 7.02(1) 17-02  8- 1-17 1       Cr. 7.03(2)(m), (n) 2018-02  8- 7-18 1       Cr. 10.15 18-03  9-11-18 1 19.01(3) 18-05  8-21-18 1       Cr. 7.03(2)(o) 18-06  9-18-18 1       Cr. 19.17  
