Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Construction and Penalties
[Adopted as Secs. 25.01, 25.03, 25.04 and 25.08 of the former
Municipal Codebook]
§ 1-1. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code of general ordinances, the following rules
shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the ordinance.
§ 1-2. Clerk to file documents incorporated by reference.
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written
or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated
in this Code as if fully set forth herein, and the Clerk shall file, deposit and
keep in his office a copy of the Code, standard, rule, regulation or other
written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept
shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any person
during the Clerk's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations that
the Clerk may prescribe for their preservation.
§ 1-3. Penalty provisions. [Amended 11-8-2010]
A. Wisconsin statutes. The term "Wisconsin Statutes," wherever used in
this Code, shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to
time.
B. Gender. Singular and Plural. Every word in this Code and in any
ordinance importing the masculine gender may extend and be applied
to females as well as males, and every word importing the singular
number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as
well as to one person or thing, provided these rules of construction shall
not be applied to any provisions which shall contain any express
language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or
context of such provisions may be repugnant thereto.
C. Person. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons,
firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic
and all entities of any kind capable of being sued unless plainly
inapplicable.
D. Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done, which may
by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
A. General penalty. Except as provided in any special section, any person
who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon
conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty as set forth in
Subsection B.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Enforcement of ordinance by issuance of citation.
These ordinances shall be enforced by the issuance of a citation as provided
under § 66.0113(1)(b), Wis. Stats., in a form which is either approved by the
Council or otherwise authorized under state law.
B. Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less
than $50 nor more than $500, plus the costs of compliance and
prosecution for each violation, and, in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until
payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation exists
or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues
or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall
preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or
remove a violation of any provision of this Code.
D. Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to
pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court
for violation of any ordinance of the City, the court may, in lieu of
ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has
been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of
the defendant for said forfeiture and costs.
§ 1-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 1-4
1:4
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 1888-19]
§ 1-5. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the City of Reedsburg
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Common Council of the
City of Reedsburg, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 690, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the City of
Reedsburg," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-6. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-7. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-8. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer
and shall remain there for use and examination by the public for at least
two weeks, in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., and until final action
is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy
shall be certified to by the City Clerk-Treasurer, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of said City Clerk-Treasurer to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-9. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Common
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Reedsburg"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be inserted in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
§ 1-10. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Reedsburg, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required by law, a notice of the adoption of this
ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The publication of notice of the enactment of this ordinance, coupled
with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-11. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk-Treasurer, or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code
required to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date
of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code
shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such
changes or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code.
§ 1-12. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the City Clerk-Treasurer or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the
payment of a fee to be set by the Common Council. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of
Reedsburg to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a penalty as
provided in § 1-3 of the Code.
§ 1-14. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 1-15
1:6
§ 1-15. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-16. Repealer.
§ 1-17. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-17 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the City of Reedsburg which
is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific enactments. The Common Council of the of the City of
Reedsburg has determined that the following ordinances are no longer
in effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Section 10.06 of the former Municipal Codebook, Dutch Elm
Disease and Elm Bark Beetles Declared Public Nuisance, adopted
by Ord. No. 1321-95.
(2) Section 12.14 of the former Municipal Codebook, Garbage and
Refuse; Licensing and Regulation of Collector, adopted June 28,
2004.
(3) Chapter 15, Electrical Code, of the former Municipal Codebook of
the City of Reedsburg, as amended.
(4) Chapter 20, Cable Television, of the former Municipal Codebook of
the City of Reedsburg.
(5) Chapter 32, Fees, of the former Municipal Codebook, as amended.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to April 22, 2019.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:7
§ 1-18. Changes in previously adopted ordinances; new ordinances.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred, including Sec. 12.12 of the former Municipal Codebook,
Natural Gas Franchise.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending the Zoning Map or otherwise
rezoning property, including Chapter 24 of the former Municipal
Codebook, Extraterritorial Zoning.
O. Any charter ordinances.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
fee or fees.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
deposit or bond schedule.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending
rates or charges for water or sewer service.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the City of Reedsburg, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
§ 1-17 REEDSBURG CODE § 1-18
1:8
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in this section.
Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Common Council that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. The following changes are made throughout the Code:
(1) References to specific chapters and sections of the Wisconsin
Statutes and Wisconsin Administrative Code are amended to reflect
the numbering of the statutes and Administrative Code as of the
publication of this Code.
(2) Throughout the Code:
(a) References to the "Department of Health and Social Services"
and "Department of Health and Family Services" are amended
to read "Department of Health Services."
(b) References to the "Department of Industry, Labor and Human
Relations" and "Department of Commerce" are amended to
read "Department of Safety and Professional Services."
(c) References to "City Council" are amended to read "Common
Council."
(d) References to "City Clerk" or City Treasurer" are amended to
read "City Clerk-Treasurer."
(e) References to "Board of Public Works" are amended to "Public
Works Committee."
(f) References to "Street Superintendent" are amended to "Public
Works Director."
(g) References to "Board of Adjustment" or "Board of Appeals" are
amended to "Zoning Board of Appeals."
(h) References to "Planning Commission" are amended to "Plan
Commission."
(i) References to "alder" or "alderman" or "aldermen" are
amended to "alderperson."
(j) References to "policeman" or "policemen" are amended to
"police officer" or "police officers."
(k) References to "fireman" or "firemen" are amended to
"firefighter" or "firefighters."
(l) Fee amounts have been removed from and replaced with
wording that states fees are "as set from time to time by
Common Council" in the following sections: §§ 176-9A and B,
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
§ 1-19. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
185-20A(6) and E, 192-4, 192-7C(1), 199-3C, 199-12, 199-16,
199-18, 199-21, 210-5A(9) and (11), 210-7A(1), B(1) and C(1),
217-2C, 224-2B, 231-4, 242-18, 349-2, 349-3A, 349-3B, 349-3C,
349-7G, 366-4, 390-3B, 478-7, 478-10C, 485-3B, 548-4,
548-11A, 577-4C, 690-46G(12).
(3) Throughout Chapters 30, Citations, and 690, Zoning, references to
"Zoning Commissioner" are revised to "Zoning Administrator," as
appropriate.
(4) Throughout Chapter 185, Airport Minimum Standards, the term
"commercial activities" is changed to "commercial activity," as
appropriate.
C. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A1 attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-18C, the chapters, articles and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a history referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, histories indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced
with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 1888-19."
Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the City
offices.
§ 1-18 REEDSBURG CODE § 1-19
1:10
Chapter 9
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 9-1. Form of government.
The City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin, operates under the Mayor-Council form
of government under Ch. 62, Wis. Stats.
§ 9-2. City wards.
There shall be 14 City wards. The map showing the ward boundaries is
attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.2
§ 9-3. City Hall office hours.
City Hall offices shall be open such hours as are prescribed by the Common
Council from time to time.
§ 9-4. Public construction without bids.
Any public works or public construction or any part thereof shall be done
directly by the City without submitting the same for bids.
Chapter 21
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AUTHORITY
2. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4
1:11

ARTICLE I
Board of Review
[Adopted as Sec. 1.101 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 21-1. Creation; appointments.
The Board of Review is created pursuant to § 70.46, Wis. Stats. The Board
shall have five members. The Mayor shall appoint the members, subject
to confirmation by the Common Council. None of the members shall have
or hold public office or be publicly employed. The members shall serve
staggered terms of three years and shall be paid a per diem at a rate
established by the Common Council. The Mayor shall designate the chair of
the Board.
§ 21-2. Confidentiality.
Except as provided herein, the Assessor, in the performance of the
Assessor's duties, requests or obtains income and expense information
pursuant to § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any successor statute thereto,
such income and expense information that is provided to the Assessor shall
be held by the Assessor on a confidential basis. The information may be
revealed to and used by persons in the discharging of duties imposed by
law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office (including, but not limited
to, use by the Assessor in performance of official duties of the Assessor's
office and use by the Board of Review in performance of its official duties);
or pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided
to the Assessor under § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., unless a court determines
that it is inaccurate, is, per § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., not subject to the
right of inspection and copying under § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-2
1:13

ARTICLE II
Community Development Authority
[Adopted as Sec. 1.102 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 21-3. Membership.
The Community Development Authority is created pursuant to § 66.1335,
Wis. Stats. The Authority shall have seven members. Two of the
Commissioners shall be members of the Common Council and shall serve
during their terms as Council members. Five of the Commissioners shall
serve staggered terms of four years. The Commissioners shall be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council. The Mayor
shall designate the Chair of the Authority.
§ 21-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-3
1:15

ARTICLE III
Utility Commission
[Adopted as Sec. 1.103 of the former Municipal Codebook; amended
in its entirety 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 1842-17]
§ 21-4. Municipal utilities.
§ 21-5. Membership.
The Utility Commission shall consist of two officers of the City and three
citizens, appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the Council,
for terms of five years, commencing on October 1 in the year of the
appointment, provided the Mayor shall stagger the initial appointments so
that the terms of the Commissioners first elected shall expire successively
one each year on each succeeding first day of October. A vacancy shall
be created in the office occupied by a member of the Common Council
when the person ceases to be a member of the Council. Vacancies shall be
filled by appointment by the Mayor, which appointments shall be subject to
confirmation of the Council.
§ 21-6. Organization.
The Commission shall organize by choosing from among its members a
President and Secretary and shall appoint a Utility Clerk, who shall perform
the duties of a bonded cashier, shall keep accurate books and accounts of
utility revenues and expenses, and shall perform such other duties as the
Commission shall from time to time direct. The Utility Clerk, before taking
office, shall give a bond for the faithful performance of the duties of the
office in such amount as the Utility Commission shall direct.
§ 21-7. Compensation.
Commission members shall receive such compensation as shall be agreed
upon by the Commission and the Council, and the Commission shall fix the
compensation to be paid to the Secretary.
§ 21-8. Powers and duties.
A. The City of Reedsburg operates the following municipal utilities:
electric, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and communications
utilities.
B. The electric, water and communications utilities shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Reedsburg Utility Commission, except as may be
otherwise provided in the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
A. Method and duties. The Commission shall have the entire charge,
management and direction of all municipal utilities not placed under
the jurisdiction of the Public Works Committee, subject only to the
general control and supervision of the Council, with such general
control and supervision being exercised through the enactment and
§ 21-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-8
1:17
§ 21-9. Utility funds and accounts.
Utility funds shall be handled by the Utility Clerk in a separate account.
The funds of the electric, water and communications utilities and all other
municipal utilities under the Commission's jurisdiction shall be maintained
amendment of this article and to the jurisdiction of the State Public
Service Commission.
B. Employees and consultants. The Commission may employ a manager or
superintendent of utilities and may fix his compensation. The City
Engineer may be employed as a superintendent or manager, and his
salary as such shall be fixed from time to time by agreement of the
Commission and Council. The Commission may employ other necessary
employees and fix their compensation. The Commission also may
employ the services and fix the compensation of such other agents or
consultants as the Commission deems necessary or convenient for the
operation and management of the utilities under its jurisdiction.
C. Rules. The Commission may make all necessary rules governing its own
proceedings and the government of the electric, water and
communications utilities and all other municipal utilities under its
jurisdiction.
D. Construction work and construction contracts. Utility construction
work shall be under the immediate supervision of the Commission and
all other public works construction under the supervision of the Public
Works Committee. The Commission shall have full authority to let bids
and enter into construction contracts in the name of the City, provided
that such contracts are necessary or convenient to the management
and operation of the municipal utilities under the Commission's
jurisdiction.
E. Other contracts. The Commission shall have full authority to enter into
other contracts in the name of the City, including but not limited to
contracts to purchase and sell electrical power and fuel, sell potable
water and purchase and sell communications services, provided that
such contracts are necessary or convenient to the management and
operation of the municipal utilities under the Commission's jurisdiction.
F. Purchase and sale of real estate. The Commission shall have full
authority to acquire and sell interests in real estate in the name of the
City as may be necessary or convenient to the management and
operation of the municipal utilities under the Commission's jurisdiction.
G. Other powers. The Commission shall have such other powers as are
necessary or convenient to the management and operation of all
municipal utilities not placed under the supervision of the Public Works
Committee, and the City intends that the Commission shall have full
authority respecting such utilities unless the authority is specifically
withheld by statute.
§ 21-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 21-9
1:18
in separate accounts. No funds shall be transferred to the general fund
except in accordance with § 66.0811(2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
§ 21-10. Recordings and proceedings.
§ 21-11. Utility expenses.
Utility departmental expenditures shall be audited monthly and, when
approved, a voucher schedule shall be prepared and certified to the City
Clerk-Treasurer by the Commission President and Secretary that the claims
listed therein have been authorized for payment. There shall be further
certifications on the schedule whether or not funds are available for
payment of the claims as listed. Order checks shall then be prepared by
the Utility and entered upon the books of the Utility, after which they shall
be signed by the Commission President and the City Clerk-Treasurer, as
provided by § 66.0607(4), Wis. Stats.
§ 21-12. Utility receipts.
Utility funds shall be separately accounted for by the municipal utilities
under the Commission's jurisdiction.
§ 21-13. Facsimile signatures.
Checks issued on the Utility accounts may be signed by facsimile signature.
A. The Commission shall keep books of account as prescribed by the
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin, which shall be public records.
B. The Secretary shall keep the minutes of the previous proceedings of the
Commission and shall report semiannually to the Council ,giving a brief
summary of the condition of the utilities and the manner in which funds
are allocated. The Secretary shall provide members of the Council with
copies of the minutes of the Utility Commission on a monthly basis.
§ 21-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-13
1:19

ARTICLE IV
City Plan Commission
[Adopted as Sec. 1.104 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 21-14. Creation; membership. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The City Plan Commission is created pursuant to § 62.23(1), Wis. Stats. The
Commission shall have seven members as follows: the Mayor, who shall
be its presiding officer, the Director of Public Works, two members of the
Common Council and three citizens. The Common Council member of the
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to election by a twothirds
vote of the Council during each April. The three citizen members shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, to hold
office for staggered terms of three years beginning May 1 of each year.
§ 21-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-14
1:21

ARTICLE V
Industrial and Commercial Development Commission
[Adopted as Sec. 1.105 of the former Municipal Codebook; amended
12-8-2008]
§ 21-15. Creation; membership. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Industrial and Commercial Development Commission is created. The
Commission shall have seven members. Two Commissioners shall be
members of the Common Council and shall serve during their terms as
Council members. Five Commissioners shall serve staggered terms of three
years. The Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
confirmation by the Council and may include a maximum of two non-City
residents based on their expertise. The members of the Commission shall
elect the officers of the Commission.
§ 21-16. General jurisdiction.
The Commission shall carry on all projects of the City concerned with
industrial development and recruitment and may work with any private
organization for such purpose. The Commission may also recruit and
promote commercial development and work with the Community
Development Authority and Community Development Block Grant
Committee in such commercial efforts.
§ 21-17. Financial records and reports.
All revenues raised by taxes by industrial development promoted by the
Commission shall be handled by the Commission, which shall keep accurate
records of its expenditures and make a financial report to the Council
during December of each year.
§ 21-18. Powers and duties.
A. The Commission may acquire and develop sites for industrial purposes
to the extent permitted by § 66.1101, Wis. Stats., and acquire sites for
industry that will expand the municipal tax base pursuant to
§§ 67.04(2)(a) and 62.22(1), Wis. Stats., and can recommend to the City
and its Community Development Authority and Community
Development Block Grant Committee the acquisition of sites for
commercial development.
B. The Commission may construct, own, lease and maintain buildings it
acquires for public purposes and may convey property for a fair
consideration.
§ 21-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-18
1:23

ARTICLE VI
Airport Commission
[Adopted as Sec. 1.106 of the former Municipal Codebook; amended
in its entirety 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 1852-17]
§ 21-19. Creation; membership.
The Airport Commission is created pursuant to § 114.14, Wis. Stats. The
Commission shall have five members. Two of the Commissioners shall be
members of the Common Council, who shall serve for the duration of their
respective Common Council term. Three of the Commissioners shall be
appointed by the Mayor to staggered terms. Their term shall be three years
subject to a shorter period of appointment if necessary to establish the
staggered terms. The Commission shall elect its Chair and a Secretary.
§ 21-20. Purpose.
A. The Commission shall have the complete and exclusive control and
management over the airport owned by the City of Reedsburg, subject
to the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and the minimum standards
adopted by the City as set forth in Chapter 185, Airport Minimum
Standards, of this Code.
B. The Commission shall have the complete and exclusive control and
management over the transit owned by the City of Reedsburg, subject
to the provisions in Chapter 548, Taxicabs, Article II, of this Code and of
the Public Transportation Assistance Program established by §§ 85.20
and 85.23, Wis. Stats.
§ 21-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-20
1:25

ARTICLE VII
Police and Fire Commission
[Adopted as Sec. 1.107 of the former Municipal Codebook; amended
2-24-2003]
§ 21-21. Creation; membership.
The Police and Fire Commission is created pursuant to § 62.13, Wis. Stats.
The Commission shall have five citizen members, three of whom shall
constitute a quorum. The Commissioners shall serve staggered terms of five
years. The Mayor shall annually, between the last Monday of April and the
first Monday of May, appoint, in writing, to be filed with the Secretary of
the Board, one member for a term of five years. No appointment shall be
made which will result in more than three members of the Board belonging
to the same political party. The Commission shall keep a record of its
proceedings and shall elect its officers. Appointments by the Mayor are
subject to confirmation by the Common Council.
§ 21-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-21
1:27

ARTICLE VIII
Library Board
[Adopted as Sec. 1.108 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 21-22. Creation; membership.
The Library Board is created pursuant to § 43.52, Wis. Stats. The Board
shall have seven members. One member shall be a member of the Common
Council appointed annually for a term commencing May 1. Five members
shall be appointed to serve staggered terms of three years commencing May
1. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation
by the Council. Per § 43.54(1)(c), Wis. Stats., the Mayor, subject to Common
Council approval, shall appoint one member who shall be a school district
administrator, or the administrator's representative, to represent the public
school district; that person may be a nonresident of the City. The Board shall
select its officers.
§ 21-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-22
1:29

ARTICLE IX
Room Tax Commission
[Adopted as Sec. 1.109 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 21-23. Creation; membership. [Amended 5-10-2008]
The Room Tax Commission is created pursuant to § 66.0615, Wis. Stats. The
Commission shall have five members appointed by the Mayor and approved
by the Council. One of the Commissioners shall be a member of the Common
Council, and one member shall be a representative of the Reedsburg hotel/
motel industry. All of the Commissioners shall serve terms of one year
commencing May 1 annually. Notwithstanding Chapter 104, Mayor and
Council, § 104-5, of the Code of the City of Reedsburg, one individual who is
not a resident of the City of Reedsburg, but who is an owner or the owner's
designee of a hotel/motel establishment, may be appointed to serve on the
Room Tax Commission.
§ 21-24. Agreements for funding to promote City.
The Commission shall, from time to time, negotiate and enter into an
agreement to provide funding to the Reedsburg Area Chamber of
Commerce for tourism promotion and development activities consistent
with the law. The Commission shall approve an annual program budget
and work in conjunction with the Chamber of Commerce to create and
implement a marketing plan and other appropriate programs.
§ 21-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-24
1:31

ARTICLE X
Special/Advisory Bodies
[Adopted as Sec. 1.110 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 21-25. Creation.
In addition to the foregoing boards, commissions and authorities, the
Mayor, with the approval of the Council, may from time to time create
such additional special/advisory bodies as needed. Such bodies shall be
established and governed by resolution; except that any such body which is
expected to have a duration of one year or more shall be established and
regulated by ordinance in this article of this chapter of the Code of the City
of Reedsburg.
§ 21-26. Community Development Block Grant Committee.
§ 21-27. Reedsburg Area Development Council.
A. The Community Development Block Grant Committee shall have seven
members. One of the members shall be a member of the Common
Council appointed annually by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council.
The six public members of the Committee shall be appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the Council and shall serve staggered terms of
three years.
B. The Committee shall be an advisory committee to the Mayor, Council,
Community Development Authority and City staff regarding community
development issues. The Committee shall have membership consistent
with state and federal housing and community development rules. The
Committee shall have responsibility of approving loans from the
housing assistance and economic development revolving loan fund as
authorized and delegated by the Council. The administration of loans
shall be consistent with state and federal grant and loan regulation.
A. The Reedsburg Area Development Council shall have 12 members. The
following local units of government shall each have three members:
City of Reedsburg, Town of Reedsburg, Town of Winfield and Town of
Excelsior. The representatives of the City of Reedsburg shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of Council, for three-year
terms effective May 1. The other local units of government shall appoint
their representatives. The Council shall elect its officers. [Amended
9-10-2001]
B. The Council shall review major development proposals for land use
changes in the extraterritorial area, such as subdivisions, certified
survey maps, road and utility extensions and planned unit
developments. The Council is to advise the City Planning Commission
and Common Council prior to action on specific proposals. The Council
shall also review variance requests to the Extraterritorial Board of
Appeals and provide recommendations to that Board.3
§ 21-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-28
1:33
§ 21-28. Public Safety Committee. [Added 5-10-2010]
A. The Public Safety Committee shall have five voting members consisting
of the Mayor (or his/her Council member designee), one alderperson,
and three resident members of the City. Nonvoting members shall
include the City Police Chief, the City Fire Chief, the Ambulance District
Chief, and the City Emergency Management Director. The alderperson
shall be appointed annually by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Common Council. The three resident members shall be appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by the Common Council and shall serve
staggered three-year terms.
B. The Public Safety Committee shall advise the Mayor, Common Council
and City staff and have no powers or authority over the Police, Fire,
Ambulance or Emergency Management Department operations, nor
shall it have any of the powers vested in the Police and Fire Commission
as stated in Article VII of this chapter, or relevant Wisconsin Statutes
cited therein. The role of the Public Safety Committee shall in no way
interfere with the lawfully prescribed powers and duties of the Common
Council, Police and Fire Commission, Mayor, Police Chief, Fire Chief,
Ambulance District Chief or Emergency Management Director.
C. The Public Safety Committee shall:
(1) Review service priorities and capital budget priorities of the Police,
Fire, Ambulance and Emergency Management Departments;
(2) Consult with appropriate bodies from neighboring municipalities
and counties to discuss and develop recommendations to address
regional public safety issues;
(3) Provide recommendations regarding general policies, plans and
long-range goals for the Police, Fire, Ambulance and Emergency
Management Departments.
3. Editor's Note: Original Subsections (4) and (5), which immediately followed this
subsection, of the former Municipal Codebook were repealed 2-25-2013.
§ 21-28 REEDSBURG CODE § 21-28
1:34
Chapter 30
CITATIONS
§ 30-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to § 66.0113, Wis. Stats., the City of Reedsburg hereby elects to
use the citation method of enforcement of ordinances, other than those
for which a statutory counterpart exists, and create this chapter of the
Reedsburg Code.
§ 30-2. Citation form.
The citation shall contain the following:
A. The name and address of the alleged violator;
B. Factual allegations describing the alleged violation;
C. The time and place of the offense;
D. The section of the ordinance violated;
E. A designation of the offense in such manner as can readily be
understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so;
F. The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court;
G. A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator:
(1) That a cash deposit based on the schedule established by this
chapter may be made which shall be delivered or mailed to the City
Clerk-Treasurer prior to the time of the scheduled court
appearance;
(2) That if a deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary
unless he is subsequently summoned;
(3) That if a cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not
appear in court, he will be deemed to have entered a plea of no
contest, or, if the court does not accept the plea of no contest, a
summons will be issued commanding him to appear in court to
answer the complaint; and
(4) That if no cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not
appear in court at the time specified, an action may be commenced
to collect the forfeiture.
H. A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the
statement which accompanies the citation shall be signed to indicate
that the statement required under Subsection G above has been read.
Such statement shall be sent or brought with the cash deposit; and
I. Such other information as the City of Reedsburg deems necessary.
§ 21-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-2
1:35
§ 30-3. Schedule of deposits.
§ 30-4. Issuance of citation.
The form of the citation to be used by the City of Reedsburg is attached
hereto and is made a part of this chapter by reference.4
A. Deposits. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) The following schedule of cash deposits is established for use with
citations issued under this chapter.5
(2) In calculating the total deposit required, court costs and
surcharges (if any) prevailing at the time of the issuance of the
citation shall be added to the amounts listed on the current
Schedule of Cash Deposits.
B. Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or certified check to the
City Clerk-Treasurer, who shall provide a receipt therefor.
A. Law enforcement officer. Any law enforcement officer may issue
citations authorized under this chapter.
B. City officials.
(1) The following City officials may issue citations with respect to those
specified ordinances that are directly related to their official
responsibilities.
(a) Building Inspector.
(b) Zoning Administrator.
(c) Health Officer.
(d) Electrical Inspector.
(e) Fire Inspector.
(f) Weed Commissioner.
(g) Plumbing Inspector.
(h) Parking Services Aide. [Added 6-28-2004]
(2) Such City officials may delegate their authority to issue citations to
their subordinates.
4. Editor's Note: The citation form is on file in the City offices.
5. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Cash Deposits for use with citations, as amended, is on file
in the City offices.
§ 30-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 30-5
1:36
§ 30-5. Adoption of standards.
Section 66.0113, Wis. Stats., relating to violators' options and procedures
on default, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
§ 30-6. Remedies nonexclusive.
§ 30-7. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is invalid or unconstitutional, or if the
application of this chapter to any person or circumstances is invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without
the invalid or unconstitutional provision of application.
Chapter 37
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 37-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 755 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
there is hereby created and established a Municipal Court of the City of
Reedsburg, the Town of LaValle and the Village of Rock Springs.
§ 37-2. Municipal Judge.
Qualifications: The Municipal Court of the City of Reedsburg, Town of
LaValle and Village of Rock Springs shall be under the jurisdiction of and
presided over by a Municipal Judge, who shall be an attorney licensed to
practice law in Wisconsin and who resides in the City of Reedsburg, in the
Town of LaValle or in the Village of Rock Springs.
§ 37-3. Elections.
A. Other ordinances. Adoption of this chapter does not preclude the
Common Council from adopting any other ordinance or providing for
enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other
matter.
B. Other remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude
the City of Reedsburg or any authorized officer from proceeding under
any other ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to
enforce any ordinance, regulation or order.
A. Vacancy. A permanent vacancy in the office of the Municipal Judge may
be filled by temporary appointment of the Common Council of the City
of Reedsburg, the Town of LaValle Town Board and the Village of Rock
Springs Village Board, as provided for in § 8.50(4)(fm), Wis. Stats. The
office shall be permanently filled by special election in the manner
provided for in said statute.
§ 30-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-3
1:37
§ 37-4. Jurisdiction.
§ 37-5. Operations and procedures.
Hours: The Municipal Court for the City of Reedsburg, the Town of LaValle
and the Village of Rock Springs shall be open as determined by order of the
Municipal Judge.
§ 37-6. Collection of forfeitures and costs. [Amended 7-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 1873-18]
The Municipal Judge may impose punishment and sentences as provided
by Chs. 800 and 938, Wis. Stats., and as provided in the ordinances of the
City of Reedsburg, the Town of LaValle and the Village of Rock Springs.
All forfeitures, fees, assessments, surcharges and costs shall be paid to
B. Electors. Electors in all the municipalities, the City of Reedsburg, the
Town of LaValle and the Village of Rock Springs, shall vote for the
Municipal Judge.
A. Exclusivity. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over incidents
occurring on or after January 1, 2004, as provided in Article VII, Section
14 of the Wisconsin Constitution, and §§ 755.045 and § 755.05, Wis.
Stats., and as otherwise provided by the laws of Wisconsin. It shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over the actions in the City of Reedsburg, the
Town of LaValle and the Village of Rock Springs, seeking to impose
forfeitures for violations of municipal ordinances, resolutions and
bylaws.
B. Juvenile offenders.
(1) The Municipal Court has jurisdiction over juvenile offenders when a
municipality enacts an ordinance under the authority of
§ 938.17(2)(cm), Wis. Stats. Pursuant to § 938.17(2)(cm), Wis.
Stats., the Municipal Judge may impose the following dispositions
upon a juvenile for a violation of City, town or village ordinances:
(a) Any disposition allowed under Ch. 48, Wis. Stats.
(b) Section 938.343(2), Wis. Stats.
(c) Section 938.343(3), Wis. Stats.
(d) Section 938.343(4), Wis. Stats.
(e) Section 938.343(10), Wis. Stats.
(f) Section 938.344, Wis. Stats.
(g) Section 938.361, Wis. Stats.
(2) Any or all of the above listed dispositions may be used in any
combination when imposed by a Municipal Judge.
§ 37-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 37-6
1:38
the Treasurer of the City of Reedsburg within seven days of receipt of the
money by the Municipal Court.
Chapter 48
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 48-1. Purpose.
A. The Municipal Court funds shall be deposited into a separate Special
Revenue Fund created solely for the purpose of managing revenues and
paying expenses: labor/benefits, operating and transfer of funds to
support internal services and capital expenditures.
B. Changes do not adjust Chapter 434, Peace and Good Order, § 434-7,
Bond schedules, approvals. A certified copy of bond schedules for the
offenses set forth in this Code shall be adopted and approved with the
text as part of this Code and shall bear upon its face the attestation of
the City Clerk-Treasurer and the Chief of Police and shall be available to
the public in the office of the Chief of Police.
C. Changes thereafter to the bond schedule shall not be effective until
entered and attested on the certified copy. Changes in the bond
schedule shall be made by the Chief of Police with the approval of the
Council. All approved changes shall be incorporated into the bond
schedule and shall be available for public inspection.
D. At the time of the payment, the Municipal Court shall report to the
Treasurer the title of the action, the nature of the offenses and total
amount of judgments imposed in actions and proceedings in which such
monies were collected.
E. Distribution of Municipal Court revenue to contracted cities, villages
and towns shall be authorized by the Municipal Judge and may be
adjusted and memorialized in a fees resolution.
A. Purpose. By reason of the existing and increasing possibility of an
emergency existing within the City whenever conditions arise by reason
of a riot or civil commotion, a disaster, or an imminent threat of a
disaster that impairs transportation, food or fuel supplies, medical care,
fire, health or police protection, or other critical systems of the City, and
to insure that preparations of this City will be adequate to deal with
such disasters; to provide for the common defense; and to protect the
lives and property and to preserve the peace, health, safety and general
welfare, it is declared to be necessary:
(1) To create the Office of Emergency Management.
(2) To confer upon the Mayor, the Common Council and upon other
officers of the City certain extraordinary powers in a period of
emergency.
§ 37-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-1
1:39
§ 48-2. Definitions.
In this chapter:
BIOLOGICAL AGENT — Any of the following:
BIOTERRORISM — The intentional use of any biological, chemical or
radiological agent to cause death, disease or biological malfunction in
a human, animal, plant or other living organism in order to influence
the policy of a governmental unit or to intimidate or coerce the civilian
population.
CHEMICAL AGENT — A substance that has chemical properties that
produce lethal or serious effects in humans, plants, animals, or other living
organisms.
(3) To provide for cooperation or mutual aid with other political
subdivisions, private agencies and individuals relative to
emergency management activities, in a manner that is consistent
with the incident command system and the City's emergency
response plan.
B. Policy. It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the
policy of the City that organization, training and planning for
emergency management are the continuing responsibility of each
department or office of City government. Emergency management
planning and preparation shall follow insofar as possible the normal
lines of governmental administration. Such planning and preparation
shall provide for the maximum use of volunteer organizations and
volunteer efforts on the part of all residents of the City.
C. Executive powers. It is further declared to be the purpose of this
chapter and the policy of the City to permit the temporary suspension
by ordinance, resolution or executive proclamation of the requirements
of any City ordinance or resolution during a period of emergency which
the Common Council or Mayor deems necessary to allow immediate
response to meet the exigencies and needs of the extraordinary
conditions existing, and to grant to the Mayor during such period broad
executive powers to discharge the responsibility and duties placed on
him or her by statute and this chapter.
A select agent that is a virus, bacterium, rickettsia, fungus, or toxin that
is specified under 42 CFR 72, Appendix A.
A.
A genetically modified microorganism or genetic element from an
organism under Subsection A that is shown to produce or encode for a
factor associated with a disease.
B.
A genetically modified microorganism or genetic element that contains
nucleic acid sequences coding for a toxin under Subsection A or its
toxic subunit.
C.
D. An agent specified by the state Department of Health Services by rule.
§ 48-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 48-2
1:40
DIRECTOR — The head of the Office of Emergency Management as
provided in Ch. 323, Wis. Stats.
DISASTER — A severe or prolonged natural or human-caused occurrence
that threatens or negatively impacts life, health, property, infrastructure,
the environment, the security of the City, or critical systems, including
computer, telecommunications, or agricultural systems.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — All measures undertaken by or on behalf
of the City to do the following:
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER — The facility from which command
and control takes place of a large disaster, catastrophic event or incident
requiring extraordinary City resources.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN — The plan that identifies the various City
department functions to be performed during a disaster.
GOVERNOR — The governor of the state of Wisconsin or anyone legally
administering the office of governor.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM — A functional management system
established to control, direct and manage the roles, responsibilities and
operations of all the agencies in a multijurisdictional or multiagency
emergency response.
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY — The occurrence or imminent threat of an
illness or health condition that meets the following criteria:
RADIOLOGICAL AGENT — Radiation or radioactive material at a level that
is dangerous to humans, animals or other living organisms.
§ 48-3. Organization.
To prepare for and minimize the effect of a disaster or the imminent
threat of a disaster.
A.
To make repairs to or to restore infrastructure or critical systems that
are destroyed or damaged by a disaster.
B.
Is believed to be caused by bioterrorism or a novel or previously
controlled or eradicated biological agent.
A.
Poses a high probability of either of the following:
(1) Many deaths or serious or long-term disabilities among humans.
A high probability of widespread exposure to a biological, chemical
or radiological agent that creates a significant risk of substantial
future harm to many people.
(2)
B.
A. Created. To carry out the policies and purposes of this chapter, there is
created the Office of Emergency Management under the executive
direction and control of the Mayor.
§ 48-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-3
1:41
§ 48-4. Emergency powers.
§ 48-5. Powers of the Mayor.
B. Director. The Director, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Common Council shall:
(1) Have administrative control of the Office of Emergency
Management.
(2) Develop and promulgate emergency plans consistent with state
and federal plans, direct the emergency management program and
perform such other duties related to emergency management as
are required by the Common Council.
(3) Coordinate the City's emergency management preparedness,
planning and exercises.
(4) Direct participation in emergency management programs and
exercises ordered by the Adjutant General of the Wisconsin
Department of Military Affairs.
(5) Advise the county head of emergency management services on
local emergency management programs and submit such reports
as he or she requires.
A. Pursuant to § 323.14(4), Wis. Stats., the Common Council is empowered
to order, by ordinance or resolution, an emergency existing within the
City. The period of emergency shall be limited by ordinance or
resolution to an emergency or the imminent threat of an emergency.
B. The emergency power of the Common Council conferred under
Subsection A includes the general authority to order, by ordinance or
resolution, whatever is necessary and expedient for the health, safety,
protection and welfare of persons and property within the City in the
emergency and includes the power to bar, restrict or remove
unnecessary traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, from the public way,
notwithstanding any provision of Chs. 341 to 349, Wis. Stats., as
amended, or any other provisions of law.
C. If, because of the emergency conditions, the Common Council is unable
to meet with promptness, the Mayor or acting Mayor shall exercise by
proclamation all of the powers conferred upon the Common Council
under Subsection A or B which within the discretion of Mayor or acting
Mayor appear necessary and expedient for the purposes of this chapter.
The proclamation shall be subject to ratification, alteration,
modification or repeal by the Common Council as soon as it can meet,
but the subsequent action taken by the Common Council shall not affect
the prior validity of the proclamation.
A. Executive direction. The Mayor shall have executive direction and
control of the Office of Emergency Management and shall be
§ 48-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 48-5
1:42
responsible for the carrying out of provisions of this chapter and Ch.
323, Wis. Stats., as amended. During a period of emergency, the Mayor
shall assume command and direct control over all emergency
management operations and functions within the City.
B. Cooperation with other agencies. The Mayor is authorized to cooperate
with other political subdivisions, other states, the federal government,
and with federally recognized American Indian tribes and bands in all
emergency management matters pertaining to the City, state, and
nation. The Mayor shall comply, so far as is practicable and consistent
with the emergency management requirements of the City, with
program guides of the emergency management agencies of the federal
government and the state of Wisconsin. He or she shall prepare or
cause to be prepared reports of emergency management preparations,
programs or progress which are required for eligibility or participation
in financial or other assistance made available by or through the federal
government or the state of Wisconsin.
C. Delegation of authority. The Mayor is further authorized and
empowered to:
(1) Make, amend and rescind orders, rules, regulations and emergency
management plans within the limits of the authority conferred
upon him or her under this chapter, consistent with emergency
management statutes and plans of the state of Wisconsin and the
federal government.
(2) Enter into shelter licenses or other similar arrangements with
other political subdivisions, or governmental or private agencies,
or individuals. However, no expenditures of public funds or any
obligation of such funds shall be made without prior approval of the
Common Council, except during periods of emergency.
(3) Delegate administrative and contracting authority vested in him or
her under this chapter and authorize the subdelegation of such
authority.
(4) Declare by proclamation a state of emergency and the termination
thereof unless the Common Council, by resolution, shall sooner
declare the termination of the state of emergency. When the
proclamation is issued, the county emergency manager shall be
immediately notified of its contents.
D. Safety protection.
(1) The Mayor shall have the power during a period of emergency to
take such action as he or she deems necessary to preserve or
protect the lives, health and safety of persons and property and to
provide emergency assistance to any victims during such period.
The Mayor shall not be required to comply with the procedures and
formalities prescribed by any other ordinance or resolution of the
City pertaining to the performance of public work, the issuance of
§ 48-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-5
1:43
§ 48-6. Director of Emergency Management.
temporary permits, entering into contracts, the incurring of
obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of
equipment, or the requisition or purchase of supplies and
materials. Such power or authority shall, however, not exceed the
amount appropriated by the Common Council, and set aside and
remaining in an emergency management fund. In no event shall
the liability of the City exceed the fair and reasonable value of the
services, supplies, equipment or materials furnished by virtue of
the exercise of such power or authority.
(2) The Mayor shall have the power after a proclamation of emergency,
and until the state of such emergency is terminated, to
commandeer materials, services and property in the public interest
and safety.
(3) The Mayor shall convene the council as soon as conditions permit.
A. The Director shall serve as the manager of the emergency operations
center and shall facilitate the coordination among City departments and
other levels of government when the center is activated.
B. The Director shall direct the planning and training of all City
departments relating to emergency management. The Director shall
maintain liaison with and cooperate with emergency management
agencies and organizations of other political subdivisions within the
state of Wisconsin, other states and the federal government, and shall
have such additional administrative authority, duties and
responsibilities as are delegated to him or her by the Mayor or as may
be granted by ordinance or resolution of the Common Council. The
Director shall not exercise command authority over any officer or
employee in charge of any other City department.
C. The Director shall prepare or cause to be prepared and maintain a
comprehensive and current emergency response plan for emergency
management and continuity of governmental operations plans for the
City and its inhabitants. The plan shall be coordinated with the national
incident command system and national response plan, and the plans of
the state of Wisconsin and the county of Sauk.
D. The Director shall, in accordance with the City's emergency response
plan, procure, or cause to be procured, supplies and equipment and
take and cause to be taken all other preparations for any future partial
or full mobilization of emergency management organizations in
advance of a disaster, or for the imminent threat of a disaster to assure
the availability of adequately trained and equipped forces of necessary
emergency management personnel in a period of emergency.
E. The Director may recommend to the Mayor appointments for
emergency management assignments of City officers or employees as
§ 48-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 48-6
1:44
§ 48-7. Designation of emergency temporary locations.
§ 48-8. Departmental emergency response and continuity of
operations plans.
may be necessary for an efficient emergency management organization
in addition to those expressly provided for in this chapter.
F. The Director shall make, or cause to be made with the Mayor's
approval, studies and surveys of industries, resources, services and
facilities in this City and surrounding political subdivisions as may be
necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the City relative to emergency
management operations and to plan for use thereof.
G. The Director shall be the central point for the news media, City
employees, public officials and the public regarding the operations of
City government during a period of emergency. The Director shall
inform the public to the maximum extent possible of the necessity of
self-help and protection and keep the public informed of the availability
of self-help and protection materials and publications.
H. The Director may, with the prior approval of the Mayor, authorize
expenditures within the budgeted funds established or provided by
either the Common Council or the state or federal government or other
agencies, in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. Expenditures of
such budgeted city funds shall be in accordance with Chapter 485, Wis.
Stats.
A. Alternate sites. The Mayor may designate, subject to Common Council
approval, alternate sites as the emergency temporary locations of
government where all, or any part, of the public business may be
conducted whenever during a state of emergency it becomes
imprudent, inexpedient or impossible to conduct the affairs of City
government at the regular or usual places. The alternate sites may be
within or without the territorial limits of the City. With the approval of
the Mayor, department heads shall from time to time designate specific
places for their subordinates and employees to report upon the
commencement of an emergency, if it is desirable for such persons to
report to a place other than that designated by the Mayor as the
temporary site of government.
B. Exercise of authority. While the public business is being conducted at a
temporary location, the Mayor, Common Council and other City officers
shall possess and exercise all executive, legislative, administrative and
judicial powers and functions conferred upon the Mayor, Common
Council and City officers under state law. Those powers and functions,
except judicial, may be exercised in light of the exigencies of the
emergency situation without regard to the compliance with timeconsuming
procedures and formalities prescribed by law. All acts of the
Mayor, Common Council and officers shall be valid and binding as if
performed within the territorial limits of the City.
§ 48-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-8
1:45
§ 48-9. Duties of departments.
§ 48-10. Utilization of existing services and facilities.
A. Each City department shall develop and maintain a departmental
continuity of operations plan. Each departmental emergency response
and recovery plan shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Risk and vulnerabilities assessment.
(2) Identification of key staff and the means of contacting key staff
during a period of emergency.
(3) Department heads shall designate by title, if feasible or by named
person, emergency interim successors and specify their order of
succession.
(4) The activities of the department during a period of emergency.
(5) Identification of critical and noncritical personnel job duties.
(6) Identification of alternate sites for departmental functions.
(7) Identification of alternate locations for storage of supplies, records
and other critical items.
(8) An outline of the process of restoring departmental services
following a period of emergency.
B. Each department shall annually submit a copy of the department's
continuity of operations plan to the Director for review to assure
consistency with the City's emergency response plan.
A. It shall be the duty of all City departments to perform the functions and
provide the necessary resources identified in the City's emergency
response plan to respond to a disastrous or catastrophic incident.
B. All City departments shall cooperate with the director in developing,
maintaining and exercising the City's emergency response plan.
A. In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Director shall utilize
the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments,
bureaus, offices, commissions, committees, authorities and agencies of
the City to the maximum extent practicable. The officers, agents,
employees and personnel of all such departments, bureaus, offices,
commissions, committees, authorities and agencies of the City shall
cooperate with the Office of Emergency Management.
B. It shall be a condition of employment by the City that every City
employee, present and future, may be required to receive training in
and assignment to an emergency management position, consistent with
the education, training, experience and the job classification or position
§ 48-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 48-10
1:46
§ 48-11. Cooperation.
§ 48-12. Funding.
occupied by the employee. The Mayor or Director may exempt
employees from this requirement.
A. The City may cooperate with other jurisdictions under § 66.0301, Wis.
Stats., to furnish services, combine offices and finance emergency
management services.
B. The Mayor may, subject to the approval of the Common Council, in
collaboration with other public or private agencies, enter into mutual
aid agreements or arrangements for reciprocal emergency
management aid. The agreements or arrangements shall be consistent
with the currently existing state of Wisconsin statutes and the state of
Wisconsin emergency management plan and the currently existing plan
and program of the federal government. In a period of emergency, the
Office of Emergency Management shall render assistance in
accordance with provisions of any mutual aid agreement or
arrangement.
A. Appropriation. The Common Council shall appropriate such money as it
deems necessary for the carrying out of the purposes of this chapter,
such money to be deposited in a special account to be known as the
"emergency management fund." The money, except as otherwise
specifically provided, shall be disbursed in the manner prescribed for
the disbursement of public funds, excepting in case of a period of
emergency, in which event the Mayor may disburse such appropriated
funds within his or her discretion for emergency management or
homeland security services without the signature or countersignature
of any other City officer or compliance with any other ordinance.
B. Supplies. Whenever during a period of emergency the federal
government or the state of Wisconsin or any agency or officer thereof,
or any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the City or to the Office
of Emergency Management, equipment, supplies, materials, aids,
expenses, assistance or funds by way of gift, grant, contribution or loan
or otherwise for the purposes of emergency management or homeland
security, the Mayor, on behalf of the City, may accept such offer, and
upon such acceptance, may authorize any officer of the City or the
Director to receive the same, subject to the terms of the offer and the
rules and regulations, if any, of the offeror or agency making the offer.
The acceptance or receipt shall not create or cause any liability on the
part of the City, the Director, or any officer, agent or employee thereof
or of the City for failure to comply with the terms of such offer and the
rules and regulations, if any, of the offeror or agency making the offer.
All funds or moneys so received shall be disbursed in the manner
prescribed for the disbursement of public funds.
§ 48-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-12
1:47
§ 48-13. Emergency management services expenses.
Except as expressly provided for in this chapter, no person shall expend
any funds of the City in carrying out any emergency management activity
authorized herein without prior approval by the Common Council, nor shall
any person have any right to bind the City by contract, agreement or
otherwise without prior approval of the Common Council.
§ 48-14. Enforcement.
The Director, department heads, officers, agents, employees and all other
City and emergency management personnel shall execute, enforce and obey
such lawful orders, rules and regulations as may be issued by the Mayor
during a period of emergency.
§ 48-15. Penalty.
Any person who willfully refuses to comply with any lawful order of the
Mayor during a period of emergency shall, upon conviction by a court of
record, forfeit a sum not exceeding $1,000, and in default of payment be
imprisoned not exceeding 40 days.
§ 48-16. Prior rights and obligations preserved.
This chapter shall not invalidate any act done, obligation or contract made
or incurred by the City or in its behalf by any officer or duly authorized
emergency management or homeland security organization, committee or
agency pursuant to the authorization of any ordinance or resolution existing
prior to August 15, 2018, nor shall this chapter divest the City, any
committee, agency, or officer thereof of any rights of property, contracts
or any other rights or of any liability or obligation which may have been
created or accrued prior to the effective date of this chapter.
§ 48-17. Vacancies in the office of Mayor.
C. Program grants. City agencies applying for emergency management or
homeland security grants shall coordinate with the Director to ensure
continuity with the goals of the City's emergency response plan and
overall homeland security strategy.
A. During the period of emergency, the position of Mayor shall be deemed
temporarily vacant if he or she is unable to perform his or her assigned
duties or cannot be located. Vacancies in the office of Mayor shall
automatically be filled during the period of the emergency, until the
elected Mayor resumes his or her duties, by a direct line of succession
by those persons elected to the following offices prior to the emergency.
(1) The president of the Common Council.
(2) Public Safety Committee Chair.
(3) Public Works Committee Chair.
§ 48-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 48-18
1:48
§ 48-18. Preservation of essential public records.
Each department head shall establish a system for the preservation of
essential City records necessary for the continuity of governmental
functions in the event of emergencies or natural or man-made disasters.
Chapter 55
ETHICS CODE AND BOARD
§ 55-1. Statement of purpose.
§ 55-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANYTHING OF VALUE — Any money or property, favor, service, payment,
advance, forbearance, loan, or promise of future employment, but does not
include compensation and expenses paid by the state, fees and expenses
which are permitted and reported under § 19.56, Wis. Stats., political
A. The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be impartial and responsible to the people; that
government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the
governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal
gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its
government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a
Code of Ethics for all City of Reedsburg officials and employees,
whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of
boards, committees and commissions of the City, as well as any
individuals who are candidates for elective office as soon as such
individuals file nomination papers with the City.
B. The purpose of this Ethics Code is to establish guidelines for ethical
standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting
forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests
of the City of Reedsburg and by directing disclosure by such officials
and employees of private financial or other interests in matters
affecting the City. The Common Council believes that a Code of Ethics
for the guidance of elected and appointed officials and employees will
help them avoid conflicts between their personal interests and their
public responsibilities, will improve standards of public service and will
promote and strengthen the faith and confidence of the citizens of this
City in their elected and appointed officials and employees. The
Common Council hereby reaffirms that each elected and appointed City
official and employee holds his or her position as a public trust, and any
intentional effort to realize substantial personal gain through official
conduct is a violation of that trust. The provisions and purpose of this
Ethics Code and such rules and regulations as may be established are
hereby declared to be in the best interests of the City of Reedsburg.
§ 48-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-2
1:49
contributions which are reported under Ch. 11, Wis. Stats., or hospitality
extended for a purpose unrelated to state business by a person other than
an organization.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
BUSINESS — Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual or
any other legal entity which engages in profit-making activities.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest which shall yield, directly or
indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or
to any person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee.
PERSONAL INTEREST — The following specific blood or marriage
relationships:
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any person excluded from the definition of a public
official who is employed by the City.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — Those persons serving in elected or appointed offices
and all members appointed to boards, committees and commissions
established or appointed by the Mayor and/or Common Council, whether
paid or unpaid.
SIGNIFICANT INTEREST — Owning or controlling, directly or indirectly, at
least 10% or $5,000 of the outstanding stock of any business.
§ 55-3. Statutory standards of conduct.
There are certain provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes which should, while
not set forth herein, be considered an integral part of any code of ethics.
Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as from time to time amended, are made a part of this chapter
of Ethics and shall apply to public officials and employees whenever
applicable, to wit:
A. A person's spouse, mother, father, child, brother or sister; or
A person's relative by blood or marriage who receives, directly or
indirectly, more than 1/2 of his or her support from such person or from
whom such person receives, directly or indirectly, more than 1/2 of his
or her support.
B.
A. Section 946.10, Bribery of Public Officers and Employees.
B. Section 946.11, Special Privileges from Public Utilities.
C. Section 946.12, Misconduct in Public Office.
D. Section 946.13, Private Interest in Public Contract Prohibited.
E. Section 19.41 et seq., Code of Ethics for Public Officials and Employees.
§ 55-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 55-4
1:50
§ 55-4. Responsibility of public office.
Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office
for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of this state and carry out impartially
the laws of the nation, state and municipality, to observe in their official acts
the highest standards and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office
regardless of personal consideration, recognizing that the public interest
must be their prime concern.
§ 55-5. Dedicated service.
Officials and employees shall adhere to the rules of work and performance
established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority.
Officials and employees shall not exceed their authority or breach the law
or ask others to do so, and they shall work in full cooperation with other
public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by
officially recognized confidentiality of their work. Members of the City staff
are expected to follow their appropriate professional code of ethics.
§ 55-6. Fair and equal treatment.
§ 55-7. Conflict of interest.
A. Use of public property. No official or employee shall use or permit the
unauthorized use of City-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or
property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services
are available to the public generally or are provided as City policy for
the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official business,
as authorized by the Common Council or authorized board, commission
or committee.
B. Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which
is available to every other citizen. No official or employee shall use or
attempt to use his or her position with the City to secure any advantage,
preference or gain, over and above his or her rightful remuneration and
benefits, for himself or herself or for a member of his or her immediate
family.
C. Political contributions. No official shall personally solicit from any City
employee, other than an elected official, a contribution to a political
campaign committee for which the person subject to this chapter is a
candidate or treasurer.
A. Financial and personal interest prohibited.
(1) No official or employee of the City, whether paid or unpaid, shall
engage in any business or transaction or shall act in regard to
financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties in the
§ 55-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-7
1:51
public interest contrary to the provisions of this chapter or which
would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the
performance of official duties.
(2) Any member of the Common Council who has a financial interest or
personal interest in any proposed legislation before the Common
Council shall disclose on the records of the Common Council the
nature and extent of such interest; such official shall not participate
in debate or vote for adoption or defeat of such legislation. If the
matter before the Council involves a member's personal interest
with persons involved, the member may participate in debate or
discussion and vote on the matter following disclosure unless an
ordinance or contract is involved; if an ordinance or contract is
involved, such official shall not participate in debate or discussion
and vote on the matter.
(3) Any nonelected official, other than a City employee, who has a
financial interest or personal interest in any proposed legislative
action of the Common Council or any board, commission or
committee upon which the official has any influence or input or of
which the official is a member that is to make a recommendation or
decision upon any item which is the subject of the proposed
legislative action shall disclose on the records of the Common
Council or the appropriate board, commission or committee the
nature and extent of such interest. Such official shall not
participate in debate or discussion or vote for adoption or defeat of
such legislation.
(4) Any City employee who has a financial interest or personal interest
in any proposed legislative action of the Common Council or any
board, commission or committee upon which the employee has any
influence of input, or of which the employee is a member, that is to
make a recommendation or decision upon any item which is the
subject of the proposed legislative action shall disclose on the
records of the Common Council or the appropriate board,
commission or committee the nature and extent of such interest.
B. Disclosure of confidential information. No official or employee shall,
without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information
concerning the property, government or affairs of the City, nor shall
such information be used to advance the financial or other private
interests of the official or employee or others.
C. Gifts and favors.
(1) No official or employee, personally or through a member of his or
her immediate family, may solicit or accept, either directly or
indirectly, from any person or organization money or anything of
value if it could be expected to influence the employee's official
actions or judgments or be considered a reward for any action or
inaction on the part of the official or employee.
§ 55-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 55-7
1:52
(2) No official or employee, personally or through a member of his or
her immediate family, shall accept any gift, whether in the form of
money, service, loan, thing or promise, from any person which may
tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his or her duties or grant in the discharge of his or
her duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. However, it
is not a conflict of interest for any public official or employee to
receive a gift or gratuity that is an unsolicited item of nominal
intrinsic value such as a meal, and that is not intended to influence
the official. Any official or employee who receives, directly or
indirectly, any gift or gifts from any person who is known by said
official or employee to be interested, directly or indirectly, in any
manner whatsoever in business dealings with the City upon which
the official or employee has any influence or input or over which
the official or employee has any jurisdiction, discretion or control
shall disclose the nature and value of such gifts to the Common
Council by January 15 next following the year in which the gift or
gifts are received.
(3) An official or employee is not to accept hospitality if, after
consideration of the surrounding circumstances, it could
reasonably be concluded that such hospitality would not be
extended were it not for the fact that the guest, or a member of the
guest's immediate family, was a City official or employee.
Participation in celebrations, grand openings, open houses,
informational meetings and similar events are excluded from this
prohibition. This subsection further shall not be construed to
prevent candidates for elective office from accepting hospitality
from citizens for the purpose of supporting the candidate's
campaign.
(4) Gifts received by an official or employee or his or her immediate
family under unusual circumstances shall be referred to the
Common Council within 10 days of receipt for recommended
disposition. Any person subject to this chapter who becomes aware
that he is or has been offered any gift, the acceptance of which
would constitute a violation of this subsection, shall within 10 days
disclose the details surrounding said offer to the Common Council.
Failure to comply with this reporting requirement shall constitute
an offense under this chapter.
D. Representing private interests before City agencies or courts.
(1) Nonelected City officials and employees shall not appear on behalf
of any private person (other than himself or herself, his or her
spouse or minor children) before any City agency, board,
commission or the Common Council if the official or employee or
any board, commission or committee of which the official or
employee is a member has any jurisdiction, discretion or control
over the matter which is the subject of such representation.
§ 55-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-7
1:53
§ 55-8. Ethics Board. [Amended 7-26-2010]
(2) Elected City officials may appear before City agencies on behalf of
constituents in the course of their duties as representatives of the
electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations.
However, the disclosure requirements of Subsection A above shall
be applicable to such appearances.
E. Ad hoc committee exceptions. No violation of the conflict of interest
restrictions of this chapter shall exist, however, where an individual
serves on a special ad hoc committee charged with the narrow
responsibility of addressing a specific issue of topic in which that
individual, or the employer or a client of that individual, has an interest,
so long as the individual discloses to the Common Council that such
interest exists.
F. Contracts with the City. No City official or employee who, in his or her
capacity as such officer or employee, participates in the making of a
contract in which he has a private pecuniary interest, direct or indirect,
or performs in regard to that contract with some function requiring the
exercise of discretion on his or her part shall enter into any contract
with the City, unless within the confines of § 946.13, Wis. Stats.:
(1) The contract is awarded through a process of public notice and
competitive bidding or the Common Council waives the
requirement of this chapter after determining that it is in the best
interest of the City to do so.
(2) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the designation
of a public depository of public funds.
A. The Ethics Board shall consist of five members. The membership of the
Ethics Board shall consist of four citizens and one alderperson. The
nonalderperson members shall not be elected officials, full-time
appointed officials or City employees, nor shall the non-Council
members be currently serving on any other City board, commission or
committee. The City Attorney shall furnish the Board any legal
assistance necessary to carry out its functions.
B. Ethics Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the Council. Initial terms of office shall be: one citizen
shall be appointed for two years, one citizen will be appointed for one
year, and two citizens will be appointed for three years. Thereafter, all
terms shall be three years. Terms begin May 1 of the respective year.
Each year, the Mayor shall appoint the alderperson at the annual
reorganization meeting. Three members shall constitute a quorum of
the Board.
C. The Ethics Board shall elect its own chair.
D. The Ethics Board may make recommendations to the Common Council
with respect to amendments of this Code of Ethics.
§ 55-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 55-8
1:54
E. Any person covered by this Ethics Code may apply, in writing, to the
Board for an advisory opinion regarding the propriety of any matter to
which the person is or may become a party. The Board shall meet to
review such a request for an advisory opinion and may advise the
person making the request. Advisory opinions and requests therefor
shall be in writing and shall state all material facts. It shall be prima
facia evidence of intent to comply with this Ethics Code when a person
refers a matter to the Board and abides by the advisory opinion of the
Board if the material facts are as stated in the opinion request.
Meetings held by the Board for deliberation and action upon such
application shall not be open to the public nor shall a nonmember,
Common Council member or the Mayor be authorized to attend any
such meeting of the Board unless requested to do so by the Board.
Advisory opinions rendered by the Board shall be in writing and shall
state the material facts upon which the opinion is based. A record of the
Board's opinions, opinion requests and investigations of violations shall
be closed to public inspection as required by Chapter 19, Wis. Stats.
Except as provided by § 19.59(5)(b), Wis. Stats., the Board shall not
make public the identity of any person requesting an advisory opinion
or of persons or organizations mentioned in the opinion. If the Board
determines that an advisory opinion rendered by the Board would be of
significant value to other officials or employees, the Board may issue a
summary of the opinion, provided that the summary does not disclose
the identity of the person originally requesting the advisory opinion. In
all cases, the Board may request an advisory opinion from the City
Attorney.
F. All complaints alleging that an official or employee committed a
violation of this Ethics Code shall be addressed to the Ethics Board and
shall be filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer. All such complaints shall be
in writing and verified and shall state the name of the official or
employee alleged to have committed a violation of this Ethics Code and
shall further state the evidentiary facts supporting the charge.
G. Within 14 days after the filing of a properly verified complaint with the
City Clerk-Treasurer, the Board shall meet to review the complaint.
Within three business days after its initial review of the complaint, the
Board shall mail a copy of the complaint to the respondent by certified
mail or shall have a copy of the complaint delivered to the respondent
by personal service.
H. Following its initial review of a verified complaint, the Board may make
a preliminary investigation with respect to each alleged violation of this
Ethics Code. No preliminary investigation of an alleged violation of this
Ethics Code may be initiated until a copy of the complaint and notice of
the Board's intent to investigate the charge has been mailed by certified
mail to the respondent or personally served upon the respondent. The
preliminary investigation shall be completed within 30 days of the date
that the complaint and notice thereof is mailed to the respondent or
personally served upon the respondent, except the Board may extend
§ 55-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-8
1:55
the investigation period for up to an additional 60 days with notice to
the respondent and to the complainant.
I. If, after its preliminary investigation, the Board finds that probable
cause does not exist for believing that the respondent violated this
Ethics Code, it shall dismiss the complaint. The Board shall promptly
notify the complainant and the respondent by certified mail or personal
service of its decision dismissing the complaint. The Board's decision to
dismiss a complaint shall be final. The same complaint or a complaint
which is substantially similar to the dismissed complaint shall not be
reconsidered by the Board unless, within 20 days of the Board's mailing
or personal service of its dismissal order, the complainant files with the
Board additional material facts which were not available to the
complainant at the time the original complaint was filed and which, if
true, would probably change the Board's decision. The Board's decision
to reconsider or not to reconsider a decision under this subsection shall
be final. If the Board determines that a verified complaint was brought
for harassment purposes, the Board shall so state in its decision.
J. If, after its preliminary investigation, the Board finds that probable
cause does exist for believing the allegations of the complaint, it shall
conduct a hearing on the matter. The hearing shall be held not more
than 60 days after the Board's finding of probable cause. The Board
shall give the respondent and complainant written notice of the hearing
date by mailing a notice thereof to the respondent and to the
complainant by first class mail at least 20 days prior to the hearing date
thereof. The hearing shall be held in closed session except that the
respondent shall have a right to demand that the hearing be held in
open session and, upon such demand, the Board shall conduct the
hearing in open session.
K. The chairperson of the Board shall preside over the proceedings, and
the City Attorney shall provide legal assistance to the Board as needed.
The complainant and the respondent may be represented by an
attorney, and the respondent may also be represented by a union
representative. Both parties may compel the attendance of witnesses by
subpoenas. Subpoenas may be issued by the Chairperson of the Board
pursuant to § 885.01, Wis. Stats. Each party shall be responsible for
serving subpoenas on its respective witnesses and for paying any
witness and mileage fees to the witness as required by the Wisconsin
Statutes.
L. All testimony of witnesses at the proceedings shall be given under oath,
administered by the Chairperson in the form and manner prescribed by
the Wisconsin Statutes. A record of the testimony may be made by
stenographic, electronic or other recording method, as the Board
determines. The record produced at the direction of the Board shall be
the official record of the proceeding. The proceedings may be
adjourned or continued by the Board from day to day until completed.
M. The proceedings shall be conducted in the following order:
§ 55-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 55-8
1:56
(1) Statement of the issues and rules by the Chairperson.
(2) Brief factual summaries, if any, by both sides.
(3) Presentation of testimony and the introduction of evidence by the
complainant to substantiate the charge.
(4) Cross-examination of witnesses by the respondent.
(5) One additional opportunity to question witnesses by the
complainant.
(6) One additional opportunity to cross-examine witnesses by the
respondent.
(7) Presentation of the base for the respondent.
(8) Repeat of Subsection M(4), (5) and (6) above regarding witnesses
and evidence produced on behalf of the respondent.
(9) Opportunity for each side to present evidence in rebuttal of any
evidence presented by the opposing side.
(10) Brief closing arguments, if any, by both sides.
N. The Board shall not be bound by common law or statutory rules of
evidence, and the Board shall hear all evidence having reasonable
probative value, but shall exclude immaterial, irrelevant or unduly
repetitious testimony or evidence. Basic principles of relevancy,
materiality and probative force shall govern this proceeding. Hearsay
evidence will not be permitted where direct evidence is reasonably
available. The Board will not base crucial or essential evidentiary
findings on hearsay evidence. Objections to evidentiary offers and
offers of proof of evidence not admitted may be made and shall be noted
in the record. All evidence, including records and documents, shall be
duly offered and made a part of the record. The Chairperson shall rule
on any objections or procedural matters. Any member of the Board and
the City Attorney may ask questions of the witnesses. No party or
witness shall be permitted to ask questions of any Board member
during the proceedings, unless expressly authorized by the
Chairperson.
O. The Board shall deliberate in closed session.
P. Within 10 working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall
file its written findings of fact, conclusions of law and recommendations
signed by a majority of the participating members and concerning the
propriety of the conduct of the respondent. Any member of the Board
may indicate his/her dissent to the written order. If the Board
determines that no violation of the Code of Ethics has occurred, it shall
dismiss the complaint, and if requested to do so by the respondent, the
Board shall issue a public statement in that regard. If the Board finds
that clear, satisfactory and convincing evidence exists for believing the
§ 55-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-8
1:57
§ 55-9. Distribution of provisions.
allegations of the complaint, the Board shall refer its findings,
conclusions and recommendation to the Common Council or to other
proper City authority and/or, in the case of an employee, to the City
Administrator and/or the Mayor as deemed appropriate. In its
recommendation, the Board may recommend that the Common Council
order the official or employee to conform his or her conduct to the
Ethics Code or recommend that the official or employee be cautioned,
censured, suspended, removed from office, issued a private reprimand,
public reprimand, and, in the case of an employee, may also
recommend suspension without pay, discharge, or other appropriate
disciplinary action. In appropriate cases, the Board may recommend
the referral of the matter to the District Attorney to commence
enforcement proceedings pursuant to the procedures and remedies of
§ 19.59, Wis. Stats.
Q. Records obtained or prepared by the Board in connection with an
investigation of a violation of this Ethics Code shall not be open for
public inspection, except that the Board shall permit public inspection
of records of a hearing conducted in open session pursuant to the
request of the respondent as provided in Subsection J hereof. Whenever
the Board refers an investigation and hearings record to a District
Attorney, the District Attorney may make public such records in the
course of a prosecution initiated thereon.
R. The time frames set forth in this Ethics Code specifying Board action
are not jurisdictional, and the Board may, where appropriate, extend
any time period as necessary.
A. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be
distributed to every public official and employee of the City within 30
days after enactment of this chapter. Each public official and employee
elected, appointed or engaged thereafter shall be furnished a copy
before entering upon his or her duties.
B. Each public official, Mayor, the Chairman of each board, commission or
committee and, through the City Administrator, the head of each
department shall between May 1 and May 31 each year, review the
provisions of this chapter with his or her fellow Council members or
board, commission, committee members or subordinates, as the case
may be, and certify to the City Clerk-Treasurer by June 15 that such
annual review had been undertaken. A notice of this Ethics Code shall
be continuously posted on the City bulletin boards wherever situated.
C. Each public official and employee shall, in connection with Subsections
A and B above, also complete and file with the City Clerk-Treasurer, as
appropriate, the following statement of understanding:
"I have read and understand the contents of the City of Reedsburg
Ethics Code, including the attached state statutes.* I also understand
§ 55-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 55-9
1:58
§ 55-10. Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements.
In the event an employee covered under a collective bargaining agreement,
is allegedly involved in an Ethics Code violation, the terms and conditions
set forth in the applicable collective bargaining agreement shall prevail in
the administration and interpretation of this Ethics Code.
§ 55-11. Sanction.
A determination that an employee's actions constitute improper conduct
under the provisions of this chapter may constitute a cause of suspension,
removal from office or employment or other disciplinary action. Sanctions,
including any disciplinary action, which may affect employees covered
under a labor agreement will be consistent with the terms and conditions
set forth in the applicable labor agreement.
§ 55-12. Police officers and firefighters.
When an ethics complaint has been filed against a police officer or
firefighter or the Chief of either the Police or Fire Department, the
procedure shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of § 62.13,
Wis. Stats.
§ 55-13. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter should raise conscientious
questions for the incumbent concerned as to whether voluntary resignation
or other action is indicated to promote the best interests of the City of
Reedsburg. For nonelected officials or City employees, violation may
constitute a cause for suspension, removal from office or employment, or
other disciplinary action. As an alternative or an addition to the sanctions
imposed herein, any person violating the provisions of this sanction shall be
subject to a nonreimbursable forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than
$500.
Chapter 63
FAIR AND OPEN HOUSING
§ 63-1. Adoption of standards.
All provisions of § 106.50, Wis. Stats., and all applicable portions of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code regarding fair and open housing, together
with any amendments, additions or deletions which may occur in the future,
are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this ordinance as if
fully set forth herein.
that I am expected to adhere to and conduct myself according to rules,
guidance and direction as set forth in the Ethics Code." (*Sections
946.10 through 946.13 and 19.41 et seq., Wis. Stats.)
§ 55-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-2
1:59
§ 63-2. Applicability.
The officials and employees of the City of Reedsburg shall assist in the
orderly prevention and removal of all discrimination in housing within
the City of Reedsburg by implementing the authority and enforcement
procedures set forth in § 106.50, Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 63-3. Complaints filing.
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain forms for complaints to be filed
under § 106.50, Wis. Stats., and shall assist any person alleging a violation
thereof in the City of Reedsburg to file a complaint thereunder with the
Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development, Equal Rights Division,
for enforcement of § 106.50, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 72
FINANCE AND TAXATION
§ 72-1. Preparation of tax roll and tax receipts. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 72-2. Duplicate Treasurer's bond eliminated.
§ 72-3. Budget.
A. Aggregate tax stated on roll. Pursuant to § 70.65(2), Wis. Stats., the
Clerk shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount
of state, county, school and local taxes in a single column in the roll
opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied or, in
the case of personal property, in a single column opposite the name of
the person against whom the tax is levied.
B. Penalty for nonpayment of personal property taxes. Pursuant to the
authority of § 74.47(2), Wis. Stats., a penalty of 0.5% per month or
fraction of a month, in addition to the interest prescribed in § 74.47(1),
Wis. Stats., shall be charged on all overdue or delinquent personal
property taxes retained for collection by the City or eventually charged
back to the City by the county for purposes of collection under § 74.31,
Wis. Stats.
A. Bond eliminated. The City elects not to give the bond on the Treasurer
provided for by § 70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
B. City liable for default of Treasurer. Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wis. Stats.,
the City shall be obligated to pay, in case the Treasurer shall fail to do
so, all state and county taxes required by law to be paid by such
Treasurer to the County Treasurer.
§ 63-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 72-3
1:60
§ 72-4. Transfer of appropriations. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The amounts of the various appropriations and the purposes of such
appropriations stated in such budget, after any alterations therein made
pursuant to the hearing required by § 72-3, shall not be changed thereafter
unless authorized by a vote of 2/3 of the entire membership of the Council.
A. Departmental estimates. On or before August 15, each officer,
department and committee shall file an itemized budget request,
detailing any changes from prior year revenues and expenditures.
B. City Administrator to prepare.
(1) Budget to include. The City Administrator shall prepare and submit
to the Finance Committee a proposed budget presenting a financial
plan for conducting the affairs of the City for the ensuing calendar
year. The budget shall include the following information:
(a) All existing indebtedness and all anticipated revenue from all
sources during the ensuing year.
(b) All proposed appropriations for each department, activity, and
reserve account during the ensuing year.
(c) All actual revenues and expenditures for the preceding year,
actual revenues and expenditures for not less than the first six
months of the current year, and estimated revenues and
expenditures for the balance of the current year.
(d) By fund, all anticipated unexpended or unappropriated
balances and surpluses.
(e) Estimated personnel cost schedule for each department and
position in the City.
(f) Such other information as may be required by the Council.
(2) The Finance Committee shall review the budget with each
department head and shall forward a final version of the budget to
the Common Council for public hearing.
C. Hearing. A summary of such budget and notice of the place where such
budget in detail is available for public inspection and notice of the time
and place for holding the public hearing thereon shall be published as a
Class 1 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., in the official City newspaper
at least 15 days prior to the hearing thereon. After the publication of
the proposed budget and the notice of hearing thereon, a public hearing
shall be held at the time and place stipulated, at which time any
resident or taxpayer of the City of Reedsburg shall have an opportunity
to be heard on the proposed budget. The budget hearing may be
adjourned from time to time. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 72-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-4
1:61
Notice of such transfer shall be given a Class 1 notice thereof, pursuant to
Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., within 15 days thereafter in the official City newspaper.
§ 72-5. City funds to be spent in accordance with appropriations.
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance
of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as
authorized by § 72-4 of this chapter. At the close of each fiscal year, any
unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general
fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be
made by the Council, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in
furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be
completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in
force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished
or abandoned.
§ 72-6. Issuance of checks with facsimile signature.
It shall be lawful for the checks issued by the City of Reedsburg and its
Utility Commission to be signed by facsimile signature by the Mayor and the
President of the Utility Commission of said City.
§ 72-7. Collection of delinquent charges. [Amended 11-26-2001]
A. Authority. This section authorizes the use of the procedures under
§ 66.0809(3), Wis. Stats., for the collection of arrearages for electric
service provided by the Reedsburg Utility Commission.
B. Procedure.
(1) On October 15 in each year, notice shall be given to the owner or
occupant of all lots or parcels of real estate to which utility services
have been furnished prior to October 1 by the Reedsburg Utility
Commission and payment for which is owing and in arrears at the
time of giving the notice.
(2) The notice shall be given by the Reedsburg Utility Commission.
(3) The notice shall be in writing and shall state:
(a) The amount of arrears, including any penalty assessed
pursuant to the rules of the utility.
(b) That, unless the amount is paid by November 1, a penalty of
10% of the amount of arrears will be added.
(c) That, unless the arrears, with any added penalty, are paid by
November 15, the arrears and penalty will be levied as a
special charge, as defined under § 74.01(4), Wis. Stats., against
the lot or parcel of real estate to which the utility service is
furnished and for which payment is delinquent. [Amended at
§ 72-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 72-7
1:62
§ 72-8. Room tax.
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
(4) The notice may be served by delivery to either the owner or
occupant, personally, or by letter addressed to the owner or
occupant at the post office address of the lot or parcel of real
estate.
(5) On November 16, the Reedsburg Utility Commission shall certify
and file with the Clerk a list of all lots or parcels of real estate,
giving the legal description for which notice of arrears was given
and for which arrears remain unpaid, stating the amount of arrears
and penalty.
(6) Each delinquent amount, including the penalty, becomes a lien
upon the lot or parcel of real estate to which the utility service was
furnished and payment for which is delinquent, and the Clerk shall
insert the delinquent amount and penalty as a special charge, as
defined under § 74.01(4), Wis. Stats., against the lot or parcel of
real estate. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
(7) All proceeds in relation to the collection of general property taxes
and to the return and sale of property for delinquent taxes apply to
the tax if it is not paid within the time required by law for payment
of taxes upon real estate.
(8) If an arrearage is for utility service furnished and metered by the
Utility Commission directly to a mobile home unit in a licensed
mobile home park, the notice shall be given to the owner of the
mobile home unit, and the delinquent amount becomes a lien on the
mobile home unit rather than on the parcel of real estate on which
the mobile home is located. A lien on a mobile home unit may be
enforced using the procedures under § 779.48(2), Wis. Stats.
A. Six-percent tax. Pursuant to § 66.0615, Wis. Stats., a 6% percent tax is
hereby imposed on the privilege and services of furnishings, at retail, of
rooms or lodging to transients by hotelkeepers, motel operators and
other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the
public, irrespective of whether membership is required for use of the
accommodations. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax
imposed by § 77.52(2)(a)1, Wis. Stats., and may not be imposed upon
sales to the federal government and persons listed under § 77.54(a),
Wis. Stats. This rate shall be effective as of July 1, 2013. [Amended
3-25-2013; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 72-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-8
1:63
B. Application of proceeds. The proceeds of the tax, when collected, less
all collection expenses, shall be assigned to the general fund and
disbursed as provided by state law.
C. Tax paid and returns filed quarterly. The tax imposed shall be paid for
each calendar quarter and shall be due and payable on the last day of
the month next succeeding the calendar quarter for which imposed. A
return shall be filed with the Treasurer by those furnishing at retail
such rooms and lodging on or before the same date on which such tax is
due and payable. Such return shall show the gross receipts of the
preceding calendar quarter from the retail furnishing of rooms or
lodging, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other
information as the Treasurer deems necessary.
D. Annual return required. Every person required by Subsection C to file a
quarterly return shall, with the first return filed, elect to file an annual
calendar-year or fiscal-year return. The annual return shall be filed
within 30 days of the close of each calendar or fiscal year. The annual
return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and adjust for
errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain such additional
information as the Treasurer requires. The annual returns shall be
made on forms prescribed by the Treasurer. All such returns shall be
signed by the person required to file a return or his/her duly authorized
agent, but need not be verified by oath.
E. Extension of time to file return on showing of good cause. The
Treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but
in no event longer than one month from the filing date.
F. Treasurer to administer. The provisions of this section shall be
administered by the Treasurer, and the Treasurer shall establish such
forms and procedures as are reasonably necessary to carry out its
intent and purposes.
G. Permit required. Every person furnishing rooms or lodging under
Subsection A shall file with the Treasurer an application for a permit for
each place of business. The application shall be made upon a form
prescribed by the Treasurer and shall set forth the name under which
the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the location of
the place of business, and such other information as the Treasurer
requires. The application shall be signed by the owner if a sole
proprietor and, if not a sole proprietor, by the person authorized to act
on behalf of the owner.
H. Treasurer to issue permit. After compliance with Subsection G and
Subsection Q by the applicant, the Treasurer shall grant and issue to
each applicant a separate permit for each place of business within the
City. Such permit shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the
person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at
the place designated therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously
displayed at the place for which issued.
§ 72-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 72-8
1:64
I. Appeal of room tax. Any person who shall dispute the amount of tax
levied by this chapter may file a petition with the Treasurer setting
forth the basis for the dispute of the tax. The merits of such dispute
shall be determined by the Board of Review. As a condition to filing a
petition, the taxes under protest shall first be paid in full. Any such tax
wrongfully assessed shall be refunded to the payer.
J. Procedure where business is sold. If a person liable for a tax under this
section sells the business or terminates the business, the successors or
assigns thereof shall withhold from the purchase price a sum sufficient
to cover the room tax until the seller produces a receipt from the
Treasurer that the tax has been fully paid or a certificate that no tax is
due. Any purchaser who fails to withhold the room tax from the
purchase price, as required herein, shall be personally liable for
payment of the amount required to be withheld.
K. Office audit. The Treasurer may, by office audit, determine the tax
required to be paid to the City or the refund due to any person under
this subsection. This determination may be made upon the basis of the
facts contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any other
information within the Treasurer's possession. One or more such office
audit determinations may be made by the Treasurer as deemed
necessary.
L. Field audit. The Treasurer may, by field audit, determine the tax
required to be paid to the City or the refund due to any person under
this section. The determination may be made upon the basis of the facts
contained in the return being audited or upon any other information
within the Treasurer's possession. The Treasurer is authorized to
examine and inspect the state sales tax records, and memoranda, of any
person in order to verify the tax liability of that person or of another
person.
M. Failure to file returns, estimate by Treasurer, penalty. If any person fails
to file a return as required by this section, the Treasurer shall make an
estimate of the amount of the gross receipts under Subsection A. Such
estimate shall be made for the period for which such person failed to
make a return and shall be based upon any information which is in the
Treasurer's possession or which may come into the Treasurer's
possession. On the basis of this estimate, the Treasurer shall compute
and determine the amount required to be paid to the City, adding to the
sum a penalty equal to 10% thereof. One or more such determinations
may be made for one or more periods.
N. Interest charge on unpaid tax. All unpaid taxes under this chapter shall
bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the due date of the
return until the first day of the month following the month in which the
tax is paid or deposited with the Treasurer. All refunded taxes shall bear
interest at 12% per annum from the due date of the return until the first
day of the month following the month in which said taxes are refunded.
An extension of time within which to file a return shall not operate to
§ 72-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-8
1:65
Chapter 79
extend the due date of the return for purposes of interest computation.
If the Treasurer determines that any overpayment of tax has been made
intentionally or by reason of carelessness or neglect, or if the tax which
was overpaid was not accompanied by a complete return, no interest
shall be paid thereon.
O. Delinquent returns, late filing fee. Delinquent tax returns shall be
subject to a $10 late filing fee. The tax imposed by this section shall
become delinquent if not paid:
(1) In the case of a timely filed return, within 30 days after the due date
of the return or within 30 days after the expiration of an extension
period if one has been granted.
(2) In the case of no return filed or a return filed late, by the due date
of the return.
P. Added penalty. If, due to negligence, no return is filed, or a return is
filed late, the entire tax finally determined shall be subject to a penalty
of 25% of the tax exclusive of any interest or other penalties. If a person
fails to file a return when due or files a false or fraudulent return with
the intent of either case to defeat or evade the tax imposed by this
section, a penalty of 25% shall be added to the tax required to be paid,
exclusive of interest and other penalties.
Q. Records kept. Every person liable for the tax imposed by this section
shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other
pertinent papers in such form as the Treasurer requires.
R. Confidentiality of returns. All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings
or audit reports relating to such returns on file with the Treasurer are
deemed to be confidential, except the Treasurer may divulge their
contents to the following and no others:
(1) The person who filed the return.
(2) Officers, agents or employees of the Federal Internal Revenue
Service or the State Department of Revenue.
(3) Officers, agents or employees of the City as may be necessary to
enforce collection.
S. Penalty. Any person subject to the tax imposed by this section who fails
to obtain a permit as required in Subsection G or who fails or refuses to
permit the Treasurer to inspect his/her state sales tax records, or who
fails to file a tax return, or who violates any other provision of this
section shall, in addition to all other penalties provided herein, be
subject to a forfeiture as provided by Chapter 1, General Provisions,
§ 1-3, of the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
§ 72-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 72-8
1:66
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 79-1. Composition.
The Department shall be known as the "Reedsburg Volunteer Fire
Department" and shall consist of the Fire Chief and such subordinates as
may be authorized by the Common Council.
§ 79-2. Bylaws.
The Department shall adopt bylaws for the control, management and
government and regulation of business and proceedings of the Department.
§ 79-3. Appointment of Chief. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Police and Fire Commission and
shall hold office during good behavior, subject to suspension or removal by
the Commission for cause, and upon reaching age 65 shall be retired.
§ 79-4. Election of subordinates.
The members of the Fire Department shall be elected by the members of the
Department subject to their bylaws existing at that time. Except the Chief,
all members elected to the Fire Department shall be not less than 21 nor
more than 50 years of age and all such shall automatically be retired from
active membership in said Department upon attaining the age of 60 years,
unless extended by the Common Council, but not to exceed 65 years.
§ 79-5. Disciplinary actions.
Disciplinary actions against the Chief and subordinates shall be subject to
§ 62.13(5), Wis. Stats.
§ 79-6. Powers and duties of Chief.
A. Supervisory and procedural responsibilities.
(1) The chief shall have general supervision of the Department, subject
to this section and the bylaws of the Department and shall be
responsible for the personnel and general efficiency of the
Department.
(2) The Chief shall preside at all meetings of the Department, call
special meetings, preserve order, decide all points of order that
may arise and enforce a rigid observance of this chapter and the
bylaws.
(3) The Chief shall have complete command of and entire
responsibility for all firefighting operations, shall plan the control
of the same, shall direct the action of the Department when at a
§ 72-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-6
1:67
fire, shall grant leaves of absence at a fire when he may deem it
proper and shall see that fire apparatus is kept in proper condition
at all times.
(4) Not later than August 15 of each year, the Chief shall file with the
Clerk a detailed estimate of the appropriations needed for the
conduct of the Department during the ensuing fiscal year.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Vacancy; residency requirements.
(1) A vacancy in the office of the Chief shall be filled by the Police and
Fire Commission. Other officers shall be chosen in the manner
provided by the Department bylaws. Upon creation of a vacancy in
the office of Chief, the ranking officer shall perform the duties of
the Chief until such vacancy has been filled.
(2) Upon appointment, the Chief shall immediately assume office and
shall hold office until his successor is appointed and qualified in
accordance with the bylaws of the Department. The Chief shall be a
resident of the City and employed with the City.
C. Additional responsibilities.
(1) Any person desiring to be a member of the Fire Department may
file with the Secretary-Treasurer of the Fire Department an
application in such form as the Department may require. Each
applicant shall also file a certificate of physical fitness from such
physician as the chief may designate.
(2) Upon reaching the age of 60, active members may become
honorary members and be relieved from firefighting duties.
(3) All resignations from the Department shall take the same course as
applications for and appointments to membership.
(4) The election of the Secretary-Treasurer and such social officers as
the bylaws may require shall be held at the annual meeting of the
Department in such manner as is provided in the bylaws. In case of
any vacancy, the Chief shall appoint a member in good standing to
fill the office until the next annual election.
(5) The Chief shall submit a written report to the Common Council not
later than December 15 of each year, and at such other times as he
deems desirable, relating to the condition of the various pieces of
apparatus and appurtenances, the number of fires occurring since
the previous report, the date of same and loss occasioned thereby,
the total number of active members in the Department and
resignations and expulsions from the Department. He shall also
report upon the drill and training program of the Department,
together with other pertinent information, including
§ 79-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 79-6
1:68
§ 79-7. Rescue fund. [Added 1-26-2009]
recommendations of such improvements as he deems proper and
necessary for the operation of the Department.
(6) He shall enforce all fire prevention ordinances of this City and state
laws and regulations pertaining to fire prevention and shall keep
citizens informed on fire prevention methods and on the activities
of the Department.
(7) He shall keep a fire record book of every fire to which the
Department was called and shall enter in such book the locality of
fire, time alarm was received, cause of fire, where fire started,
cause of delay, if any, in responding, method of extinguishment,
equipment used, amount of insurance carried on building and
contents, estimated fire loss, time fire was extinguished, names of
men responding and general remarks.
(8) He shall keep an inventory of all apparatus and equipment and an
inventory of all hose showing dates and results of tests on each
length, which shall be individually identified.
(9) He shall perform such other duties as are incumbent on the
commanding officer of the Fire Department.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the deposit of
certain funds into a Rescue Fund to be held and administered by the
Fire Department. The City acknowledges that all of the funds which
have been or will be deposited into this account are not generated from
tax revenues and, in fact, represent assets that have been or will be
generated through countless hours of volunteer work by Fire
Department members, friends and family. The City expressly
acknowledges that these funds may never be used for any purposes
other than those approved by the Fire Department as outlined within
the body of this section. If the Common Council ever amends this
section, it will consult with the Fire Department. Under no
circumstances may these funds be used for general City obligations or
to offset or supplement the Fire Department's general operating budget
without the Fire Chief's approval as outlined within the body of this
section.
B. Authority. The Common Council adopts this section pursuant to
§ 66.0608, Wis. Stats., and it is to be interpreted in conformance with
that section as it may be amended from time to time.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief for the City of Reedsburg Fire
Department.
§ 79-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-7
1:69
Chapter 104
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
FIRE VOLUNTEER FUNDS — Funds that are raised by members of the
Fire Department through fund-raising activities, donations and similar
sources, and/or donations to the City restricted to Fire Department use.
PUBLIC DEPOSITORY — Has the meaning given in § 34.01(5), Wis.
Stats.
D. Description of accounts.
(1) Rescue fund. This fund shall be used for deposit of all fire volunteer
funds.
(2) Deposit of funds. The Fire Chief or his/her designated
representative shall deposit fire volunteer funds to the Rescue
Fund, held in the name of the Reedsburg Fire Department. All such
fund deposits shall be in a public depository in which other City
funds are being held by the City Treasurer. All other funds shall be
held in the Fire Department account to be administered by the City
Treasurer in accordance with applicable provisions of the law.
(3) Control of funds. The Fire Department, through the Fire Chief or
his/her designated representative, is granted exclusive control over
the expenditure of the funds in the Rescue Fund, subject to any
restrictions imposed by the donors or the organizational documents
for the Fire Department. All of the funds comprising the Fire
Department account shall remain under the control of the City.
(4) Limitations, requirements, and withdrawals. The following
limitations and requirements shall apply to the handling and
disbursement of funds from the Rescue Fund.
(a) Expenditures withdrawn from the Rescue Fund shall be made
only upon majority vote of the Fire Chief and the elected
officers of the Fire Department.
(b) Withdrawals and expenditures from the Rescue Fund may be
made for any purpose that promotes the ability of the Fire
Department to provide services for which it is organized.
(c) The monies in the Rescue Fund shall remain the property of
the City until the funds are disbursed in accordance with this
section.
(5) Accounting/audit. The Rescue Fund shall be maintained in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and
shall be included in any annual audit of the City funds, and shall be
audited in the same manner.
§ 79-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 79-7
1:70
ARTICLE I
Mayor
[Adopted as Sec. 1.02 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 104-1. Election; salary.
The Mayor is elected at the regular City election in even-numbered years
for two years. The Mayor's salary shall be as ordered by a vote of 3/4 of all
the members of the Council.
§ 104-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-1
1:71

ARTICLE II
Alderpersons
[Adopted as Sec. 1.03 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 104-2. Election; terms of office.
There shall be nine Alderpersons. Two Alderpersons shall be elected from
each aldermanic district. The ninth Alderperson shall be "at large" and shall
be elected by the entire City. Three Alderpersons shall be elected annually
for a term of three years, except that one Second District Aldermanic
position shall be elected to a two-year term in 2014 to stagger the terms,
but thereafter this term will be a three-year term.
§ 104-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-2
1:73

ARTICLE III
Common Council Committees
[Adopted as Secs. 2.01 to 2.06 of the former Municipal Codebook;
amended in its entirety 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 1848-17]
§ 104-3. Committees.
The following shall constitute the standing advisory committees of the
Common Council:
§ 104-4. Appointments.
Subject to any specified terms set forth herein, all appointments to
committees shall be made by the Mayor and confirmed by the Common
Council at the annual organizational meeting of the Council. Unless
otherwise specified, the Mayor shall designate the chair of each committee.
All appointments begin on May 1 of each year.
§ 104-5. Residency.
Nonresidents of the City of Reedsburg may not serve on City boards,
commissions and/or committees unless specifically appointed to
nonresident positions by the respective governing body.
§ 104-6. Reports. [Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 1858-18]
Each committee to which any matter shall be referred shall report thereon
at the next regular scheduled meeting. Such report(s) shall be filed with the
Clerk.
§ 104-7. Finance Committee. [Amended 10-23-2017 by Ord. No.
1852-17]
A. Finance.
B. Parks and Recreation.
C. Public Works.
D. Ordinance.
E. Personnel.
F. Reedsburg Arts.
A. The Finance Committee shall have six members. The members of the
Finance Committee shall be the chairs of the Planning Commission, the
Public Works Committee, the Personnel Committee and the Parks and
Recreation Committee. In the event that one Council member holds
multiple chair positions, the Mayor shall appoint such other members of
the Council as are necessary to provide for four Council representatives
§ 104-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-7
1:75
§ 104-8. Parks and Recreation Committee.
§ 104-9. Public Works Committee.
§ 104-10. Ordinance Committee.
on the Finance Committee. There shall also be two members of the
public, who shall serve staggered terms of three years.
B. The committee shall provide oversight of the financial affairs of the City
and advise the Mayor, Council and City staff, accordingly. Among the
functions to be performed by the committee are:
(1) Review and recommend bills to be paid by the Council.
(2) Review and recommend the level and type of financing appropriate
for long-term capital needs.
(3) Review and recommend the annual operating budget and level of
taxation.
(4) Provide and recommend health, workers' compensation, property
and liability insurance policies as well as make recommendations
regarding claims against the City.
A. The Parks and Recreation Committee shall have five members. Three of
the members shall be members of the Common Council appointed
annually, and two of the members shall be members of the public who
shall serve staggered terms of three years. [Amended 5-24-2004]
B. The Committee shall have those powers specified in § 27.08, Wis. Stats.,
shall oversee the parks, recreation and forestry functions of the City
and provide advice to the Mayor, the Council and City staff. The
Committee shall review the annual operating budgets, capital
improvement projects and major equipment purchases for the activities
within its purview.
A. The Public Works Committee shall have five members. Three of the
members shall be members of the Common Council appointed annually.
Two of the members shall be members of the public, who shall serve
staggered terms of three years.
B. The Committee shall advise the Mayor, the Council and the City staff
regarding the construction, maintenance and operation of streets,
bridges, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, wastewater treatment plant,
municipal buildings and other related City facilities. The Committee will
also review the annual operating budget, capital improvement projects
and major equipment purchases for the departments within its purview.
The Committee shall also monitor the City's compliance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act.6
6. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 104-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 104-10
1:76
§ 104-11. Personnel Committee.
§ 104-12. Reedsburg Arts Committee.
A. The Ordinance Committee shall have five members. Three of the
members shall be members of the Common Council appointed annually.
Two of the members shall be members of the public, who shall serve
staggered terms of three years.
B. The Committee shall review and recommend the issuance and renewal
of liquor-related licenses. The Committee shall serve as the Appeals
Committee as may be directed by City statute related to permits and
licenses.
C. The Committee shall review and recommend new or amended
ordinances and perform such other related functions as assigned by the
Mayor and Council.
A. The Personnel Committee shall have five members. Three of the
members shall be members of the Common Council appointed annually.
Two of the members shall be members of the public, who shall serve
staggered terms of three years.
B. The Committee shall advise the Mayor, Council and City staff regarding
the personnel policies and procedures of the City; except that the
Committee shall not direct or manage the activities of any member of
the City staff.
C. The Committee shall recommend labor negotiation strategies and
objectives and recommend contract settlement terms to the Mayor and
Council, and members will participate on bargaining teams for labor
negotiations as assigned by the chair of the Committee. The Committee
may also function as an appellate body depending upon the grievance
procedures of specific labor contracts.
D. The Committee shall review the performance evaluations prepared by
the City administrator of department heads and make
recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding compensation of
non-represented employees.
E. The Committee shall review and recommend changes in the
organizational structure and job descriptions for the City and shall
perform such other functions as assigned.
A. The Reedsburg Arts Committee shall have seven voting members who
reside or have a business in the City. Four members, residing in the City,
of the public shall serve staggered terms of three years and three
members shall be appointed for the opposite terms period. (Initial
member appointments may be reduced to help with the transition time
in creation of the Committee.)
§ 104-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-12
1:77
B. The Reedsburg Arts Committee shall be an advisory committee to the
Mayor and Council to carry out the Arts in Public Places policy as
approved by the Common Council. The Reedsburg Arts Committee shall
strive to create a long-range strategic arts plan and complete the
refinement of the Arts in Public Places policy.
C. The Reedsburg Arts Committee shall supervise and recommend
expenditures of the amount of art in public places funding as approved
annually by the City Council. The Arts Committee may seek grant funds
for special art placement in public places. Awarded grants must be
approved by the Mayor and Council. [Amended 8-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 1887-19]
§ 104-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 104-12
1:78
ARTICLE IV
Council Meetings and Rules of Procedure
[Adopted as Sec. 2.07 of the former Municipal Codebook; amended
in its entirety 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 1851-17]
§ 104-13. Organization meeting.
Following a regular City election, the new Council shall meet on the third
Tuesday of April. A President of the Council shall be chosen at this time
from among the Alderpersons by majority vote.
§ 104-14. Regular meetings.
The regular meetings of the Common Council shall be held at the Council
Chambers at 7:00 p.m. on the second and fourth Mondays of each month
except when such day is a legal holiday, when such meeting shall be held at
the time determined by the Council.
§ 104-15. Special meetings.
A. Special meetings shall be held at such times as the Mayor or a majority
of the Council direct.
B. Notice of a special meeting may be given by any of the following
methods at least 24 hours before the meeting.
(1) By written notice delivered personally to a Council member.
(2) By a telephone call to a Council member. If the member has a
telephone answering device, a message may be left with a request
that the member confirm receipt of the notice. Notice will be
completed when the member confirms receipt.
(3) By facsimile transmission to a Council member. The facsimile
transmission shall contain a request that the member confirm
receipt of the notice. Notice will be completed when the member
confirms receipt.
(4) By electronic transmission, commonly known as "e-mail," to a
Council member. The e-mail message shall include a request that
the member confirm receipt of the notice. Notice will be completed
when the member confirms receipt.
C. The notice given, whatever the form, shall state the matters to be
considered at the special meeting, and a copy of the meeting agenda
shall be posted at least 24 hours prior to the meeting.
D. The persons who give notice of a special meeting as set forth above
shall provide a sworn affidavit stating the form of the notice, the time of
delivery and the time of confirmation, if any, which notice shall be
retained by the City for at least two years.
§ 104-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-15
1:79
§ 104-16. Call to order.
The Mayor or, in his absence, the President of the Council shall take the
chair at the hour appointed, call the members of the Council to order,
and may, at the instance of any two members, order the attendance of
absentees. In the absence of the Mayor and President of the Council, any
member may call the Council to order, and thereupon the Council shall
appoint a Chairman to preside at such meeting.
§ 104-17. Quorum.
Two-thirds of the membership of the Council shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business, although a lesser number may adjourn. The
Mayor shall not be counted in determining a quorum.
§ 104-18. Order of business.
At all regular meetings the order of business shall be determined by the
Mayor.
§ 104-19. Conduct of meetings.
Meetings of the Council and committees shall be open to the public except
as provided in § 19.85, Wis. Stats. No member shall leave a meeting of the
Council or a committee without leave of absence under penalty of $5 for
each offense. The Council may punish by fine members or other persons for
disorderly behavior.
§ 104-20. Duties of presiding officer.
§ 104-21. Agenda.
An agenda shall be prepared for all meetings of the Common Council by
the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall advise the Mayor of
the items included on the agenda. An item may be placed on the agenda
by the City Administrator, Mayor, or any other Council member. An item
recommended for placement on an agenda may be removed from the
agenda by the Mayor. If the Mayor removes an item from the agenda, the
E. The City of Reedsburg hereby elects not to be governed by the meetings
provisions of § 62.11(2), Wis. Stats. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, subject to
appeal to the Council.
B. The presiding officer shall preserve order. If any member violates any of
these rules, the presiding officer shall, or any member may, call him to
order, in which case he will immediately sit down and be silent unless
permitted to explain. A member called to order may appeal to the
Council.
§ 104-15 REEDSBURG CODE § 104-21
1:80
item shall be restored to the agenda upon the request of two or more
Council members.
§ 104-22. Motions.
§ 104-23. Questions.
§ 104-24. Voting.
A. To be reduced to writing. Every motion or proposition except privileged
motions shall be reduced to writing by the Clerk.
B. When before Council. When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be
before the Council and shall be stated by the presiding officer or, if in
writing, shall be delivered to the Clerk and read by him previous to
debate.
C. When a question is before Council. When a question is before the
Council, no motion shall be received except to adjourn, to lay on the
table the previous question, to refer to committee, or to amend or to
withdraw, which motions shall have precedence in the order in which
made.
A. Form of. All questions shall be put in this form: "As many as are of the
opinion (as the case may be) say aye; contrary, no."
B. Speaking on. When a member is about to speak to a question or make a
motion, the member will respectfully address the presiding officer and
Council, as entitled to the floor, and the member shall confine remarks
to the question under consideration.
C. Limitation on speaking. No member shall speak more than twice on any
question, no more than 10 minutes at any one time without leave of a
majority of the members present, expressed by a rising vote, and the
same rule shall be observed in committee of the whole.
D. Putting previous question. When previous question shall be put in these
words: "Shall the main question be now put?" it shall be admitted on
demand of two members and, until decided, shall preclude all further
amendment or debate of the main question, but shall not preclude
pending amendments from being put before the main question.
E. Division of question. The presiding officer may direct or any member
may call for a division of the question when the same will admit thereof,
and such division shall be made by the presiding officer and a separate
vote shall be taken on each division. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. By Mayor. The Mayor shall not be counted in determining whether a
majority or other proportion of the Council has voted for a proposition,
and he shall not vote except in the case of a tie.
§ 104-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-24
1:81
§ 104-25. Ordinances.
§ 104-26. Petitions, etc.
All petitions, memorials, resolutions, and other communications shall be
in writing, with a brief statement of their contents endorsed upon them
together with the name of the member presenting the same. All petitions
shall be presented by the presiding officer and the contents briefly
explained. Petitions shall thereupon be referred to a committee.
B. Confirmation of appointments. A majority of all the members shall be
necessary for confirmation. In case of a tie, the Mayor shall have a
casting vote as in other cases.
C. A vote by ayes and nos shall be required on any measure assessing or
levying taxes, appropriating or disbursing money or creating any
liability against the City or any fund thereof. In addition, any member
may require a vote by the ayes and nos. All such votes shall be
recorded. Unless a roll call vote is requested by a member, a voice vote
shall be taken and recorded thereof. In addition, any member may
require a vote by the ayes and nos. All such votes shall be recorded in
the journal.
D. Members required to vote. Every member present when a question is
put shall vote unless the Council shall excuse him.
E. Reconsideration. Any member who voted in the majority may have
reconsideration of the vote at the same or the next succeeding regular
meeting of the Council. A motion to reconsider having been put and lost
shall not again be in order.
F. Explanation of vote. No member may explain his vote during the calling
of ayes and nos. However, he may explain the reason for his dissent
from the vote of the majority and have such reasons entered on the
journal.
A. Upon introduction of an ordinance, a public hearing shall be held at a
time and date to be set by the Council. If no date is set, and after
publication, the hearing shall be held at the first available Council
meeting after the meeting in which the ordinance is introduced. A
notice of public hearing shall be published as a Class 1 notice under Ch.
985, Wis. Stats., unless another class of notice is required by ordinance
or state statute. At such time as it is adopted, it shall be published
pursuant to state statute.
B. Any ordinance, upon introduction, may be referred to committee by the
presiding officer or upon motion of the Council.
§ 104-24 REEDSBURG CODE § 104-27
1:82
§ 104-27. Claims.
No claims shall be allowed unless itemized. Claims shall be examined and
certified to be correct by a committee of the Council and reported to and
audited by the Council.
§ 104-28. Suspension of rules.
Any rule hereunder may be suspended by a 2/3 vote of the members
present.
§ 104-29. Alteration of rules.
Any of the rules hereunder may be altered or amended by a 2/3 vote of all
the members of the Council.
§ 104-30. Robert's Rules of Order.
When not otherwise covered by these rules of procedure, Robert's Rules of
Order Revised shall govern.
§ 104-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-30
1:83
Chapter 115
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 104-30 REEDSBURG CODE § 104-30
1:84
ARTICLE I
City Administrator
[Adopted as Secs. 1A.01 to 1A.04 of the former Municipal
Codebook]
§ 115-1. Office of City Administrator. [Amended 4-24-2005]
In order to provide the City of Reedsburg with a more efficient, effective and
responsible government under a system of a part-time Mayor and part-time
Common Council (hereinafter referred to as "Council") at a time when City
government is becoming increasingly complex, there is hereby created the
Office of City Administrator for the City of Reedsburg (hereinafter referred
to as "Administrator").
§ 115-2. Appointment, term of office and removal.
The Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard
to training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the
office by a two-thirds vote of the Council. For the purposes of appointing
or terminating the Administrator, the Mayor and each Alderman shall cast
one vote. The Administrator shall hold office for an indefinite term subject
to removal at any time by a two-thirds vote of the Council. This section,
however, shall not preclude the Council from establishing other employment
terms and conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of this article or
the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
§ 115-3. Functions and duties of Administrator.
The Administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions and
ordinances of the City of Reedsburg and Wisconsin State Statutes, shall be
the chief administrative officer of the City, responsible only to the Mayor
and the Council for the proper administration of the business affairs of the
City, pursuant to the statutes of the State of Wisconsin, the ordinances of
the City of Reedsburg, and the resolutions and directives of the Council,
with power and duties as follows:
A. General duties.
(1) Carry out directives of the Mayor and Council that require
administrative implementation, reporting promptly to the Mayor
and Council any difficulties encountered herein;
(2) Be responsible for the administration of all day-to-day operations of
the City government, including the monitoring of all City
ordinances, resolutions, Council meeting minutes and state
statutes;
(3) Prepare a plan of administration, including an organization chart
which defines authority and responsibility for all nonstatutory
positions of the City; and submit it to the Common Council for
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-3
1:85
adoption as the official organization and administrative procedure
plan for the City;
(4) Establish, when necessary, administrative procedures to increase
the effectiveness and efficiency of City government according to
current practices in local government not inconsistent with
Subsection A(3) above or directives of the Mayor and Council;
(5) Serve as ex officio nonvoting member of all boards, commissions
and committees of the City, except as specified by the Council or
Wisconsin State Statutes;
(6) Keep informed concerning current federal, state, and county
legislation and administrative rules affecting the City, and submit
appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to the Council;
(7) Keep informed concerning the availability of federal, state and
county funds for local programs. Assist department heads and the
Council in obtaining these funds under the direction of the Mayor
and the Council;
(8) Represent the City in matters involving legislative and
intergovernmental affairs as authorized and directed as to that
representation by the Mayor and Council;
(9) Act as public information officer for the City with the responsibility
of assuring that the news media is kept informed about the
operations of the City and that all open meeting rules and
regulations are followed;
(10) Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications
between citizens and City government to assure that complaints,
grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt
attention by the responsible official and to assure that all such
matters are expeditiously resolved;
(11) Promote the economic well-being and growth of the City through
public and private section cooperation.
B. Responsibilities to the Common Council.
(1) Attend all meetings of the Council, assisting the Mayor and the
Council as required in the performance of their duties;
(2) In coordination with the Mayor, the Council, and the Clerk, ensure
that appropriate agendas are prepared for all meetings of the
Council, all Council committees, and all other appropriate
committees and commissions of the City, together with such
supporting material as may be required, with nothing herein being
construed as to give the Administrator authority to limit or in any
way prevent matters from being considered by the Council or any
of its committees and commissions;
§ 115-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 115-3
1:86
(3) Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as
requested by the Mayor or the Council or as needed;
(4) Keep the Mayor and Council regularly informed about the activities
of the Administrator's office by oral or written report at regular and
special meetings of the Council;
(5) In the event that action normally requiring Council approval is
necessary at a time when the Council cannot meet, the
Administrator shall receive directives from the Mayor.
C. Personnel.
(1) Be responsible for the administrative direction and coordination of
all employees of the City according to the established organization
procedures;
(2) Recommend to the Council the appointment, promotion and, when
necessary for the good of the City, the suspension or termination of
department heads;
(3) In consultation with the appropriate department head, be
responsible for the appointment, promotion and, when necessary
for the good of the City, the suspension of employees below the
department head level;
(4) Assist in labor contract negotiations and collective bargaining
issues;
(5) Work closely with department heads to assure that employees
receive adequate opportunities for training to maintain and
improve their job-related knowledge and skills and act as the
approving authority for requests by employees to attend
conferences, meetings, training schools, etc., provided that funds
have been budgeted for these activities;
(6) In consultation with the appropriate department head, be
responsible for the termination of seasonal and part-time
employees.
D. Budgeting and purchasing.
(1) Be responsible for the preparation of the annual City budget, in
accordance with guidelines as may be provided by the Common
Council and in coordination with department heads, and pursuant
to state statutes, for review and approval by the Mayor and the
Council;
(2) Administer the budget as adopted by the Council;
(3) Report regularly to the Council on the current fiscal position of the
City;
§ 115-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-3
1:87
§ 115-4. Cooperation.
All officials and employees of the City shall cooperate with and assist the
Administrator so that the City government shall function effectively and
efficiently.
(4) Supervise the accounting system of the City and ensure that the
system employs methods in accordance with current professional
accounting practices;
(5) Serve as the purchasing agent for the City, supervising all
purchasing and contracting for supplies and services, subject to the
purchasing procedures established by the Council and any
limitation contained in the Wisconsin State Statutes.
§ 115-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 115-4
1:88
ARTICLE II
Appointed City Officials
[Adopted as Secs. 1.05 to 1.07 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 115-5. City Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 115-6. Assessor. [Amended 2-23-2004]
An Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation and
a two-thirds vote of the members of the Council, and shall hold office for
the term of the contract. All candidates for such office are to be interviewed
by a committee of three appointed by the Mayor. Candidates shall file an
application stating, in detail, their education, experience and qualifications
for the position. The committee shall submit to the Mayor and Common
Council a written report on the qualifications of each candidate. Such report
shall state the extent to which the firm possesses knowledge of the subject
of taxation and the valuation of property, together with skill in matters
pertaining thereto.
§ 115-7. City Attorney.
The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Council annually in April.
§ 115-8. Comptroller.
The City Administrator shall perform the duties of the comptroller.
§ 115-9. Bonds. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
The following officers shall give the following bonds:
A. Such person so selected to perform the duties of the office of City Clerk-
Treasurer of said City shall hereafter be appointed by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the members of the Common Council of the City of
Reedsburg and shall take office November 15, 1971.
B. Said person so appointed to perform the duties of such offices shall hold
office for an indefinite term, subject to be removed as provided in
§ 17.12(1)(c) and (d), Wis. Stats.
C. Such person appointed to perform the duties of the combined offices
shall perform all duties required of both offices as provided by law and
such other duties as are requested to be executed by him by the
Common Council from time to time.
A. City Clerk-Treasurer: $400,000.
§ 115-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-9
1:89

ARTICLE III
Gifts or Gratuities
[Adopted as Sec. 1.113 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 115-10. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any public official to receive or offer to receive,
either directly or indirectly, any gift, gratuity, or anything of value which he
is not authorized to receive from any person, if such person:
§ 115-11. Public policy.
The receipt of any gift, gratuity, or anything of value as denoted above7 is
contrary to the public policy of the City of Reedsburg.
A. Has or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial
relationships with such public employee's employer or the
governmental body of the public official; or
B. Conducts operations or activities which are regulated by such
employee's employer or the governmental body of a public official; or
C. Has interests which may be substantially affected by public employee's
employer or the governmental body of the public official.
7. Editor's Note: See the definition in Chapter 55, Ethics Code and Board, § 55-2 of the Code
of the City of Reedsburg.
§ 115-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-11
1:91

ARTICLE IV
Attendance at Closed Sessions
[Adopted as Sec. 1.116 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 115-12. Participation.
Pursuant to § 19.89, Wis. Stats., and unless otherwise provided by law, no
duly elected or appointed member of a governmental body who attends a
meeting of a subunit of that governmental body may participate in that
meeting unless authorized by the chair of that body, board, commission or
committee.
§ 115-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-12
1:93
Chapter 124
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 115-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 115-12
1:94
ARTICLE I
Office of Chief of Police Established
[Adopted as Sec. 1.08 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 124-1. Office created.
The offices of marshal and constable are abolished and the office of Chief of
Police is created.
§ 124-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-1
1:95

ARTICLE II
Composition of Department; Powers and Duties
[Adopted as Ch. 4 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 124-2. Composition of Police Department.
The Police Department of the City shall consist of a Chief and such
subordinates as the Common Council may designate, who shall be
appointed pursuant to § 62.13, Wis. Stats.
§ 124-3. Salaries. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
The salaries of the Chief of Police and subordinates shall be fixed by the
Common Council but shall not be lowered unless recommended by the
Police and Fire Commissions.
§ 124-4. Disciplinary actions.
Disciplinary action against the Chief of Police and subordinates shall be
subject to § 62.13(5), Wis. Stats.
§ 124-5. Chief of Police duties and powers.
§ 124-6. Police officers.
A. The Chief of Police shall possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and be
subject to the liabilities conferred and imposed by law upon marshals
and constables.
B. He shall obey all lawful written orders of the Mayor and Common
Council.
C. He shall cause the public peace to be preserved and see that all laws
and ordinances of the City and state are enforced, and whenever any
violation thereof shall come to his knowledge, he shall cause the
requisite complaint to be made and see that the evidence is procured
for the successful prosecution of the offender or offenders.
D. He shall exercise supervisory control over all the personnel of his
Department, and may adopt, subject to the approval of the Council,
rules and regulations for the government, discipline, equipment and
uniforms of police officers.
E. He shall be solely responsible for the care and condition of the
equipment used by his Department.
F. He shall keep an accurate and complete record of all complaints,
arrests, traffic violations, convictions and dispositions of the
Department.
§ 124-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-6
1:97
§ 124-7. Assistance by civilians.
All persons in the City at the request of any police or peace officer shall aid
and assist such officer in the execution of his duties.
§ 124-8. Disposal of abandoned property. [Added 5-14-2018 by Ord.
No. 1871-18]
A. General powers and duties. Each officer of the Department shall
possess the powers conferred on marshals and constables by law and
shall preserve the public peace and enforce the laws and ordinances of
the state and City subject to the orders, rules and regulations of the
Chief, the Mayor and Common Council.
B. Power of arrest. The Chief of Police and any police officer shall arrest all
persons in the City found in the act of violating any law or ordinance of
the City or state or aiding or abetting in such violation, and they shall
arrest without warrant all persons who they have reason to believe have
violated any law or ordinance and who will not be apprehended unless
immediately arrested, and shall take all arrested persons in charge and
confine them and shall within a reasonable time bring such persons
before the court having jurisdiction thereof to be dealt with according
to law.
A. The Police Department is authorized to dispose of abandoned property
in its possession and unclaimed for at least 30 days.
B. Based upon the value of an item, whether it is generic or unique, the
condition of the item, and whether the item may have a use in City
operations, items may be disposed of in any of the following ways:
(1) An Internet auction site (i.e., eBay, PropertyRoom.com, etc.);
(2) The bulk sale of items, including sale as scrap;
(3) Conversion of the item for use by the City;
(4) Sale at a live auction;
(5) Donation to 501(c)(3) organizations upon application and proof of
nonprofit status; or
(6) Any other method of sale deemed reasonable by the Chief of Police
based upon the unique characteristics of the item.
C. Firearms shall be disposed of in accordance with §§ 66.0139 and
968.20, Wis. Stats.
D. Flammable, explosive, or incendiary substances, materials, or devices
that pose a danger to life or property in their storage, transportation, or
use immediately after taking possession of the substances may be
disposed of in accordance with § 66.0139(3), Wis. Stats.
§ 124-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 124-8
1:98
§ 124-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3 of this Code
of the City of Reedsburg.
E. The provisions of § 66.0139, Wis. Stats., are adopted and incorporated.
§ 124-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-9
1:99
Chapter 138
RECORDS
§ 124-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 124-9
1:100
ARTICLE I
Destruction of Public Records
[Adopted as Sec. 3.06 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 138-1. Financial records. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Officers may destroy the following nonutility records under their
jurisdiction after the completion of an audit by the Legislative Audit Bureau/
State Auditor, but not less than seven years after payment of receipt of the
sum involved in the applicable transaction:
§ 138-2. Utility records.
Officers may destroy the following records of municipal utilities subject to
regulation by the state Public Service Commission and after an audit as
provided above, but not less than two years after payment or receipt of the
sum involved in the applicable transaction:
§ 138-3. Other records.
Officers are empowered to destroy the following records, but not less than
seven years after the record was effective:
A. Bank statements, deposit books, slips and stubs.
B. Bonds and coupons after maturity.
C. Canceled checks, duplicates and check stubs.
D. License and permit applications, stubs and duplicates.
E. Payroll and other time and employment records of personnel included
under the Wisconsin Retirement Fund.
F. Receipt funds.
G. Special assessment records.
H. Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all other supporting
documents pertaining thereto.
A. Water, sewer, electrical stubs and receipts of current billings.
B. Customers' ledgers.
C. Vouchers and supporting documents pertaining to charges not included
in plant accounts.
D. Other utility records after seven years with the written approval of the
state Public Service Commission.
A. Assessment rolls and related records, including the Board of Review
minutes.
§ 138-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-3
1:101
§ 138-4. Notice required.
Prior to the destruction of any public record described above, at least 60
days' notice shall be given the state Historical Society.
B. Contracts and papers relating thereto.
C. Correspondence and communications.
D. Financial reports other than annual financial reports.
E. Insurance policies.
F. Justice dockets.
G. Oaths of office.
H. Report of boards, commissions, committees, and officials duplicated in
the official minutes.
I. Resolutions and petitions.
J. Voter record cards.
§ 138-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 138-4
1:102
ARTICLE II
Access to Public Records
[Adopted 6-11-2007 (Sec. 1.114 of the former Municipal Codebook)]
§ 138-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Any of the following City entities having custody of a City
record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission, council,
department or public body corporate and politic created by constitution,
law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit of the
foregoing.
CUSTODIAN — That officer, department head, division head or employee of
the City designated under § 138-7 or otherwise responsible by law to keep
and preserve any City records or file, deposit or keep such records in his
or her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such
public records and who is required by this article to respond to requests for
access to such records.
RECORD — Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual
or electromagnetic information or electronically generated or stored data
is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
that has been created or is being kept by an authority. "Record" includes,
but is not limited to, handwritten, typed, or printed pages, maps, charts,
photographs, films, recordings, tapes, optical discs, and any other medium
on which electronically generated or stored data is recorded or preserved.
"Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations, and like
materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the
originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working;
materials that are purely the personal property of the custodian and have
no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by
copyright, patent, or bequest; and published materials in the possession
of an authority other than a public library that are available for sale, or
that are available for inspection at a public library.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 138-6. Duty to maintain records.
A. Except as provided under § 138-11, each officer and employee of the
City shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or her
predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited
or kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful possession or
control of the officer or employee or his or her duties, or to the
possession or control of which he or she or they may be lawfully entitled
as such officers or employees.
B. Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term
of employment or whenever the office or position of employment
§ 138-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-6
1:103
§ 138-7. Legal custodians.
§ 138-8. Public access to records.
becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or
her successor all records then in his or her custody and the successor
shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file said
receipt with the City Clerk-Treasurer. If a vacancy occurs before a
successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and
receipted for by the Clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to
such successor upon the latter's receipt.
A. Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the
records of his or her office, but the official may designate an employee
of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
B. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the City Clerk-Treasurer or the
Clerk-Treasurer's designee shall act as legal custodian for the Common
Council and for any committees, commissions, boards, or other
authorities created by ordinance or resolution of the Common Council.
C. For every authority not specified in Subsection A or B, the authority's
administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the
officer may designate an employee of his or her staff to act as the legal
custodian.
D. Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his
or her absence or the absence of his or her designee.
E. The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and
to carry out the duties of an authority under Ch. 19, Subch. II, Wis.
Stats, and this section. The designation of a legal custodian does not
affect the powers and duties of an authority under this section.
A. Except as provided in § 138-10, any person has a right to inspect a
record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in
§ 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
B. Records will be available for inspection and copying during regular
office hours.
C. If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records
are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying at
least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
D. A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those
available to City employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
E. The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may
impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an
original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
§ 138-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 138-8
1:104
§ 138-9. Access procedures.
F. A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and
copying records as follows:
(1) The cost of photocopying shall be $0.20 per page. Said cost has
been calculated not to exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost
of reproduction.
(2) If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual
and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing
shall be charged.
(3) The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in
printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and
audiotapes or videotapes, shall be charged.
(4) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also
be charged.
(5) There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost
thereof exceeds $50, in which case the actual cost shall be
determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester.
Actual costs shall be determined on the basis of any direct costs to
the City in addition to the actual hourly wage, including fringe
benefits, of the employee searching for the record multiplied by the
amount of time spent in the search. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(6) The legal custodial shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and
may require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such
estimate exceeds $5.
(7) Elected and appointed officials of the City of Reedsburg shall not be
required to pay for public records they may reasonably require for
the proper performance of their official duties.
(8) The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge
or at a reduced charge where he or she determines that waiver or
reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
G. Pursuant of § 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each
authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for
inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a
notice containing a description of its organization and the established
times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the
methods whereby the public may obtain information and access to
records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of
records, and the costs thereof. Each authority shall also prominently
display at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a copy of §§ 138-8
through 138-10 of this article. This subsection does not apply to
members of the Common Council.
§ 138-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-9
1:105
§ 138-10. Limitations on right to access.
A. A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal
custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably
describes the requested record or the information requested. However,
a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject
matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a
sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request may be
in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under
§ 19.37, Wis. Stats. Except as provided below, no request may be
refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be
identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be
refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a
fee is required to show acceptable identification whenever the
requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security
reasons or federal law or regulations so require.
B. Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as
practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the
requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole
or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after
conferring with the City Attorney, determines that a written request is
so general as to be unduly time-consuming, the party making the
request may first be required to itemize his or her request in a manner
which would permit reasonable compliance.
C. A request for a record may be denied as provided in § 138-10. If request
is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a
written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the
requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written
request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a
written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written
denial of a request shall inform the requester that, if the request for the
record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review
upon petition for a writ of mandamus under § 19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or
upon application to the attorney general or a district attorney.
A. As provided by § 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt
from inspection under this section:
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal
law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law;
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require
exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a
condition to receipt of aids by the state;
(3) Computer programs, although the material used as input for a
computer program or the material produced as a product of the
computer program is subject to inspection; and
§ 138-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 138-10
1:106
(4) A record or any portion of a record containing information
qualifying as a common-law trade secret.
B. As provided by § 43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records
are exempt from inspection under this section.
C. In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is
not specifically exempt from disclosure the legal custodian, after
conferring with the City Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in
part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest
resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full
access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which
disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which
were necessary and given in order to obtain the information
contained in them.
(2) Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
(3) Records of current deliberations concerning employment,
dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance, or
discipline of any City officer or employee, or the investigation
charges against a City officer or employee, unless such officer or
employee consents to such disclosure.
(4) Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or
prevention.
(5) Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of
City property, investing of City funds, or other City business,
whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require
nondisclosure.
(6) Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data
of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a
substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person
referred to in such history or data.
(7) Communications between legal counsel for the City and any officer,
agent or employee of the City when advice is being rendered
concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the
City or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely to
become involved, or communications which are privileged under
§ 905.03, Wis. Stats.
D. If a record contains information that may be made public and
information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record
shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the
information that may not be made public from the record before
release. The custodian shall confer with the City Attorney prior to
releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the City
§ 138-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-10
1:107
§ 138-11. Retention of audio and video.
Unless otherwise provided by statute, the following categories of records
shall be maintained for the following periods after their date of creation:
Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If, in the judgment
of the custodian and the City Attorney, there is no reasonable way to
separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without
unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the
entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.
A. Police Department audio tapes: 120 days.
B. Police Department squad and other evidentiary videos. A video may be
erased and reused at such time as the video is deemed by the
Department as having no evidentiary value.
§ 138-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 138-11
1:108
Chapter 147
STORMWATER UTILITY
§ 147-1. Establishment.
The Reedsburg Stormwater Utility is hereby established as a separate
utility of the City to operate and maintain the stormwater management
facilities and functions of the City in accordance with the policies and
directives of the Common Council and this chapter.
§ 147-2. Authority.
The Stormwater Utility is created pursuant to the authority provided in
Chapter 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes, including, without limitation, the
authority granted in the following sections: §§ 66.0621, 66.0627, 66.0701,
66.0703, 66.0809, 66.0811, 66.0813 and 66.0821.
§ 147-3. Management and operations.
The operation of the Stormwater Utility shall be under the general
supervision of the Utility Director and the Common Council. The Utility
Director will also oversee and be in charge of the day-to-day operations of
the Utility. Currently, the Utility Director will be the City Engineer/Director
of Public Works.
§ 147-4. Powers and duties.
A. Facilities. The City, through the Stormwater Utility, may acquire,
construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace,
clean, dredge, repair, manage and finance such facilities as are deemed
proper and reasonably necessary for a system of stormwater and
surface water management. Such facilities may include, without
limitation by enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities,
sewers, watercourses, retaining walls, ponds, basins, streets, roads,
ditches and such other facilities as will support a stormwater
management system.
B. Rates and charges. The Common Council shall establish such rates and
charges as are necessary to finance any necessary property or
easement acquisition and the planning, design, construction,
maintenance and operation of stormwater management facilities in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter for the
Stormwater Utility. The City may advance funds or services to the
Stormwater Utility from time to time, and the Utility shall reimburse
the actual amount or value of such advances as determined by the
Common Council.
C. Budgeting process. The Utility Director shall prepare an annual budget
for the Stormwater Utility which shall include all operation,
maintenance and capital costs, debt service and other costs related to
§ 138-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-4
1:109
§ 147-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings set forth
below:
DIRECTOR — The Utility Director or his or her designee.
DUPLEX — A residential building containing two dwelling units.
DUPLEX UNIT — A dwelling unit within a duplex.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms within a building that is arranged,
designed or used as living quarters for one group of individuals living as a
single housekeeping unit.
EQUIVALENT RUNOFF UNIT or ERU — The estimated average horizontal
measurement of impervious area of a fully developed single-family parcel
within the City as determined from time to time by the Common Council.
One ERU is determined on the effective date of this chapter to be equivalent
to 3,024 square feet.
FARMSTEAD HOME SITE — That portion of any agricultural property that
contains a single-family home, duplex unit or multifamily unit, regardless of
whether the dwelling unit is on a separate lot or parcel.
IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A horizontal surface,
or the horizontal area included in a sloped surface, that is compacted or
covered with a layer of material such that it significantly reduces the ability
of rainwater or other surface water to penetrate the ground below. The term
includes, but is not limited to, semi-impervious surfaces, such as compacted
clay, as well as streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios, parking lots, driveways and
other similar surfaces.
LOT — Shall have the meaning defined in Chapter 690, Zoning, § 690-9 of
this Code.
MULTIFAMILY PROPERTY — A residential building consisting of three or
more dwelling units.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A dwelling unit within a multifamily property.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any developed lot or parcel other than
residential property as defined herein, and includes, but is not limited
the operation of the Utility. The costs shall be allocated among the
various rate classifications as determined by the Common Council.
The budget shall be approved by the Council in accordance with the
procedures and requirements of § 65.90, Wis. Stats.
D. Excess revenues. All stormwater fees collected, and any other revenues
appropriated to or attributable to the operation of, the Stormwater
Utility shall be maintained in a segregated Stormwater Utility
Enterprise Fund. Any excess of revenues over expenditures from
Stormwater Utility operations in a given year shall be maintained in the
Enterprise Fund and shall be used in future years exclusively for
purposes consistent with this chapter.
§ 147-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 147-5
1:110
to, transient rentals (such as hotels and motels), mobile home parks,
commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental property and parking
lots.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any lot, parcel or farmstead home site
developed for residential purposes, including single-family homes, duplex
units, and multifamily units, but not including transient rentals (such as
hotels and motels) and mobile home parks.
SINGLE-FAMILY HOME — Any residential building containing only one
single dwelling unit.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY — Property that has not been altered by the
addition of any improvements such as a building or other structure, paving
or the installation of substantial impervious landscaping. A property shall be
considered developed pursuant to this chapter upon issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, or upon substantial completion of construction if no such
certificate is issued or where construction is at least 50% complete and
construction is halted for a period of three months.
§ 147-6. Rates and charges.
A. The rates charged by the Stormwater Utility shall be established from
time to time by Common Council resolution at sufficient levels to fund
the capital, operating and other expenses set forth in the adopted
budget which are not funded by other sources of revenue. Service
charges so established shall be in addition to any assessments or
charges imposed under any other provision of this Code.
B. A copy of the current rates shall be maintained at all times on file with
the City Clerk-Treasurer and available to the public during normal
business hours.
C. Service charges established by the Council may include the following
components:
(1) Base charge (BC). A base charge may be charged to each property
in the City based upon its total area determined from annual tax
records.
(2) Equivalent runoff unit charge (ERU). The ERU charge shall be the
basic service fee charged to each property in the City based upon
the amount of impervious area as reasonably determined by the
Director.
(3) Special charge (SC). A special charge may be imposed on property
located in an area specially benefited by a particular stormwater
management facility or service. Any special charge will be
developed to reflect the benefits and/or services in a particular
area which the Council determines cannot equitably be charged to
all property throughout the City.
§ 147-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-6
1:111
§ 147-7. Credits.
(4) Connection charge. A one-time charge may be imposed when a
property is converted from undeveloped to developed property or
otherwise becomes connected to the City stormwater management
system. The charge shall be determined by the Common Council
from time to time and may vary based on the size of the parcel of
property or other factors determined appropriate by the Common
Council.
D. The Common Council may make such other classifications of properties
or customers in order to achieve a reasonable and fair allocation of the
costs of the Stormwater Utility among the properties benefited.
A. The Common Council may grant credits against the BC, ERU, SC, and
connection charges as provided in this section. The total of all credits
may not exceed the total of all applicable charges.
B. Any property owner requesting a credit shall file with the Utility
Director an application therefor on a form provided by the City,
together with a review fee established by the Common Council,
identifying the stormwater facilities, management practices or services
for which the credit is claimed and the financial benefit to the utility.
The review fee shall be deposited into the Stormwater Utility Fund. If
the Utility Director determines that additional engineering analysis is
necessary to properly complete his or her review and to make an
appropriate recommendation thereon, the Utility Director may deny the
application unless the applicant agrees to pay the cost of the necessary
engineering services.
C. Credits may be granted under any of the following circumstances:
(1) Any property owner may seek a credit against the ERU charge
where the owner has installed and maintained facilities that result
in the detention, retention or infiltration of stormwater on site and
such facilities demonstrably reduce the financial obligations of the
Stormwater Utility. The property owner must satisfactorily
demonstrate the financial savings to the utility from the practice for
which a credit is desired.
(2) For residential SWMU customers, a credit of 25% of the annual
Stormwater Utility fee may be provided for the construction of a
rain garden that is installed according to University of Wisconsin
and WDNR standards and maintained by the owner. To obtain this
credit, a qualifying property owner must self-certify that the rain
garden has been installed using the above standards and it will be
maintained for the duration of the credit.
(3) For nonresidential SWMU customers, a credit up to 50% of the
utility fee could be obtained by detaining excess stormwater. For
example, if an on-site detention pond on a newly developed site
§ 147-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 147-7
1:112
detains the 100-year storm and releases a peak discharge equal
to the two-year storm during predeveloped site conditions, a 50%
credit would be possible. The table below defines possible credits
for nonresidential properties, assuming that the peak discharge
for the storm size in the table during post-developed conditions
is reduced to the two-year storm peak discharge for predeveloped
conditions.
Possible Credits for Nonresidential Properties
Storm Size
(years) Credit
5 to 2 10%
10 to 2 20%
25 to 2 30%
50 to 2 40%
100 to 2 50%
(4) Any nonresidential property owner may seek a credit against the
ERU charge for that portion of the property that does not drain into
any stormwater conveyance or facility operated or maintained by
the Stormwater Utility.
(5) Any property owner may seek a credit against the SC charge if
stormwater from the property does not drain into any stormwater
conveyance or facility that is the subject of the special charge.
D. The Utility Director shall evaluate the quantifiable benefits in both
quantity and quality management measures in reviewing requests for
credits, where applicable. In all cases, the Utility Director shall submit
a written recommendation to the Common Council as to whether a
request for credit should be granted, denied, or granted in part and
denied in part. The written recommendation shall also set forth the
reason or reasons for such recommendation.
E. Credit applications shall be decided by the Utility Director and shall be
either one-time credits or may be continuing credits against recurring
charges as determined appropriate by the Director. The Director shall
grant a credit under Subsection C(1) only if it finds all of the following:
(1) If the credit is based on special facilities or management practices
under Subsection C(1):
(a) The facilities installed or practices undertaken will reduce the
expenses incurred by the utility by limiting the quantity and/or
improving the quality of discharges into the facilities of the
utility from the property;
§ 147-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-7
1:113
§ 147-8. Customer classifications. [Amended 1-26-2009]
(b) The property owner has, by contract, deed restriction or other
method approved by the Utility Director, ensured that the City
may legally enforce any operational or maintenance programs
necessary to assure that the facilities or practices will continue
to provide the benefits on which the credit is based;
(c) The investment of the property owner in the facilities or
management practices exceeded the investment that would
otherwise be necessary in order to comply with any other City
ordinance, state or federal regulations or to obtain any land
division or development approval from the City;
(d) The investment of the property owner in such facilities or
management practices is disproportionate to the investment
made by the average property owner subject to the same
normal charges such that it would be inequitable to charge the
applicant on the same basis; and
(e) The amount of the credit does not exceed the cost savings to
the utility from the facilities and management practices
maintained by the applicant.
(2) If the credit is based on Subsection C(2) or (3):
(a) That the absence of drainage from the property or a portion
thereof into the facilities of the Utility results in financial
savings to the Utility.
(b) Adequate assurances are provided that the area of the
property for which the credit is given will not be altered in
such a way as to allow drainage into the facilities operated by
the Utility.
(c) The drainage from the property is managed in a way that
complies with all City ordinances and does not cause a
nuisance condition.
(d) The amount of the credit does not exceed the cost savings to
the utility determined under Subsection E(2)(a).
F. The Utility Director may revoke the credit in any case where the
circumstances forming the basis for the credit have materially changed.
The Committee shall provide at least 30 days' advance written notice of
any proposed credit revocation.
G. A denial or revocation of any credit may be appealed under § 147-10.
A. For purposes of imposing the ERU charges, all lots and parcels within
the City shall be classified into the following five customer classes:
(1) Residential, single-family.
§ 147-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 147-8
1:114
§ 147-9. Billing and penalties. [Amended 1-26-2009]
§ 147-10. Appeals.
(2) Residential, duplex.
(3) Residential, multifamily, including condominiums.
(4) Nonresidential.
(5) Undeveloped.
B. The City Utility Director shall prepare a list of properties within the City
and assign a customer classification to each lot or parcel.
C. ERUs shall be calculated for each property classification as follows:
(1) Residential, single-family: one ERU.
(2) Residential, duplex: two ERU.
(3) Residential, multifamily: one ERU per dwelling unit.
(4) For nonresidential parcels, the Director shall be responsible for
determining the impervious area from available information,
including, but not limited to, data supplied by the City Assessor, the
property owner, tenant or developer, aerial photography, or by
actual on-site measurement. The Director may require additional
information from the property owner as necessary to make the
determination. The ERU value for a nonresidential property shall
be determined by dividing its impervious area by the number of
square feet per ERU and rounding the quotient to the next higher
0.1 ERU. The minimum ERU charge to nonresidential properties
will be one ERU. The billing amount shall be updated by the
Director as necessary based on changes to the amount of
impervious area on the property.
(5) Undeveloped properties: zero ERU.
A. Stormwater Utility charges can be billed with the utility billing or with
the annual tax rate as determined by the Common Council. All charges
shall be due and payable 20 days from the bill date.
B. Billings for Stormwater Utility charges shall be the responsibility of the
designated property owner or tenant. The owner of the property shall
be liable for all Stormwater Utility charges in the event payment is not
made as required in this chapter.
C. Any Stormwater Utility charges remaining unpaid more than 30 days
from the date of billing shall be deemed delinquent and shall accrue a
late charge of not less than 1% or greater than 10% in addition to all
other charges. All delinquent charges shall be collected as provided in
§§ 66.0821(4) and 66.0809, Wis. Stats.
§ 147-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-10
1:115
§ 147-11. Special assessment and charges.
A. Any Stormwater Utility charge, determination of ERUs, or ERU credits
for any individual property may be appealed by filing a written appeal
with the City Clerk-Treasurer not later than 30 days after the date the
payment is due. The appeal shall specify all bases for the appeal and the
amount of the stormwater charge the appellant asserts is
inappropriate. Any appeal not filed within the time permitted by this
section shall be deemed waived. As a condition to maintaining an
appeal, the appellant shall pay all charges billed under protest prior to
filing the appeal.
B. The Director shall review the appeal and determine whether the
challenged determination is fair and reasonable and consistent with the
provisions of this chapter, and whether a refund is due the customer.
The Director shall determine its procedure for deciding such appeals
which, at a minimum, shall provide the appellant with written notice by
certified return receipt mail at least 10 days prior to the meeting at
which the appeal will be reviewed, and an opportunity to present
evidence and be heard on the appeal at such meeting. The Director
shall provide the appellant with its decision, in writing, within 15 days
of the date of the decision.
C. The appellant may appeal the decision of the Director within 30 days
from the date of mailing the Director's decision. An appeal to the
Common Council shall be limited to the evidence presented to the
Director, but the appellant shall be afforded the opportunity to present
arguments based on that evidence.
D. If the Council or the Director determines that the decision appealed
from should be reversed or modified, it shall determine whether a
refund is due the customer. Any refund ordered shall be applied as a
credit against the customer's next stormwater billing if the refund will
not exceed the customer's next stormwater billing, and otherwise will
be refunded by the City Clerk-Treasurer from the Stormwater Utility
fund.
A. In addition to any other method for collection of the charges established
pursuant to this chapter for Stormwater Utility costs, the Common
Council may order that the charges be levied against the property as a
special charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats. The mailing of an
invoice reflecting the charges due to the owner shall be notice to the
owner that failure to pay the charges when due may result in such
charges being placed upon the tax roll.
B. In addition to any other method of charging for Stormwater Utility
expenses, the Common Council may by resolution levy special
assessments on property in a limited and determinable area for special
benefits conferred upon property by any public improvements pursuant
to § 66.0703, Wis. Stats. The failure to pay such special assessments
§ 147-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 147-11
1:116
§ 147-12. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is found to be invalid or unenforceable for
any reason, such determination shall not affect the validity or application of,
the remaining provisions. A determination of invalidity or unenforceability
of any provision as applied to any specific property or circumstance shall
not affect the validity and application of such provisions to any other
property or circumstances.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 176
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
§ 176-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes, including, without limitation, §§ 62.11 and 66.0415(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 176-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate, prevent, combat, control and
mitigate the harmful secondary effects of adult-oriented uses and
establishments operated within the City, in a manner that is fully consistent
with the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.
§ 176-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine
at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — A use or establishment that sells at retail adultoriented
printed or graphic materials, provided that 40% or more of the
store's inventory of printed or graphic materials that are displayed and
offered for sale in the store (either in terms of the number of items or
in terms of the aggregate retail value of such items) consists of adultoriented
printed or graphic materials, or that 40% or more of the display
space or floor area devoted to printed or graphic materials for sale in the
shall result in a lien on the property and shall be enforced pursuant to
§ 66.0703(13), Wis. Stats.
§ 147-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-3
1:117
store is devoted to adult-oriented printed or graphic materials, or that 40%
or more of the store's gross receipts from the sale of printed or graphic
materials during any calendar month with the past 12 calendar months is
attributable to the sale of adult-oriented printed or graphic materials, or
that the store holds itself out or identifies itself to the public by its name,
its signs and/or its advertising as an adult bookstore or as a substantial
source of adult-oriented materials, including, without limitation, by verbal
or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references
to adult books, adult entertainment, exotic entertainment or similar terms.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment at which on 20 or more days in any twelve-month period:
A commercial establishment which has a significant or substantial
portion of its stock-in-trade or a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business to advertising to the sale or rental for any form of
consideration of any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions slides, or other visual representations which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will
not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offer
for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
B.
Video stores that sell and/or rent only videotapes or other photographic
or computer-generated reproductions and associated equipment shall
come within this definition if 20% or more it its stock-in-trade or
revenues comes from the rental or sale of videotapes or other
photographic reproductions or associated equipment which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
A. Persons appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
§ 176-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-3
1:118
ADULT CLUB — A use or establishment that would be classified as an adult
cabaret, adult dry cabaret or adult viewing facility except that it is operated
as a private club that is open only to members and their guests.
ADULT DRY CABARET — A use or establishment, open to members of the
public, that does not serve or sell alcoholic beverages and which typically
or on a frequently recurring basis provides or allows the provision of adult
live entertainment to its customers, or which holds itself out or identifies
itself to the public by its name, its signs and/or its advertising as an
adult dry cabaret or an establishment where adult live entertainment is
typically available or available on a frequently recurring basis including,
without limitation, by verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or
gratification or by references to adult entertainment, exotic entertainment,
strippers, showgirls, exotic dances, gentlemen's club, or similar terms
relating to either or both sexes.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — Seminude dancing or any other form of
live entertainment performed by seminude entertainers.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed establishment
with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting materials having
as its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on, matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
Live performances occur which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions are shown which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, and, without limitation where adult entertainment is typically
available or available on a frequently recurring basis, including verbal
or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by
references to adult entertainment, exotic entertainment, strippers,
showgirls, exotic dances, gentlemen's club, or similar terms relating to
either or both sexes.
C.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
§ 176-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-3
1:119
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed establishment with
a capacity of 50 or more persons where, for any form of consideration,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER — A use or establishment open to the public
that typically or on a frequently recurring basis shows movies which have
as their dominant subject or theme, or which are distinguished or
characterized by their primary emphasis on, the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or that holds
itself out or identifies itself to the public by its name, its signs and/or
its advertising as an adult movie theater or a movie theater where adultoriented
motion-picture materials are typically shown or shown on a
frequently recurring basis, including, without limitation, by verbal or
pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to
adult entertainment, exotic entertainment or similar terms.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — A business, private club or other
use conducted at a particular location, which constitutes or includes one or
more adult-oriented uses, and the building or portion of a building where it
is operated.
ADULT-ORIENTED MATERIALS — Adult-oriented printed or graphic
materials and/or adult-oriented motion-picture materials.
ADULT-ORIENTED MOTION-PICTURE MATERIALS — Motion-picture
materials which have as their dominant subject or theme, or which are
distinguished or characterized by their primary emphasis on, the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED PRINTED OR GRAPHIC MATERIALS — Printed or
graphic materials that have as their dominant subject or theme, or which
are distinguished or characterized by their primary emphasis on, the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED USE — An adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club,
adult movie theater, adult dry cabaret, adult video store, adult video rental
store or adult viewing facility.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in
a state of nudity or seminude, or live performances which are characterized
by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.
ADULT VIDEO RENTAL STORE — A use or establishment that rents at
retail adult-oriented motion-picture materials, provided that 40% or more
of the store's inventory of motion-picture materials that are displayed and
offered for rent in the store (either in terms of the number of items or
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
§ 176-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-3
1:120
in terms of the aggregate retail value of such items) consists of adultoriented
motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of the display space
or floor area devoted to motion-picture materials for rent in the store is
devoted to adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of
the store's gross receipts from the rental of motion-picture materials during
any calendar month within the past 12 calendar months are attributable
to the sale of adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that the store
holds itself out or identifies itself to the public by its name, its signs and/
or its advertising as an adult video store or as a substantial source of
adult-oriented materials including, without limitation, by verbal or pictorial
allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult
videos," "adult entertainment, exotic entertainment or similar terms.
ADULT VIDEO STORE — A use or establishment that sells at retail adultoriented
motion-picture materials, provided that 40% or more of the store's
inventory of motion-picture materials that are displayed and offered for
sale in the store (either in terms of the number of items or in terms of
the aggregate retail value of such items) consists of adult-oriented motionpicture
materials, or that 40% or more of the display space or floor area
devoted to motion-picture materials for sale in the store is devoted to
adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of the store's
gross receipts from the sale of motion-picture materials during any calendar
month within the past 12 calendar months are attributable to the sale of
adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that the store holds itself out or
identifies itself to the public by its name, its signs and/or its advertising as
an adult video store or as a substantial source of adult-oriented materials,
including, without limitation, by verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual
stimulation or gratification or by references to adult videos, adult
entertainment, exotic entertainment or similar terms.
ADULT VIEWING FACILITY — A use or establishment, open to members
of the public, that allows individuals to view adult-oriented motion-picture
materials on site, provided that 40% or more of the motion-picture materials
available for such on-site viewing consist of adult-oriented motion-picture
materials, or that 40% or more of the display space or floor area devoted
to motion-picture materials that can be viewed in the establishment is
devoted to adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more
of the motion-picture materials actually viewed in the establishment in
any calendar month within the past 12 calendar months are adult-oriented
motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of the establishment's gross
receipts from on-site viewing of motion-picture materials during any
calendar month within the past 12 months are attributable to the viewing
of adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that the establishment holds
itself out or identifies itself to the public by its name, its signs and/or
its advertising as an adult viewing facility or as a substantial source of
adult-oriented materials, including, without limitation, by verbal or pictorial
allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to adult
videos, adult entertainment, exotic entertainment or similar terms.
BOOTH, ROOM or CUBICLE — Such enclosures as are specifically offered
to the public or members of a sexually oriented business for hire or for a
§ 176-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-3
1:121
fee as a part of a business operated on the premises which offers as part
of its business the entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure; which
shall include, without limitation, such enclosures wherein the entertainment
is dispensed for a fee, but a fee is not charged for mere access to the
enclosure. However, "booth," "room," or "cubicle" does not mean such
enclosures that are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons
employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment,
which enclosures are not held out to the public or members of the
establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of viewing
entertainment for a fee and are not open to any persons other than
employees, nor shall this definition apply to hotels, motels or other similar
establishments licensed by the State of Wisconsin pursuant to Ch. 50, Wis.
Stats.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
CUSTOMER — An individual who:
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid
a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.
"Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair
or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the
delivery of goods to the premises.
ENTERTAINER — Any individual who provides live entertainment in an
adult-oriented use or establishment, and without regard to the nature of
such individual's relationship with the operator.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as
a companion, guide or date for another person, who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a strip tease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
Is allowed to enter an adult-oriented use or establishment in return
for the payment of an admission fee or other form of consideration or
gratuity;
A.
Enters an adult-oriented use or establishment and purchases, rents or
otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other
services offered therein; or
B.
Is a member of (or the guest of such a member) and on the premises
of an adult-oriented use or establishment that is operated as a private
club.
C.
§ 176-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-3
1:122
FREQUENTLY RECURRING — Occurring on six or more occasions within a
period of six consecutive calendar months, provided that such six or more
occasions occur within at least three separate calendar weeks (i.e., the
period of seven consecutive days beginning with Monday and ending with
Sunday).
INDOOR ACCESSORY — An accessory use conducted inside a building, e.g.,
not including outdoor parking, fencing, landscaping, etc.
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in
a sexually oriented business.
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC — Individuals who are neither employees nor
entertainers in an adult-oriented use or establishment.
MINOR MODIFICATION — A modification of the physical layout of the
physically separate defined area of a building occupied by an adult-oriented
use or of the operation of an adult-oriented use, as approved by the Zoning
Administrator in approving an application for an adult-oriented use license
(or in approving an application for renewal or amendment of such a license),
or as approved by the Zoning Administrator in approving the issuance of
a minor modification to such a license or a modification of the terms of an
adult-oriented use license, which:
MOTION-PICTURE MATERIALS — Videotapes, films, disks, slideshows, or
other recording of visual images from which motion pictures or a series of
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
B.
The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business.
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
A. Is minor in scope;
Has no potential to create or increase the risk of harmful secondary
effects of the adult-oriented use(s) in question;
B.
Is not contrary to any requirement of this chapter, Chapter 690, Zoning,
or any other City ordinance.
C.
Does not involve the addition of any new use within the applicable
physically separate defined area; and
D.
Does not involve an expansion of any adult-oriented use or any related
indoor accessory use or of the approved physically separate defined
area occupied by such use(s).
E.
§ 176-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-3
1:123
still pictures can be projected or reproduced and viewed, with or without
audio accompaniment.
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing use that was lawful in its inception
but that has subsequently become either a prohibited use under Chapter
690, Zoning, or a use requiring a conditional use permit which has not
been granted, and that was active and actual at the time the use became
nonconforming (as distinguished from being merely casual, occasional,
incidental or accessory), and that has been continuous with no gap of 12
or more consecutive months since it became a nonconforming use, and
that has not been physically expanded or extended to occupy a greater
area since the use became nonconforming, and that does not occupy a
building or other structure that has been structurally altered or repaired
to the extent of 50% or more of its assessed value since the use became
nonconforming.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas
and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any
form of consideration. "Nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the State of Wisconsin or a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college
or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of the entire nipple and areola, or the showing of the
covered male/female genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
OPEN TO PUBLIC — The hours during which members of the public or
customers are invited onto or permitted to remain on the premises of an
adult-oriented use or establishment.
OPERATOR — Any person that owns, operates or conducts an adult-oriented
use or establishment; also, the person that is required to apply for an adultoriented
use license and the person to whom or to which an adult-oriented
use license is issued.
That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
A.
Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
B.
Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at
any one time.
C.
§ 176-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-3
1:124
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, trust,
association or other legal entity.
PHYSICALLY SEPARATE DEFINED AREA — The area of a principal building
or of a unit of a principal building occupied by one or more specified uses
(such as an adult-oriented use) which area is defined in an approved site
and operational plan, conditional use permit or special City license (such
as an adult-oriented use license) and is physically separated from other
portions of the building or other portions of a particular unit of the building
by walls, doorways, floor stripes, signs and/or other approved means which,
individually or collectively, make it readily apparent that one is entering or
leaving the defined area.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building occupied by or used for one or more
principal uses [and, if applicable, occupied by or used for one or more
accessory uses related to such principal use(s)].
PRINCIPAL USE — A primary use of real property, including any use that is
not an accessory use to a principal use conducted on the same lot or site.
PRINTED OR GRAPHIC MATERIALS — Books, magazines, newspapers,
periodicals, calendars, posters, cards, photographs, pictures, drawings,
covers or other packaging for merchandise or any similar printed or graphic
materials.
PROPOSED (USE DEVELOPMENT, STRUCTURE, ALTERATION,
MODIFICATION, ETC.) — Any use, development, structure, alteration,
modification, etc., for which a license, permit or approval is required by this
chapter or Chapter 690, Zoning, which has not yet been issued or granted,
regardless of whether or not the permit or approval has been requested,
and regardless of whether or not the use of development, structure,
alteration, modification, etc., is existing or has been commenced,
constructed, installed or completed.
PUBLIC INDECENCY — A person knowingly or intentionally, in a public
place:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any location frequented by the public, or where the
public is present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably
be expected to be observed by members of the public. Public places include,
but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and
commercial establishments (whether for-profit or not-for-profit and whether
open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge
or membership requirement), bottle clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants,
nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets and meeting facilities utilized by
religious, social, fraternal or similar organizations. Premises used solely as
A. Engages in sexual intercourse;
B. Engages in deviant sexual conduct;
C. Appears in a state of nudity; or
D. Fondles the genitals of self or another person.
§ 176-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-3
1:125
a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not
be deemed to be a public place. "Public place" shall not include enclosed
single-sex public restrooms, enclosed single-sex functional showers, locker
and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms
designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctors' offices,
portions of hospitals and similar places in which nudity or exposure is
necessarily customarily expected outside of the home and the sphere of
privacy constitutionally protected therein. "Public place" does not include
a private facility which has been formed as a family-oriented, clothingoptional
facility properly licensed by the state.
SEMINUDE or IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION — The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall
include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited
by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel,
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or
sexual encounter center.
SPECIAL LICENSED USE — Any use requiring a special City license, e.g.,
an adult-oriented use license, a cabaret license or a liquor license. A special
licensed use can only be conducted pursuant to and in accordance with
a required City license, and the granting of such a license is not assured
either by permitted-use zoning status or by the granting of a conditional use
zoning permit or of any other City permit or approval. A special licensed use
may require other City permits or approvals.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely covered human
genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulated or actual acts of human
sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, sodomy, masturbation,
sadomasochistic abuse, bestiality or necrophilia; or simulated or actual
physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification,
with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, anus or buttocks
or with a female person's breast; or a person's simulated or actual use
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
B.
§ 176-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-3
1:126
of an inanimate object in an apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
STORE — A use devoted exclusively or primarily to the retail sale or rental
of goods or products.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
— The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%,
as the floor area exists on the date this chapter takes effect.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
UNIT OF A BUILDING — The specified area of a building in which a
tenant or other person has a right of use and occupancy for nonresidential
purposes, e.g., a store space in a shopping center building or a suite of
offices in an office building.
USE — The employment and/or occupancy of particular real property for a
particular purpose or purposes; or a particular use of real property that is
specifically recognized by Chapter 690, Zoning. (Note: "use" is intended to
be sufficiently elastic to refer simultaneously to the most limited possible
hypothetical use, e.g., the retail sale of books, and to an actual use of
which such hypothetical us is a component, e.g., a combined bookstore/
coffeehouse.)
USES CONDUCTED TOGETHER IN THE SAME BUILDING — Uses
conducted in the same building by the same owner or operator as part of
the same business, company, firm or organization.
USES LOCATED TOGETHER IN THE SAME BUILDING — Uses located
in the same building by the same owner or operator as part of the same
business, company, firm or organization.[Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
VALID ADULT-ORIENTED USE LICENSE — An adult-oriented use license
that has been approved by the City Zoning Administrator and issued to
an operator pursuant to this chapter, and which has not expired, or been
terminated, or been adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, and which is not currently suspended.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
§ 176-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-4
1:127
§ 176-4. Classification of regulated uses.
All sexually oriented businesses are subject to the regulations in this
chapter and are classified as follows:
§ 176-5. License required; display.
A. Adult arcades;
B. Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;
C. Adult cabarets;
D. Adult motels;
E. Adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini-motion-picture theaters;
F. Adult theaters;
G. Escort agencies;
H. Nude model studios; and
I. Sexual encounter centers.
A. After the effective date of this chapter:
(1) The operator of a proposed new or relocated adult-oriented use or
establishment in the City shall obtain from the City and possess a
valid adult-oriented use license issued pursuant to this chapter
before commencing the operation of such use or establishment;
and
(2) The operator of an adult-oriented use or establishment already
existing in the City on the effective date of this chapter which
proposes to expand or shift the area occupied by its operations, or
to which a new or additional adult-oriented use is proposed to be
added, shall obtain from the City and possess a valid adult-oriented
use license issued pursuant to this chapter before commencing the
operation of such new or additional use or before expanding or
shifting the area occupied by its operations; and
(3) The operator of an adult-oriented use or establishment to whom a
valid adult-oriented use license has been issued shall obtain and
possess a valid amendment or minor modification of such license
issued pursuant to this chapter before making any change or
modification to the nature, operation or physical layout of the
use(s) provided for in such license; and
(4) The operator of an adult-oriented use or establishment to whom a
valid adult-oriented use license has been issued shall obtain and
possess a valid renewed or new adult-oriented use license before
continuing to operate such use or establishment after the
expiration of the issued license.
§ 176-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-5
1:128
§ 176-6. Preapplication staff conference. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Prior to filing an application for an initial or amended (or amended and
renewed) adult-oriented use license, or for a minor modification of an
adult-oriented use license, the operator shall meet with the City's Zoning
Administrator to discuss the proposed adult-oriented use(s), the
requirements of this chapter and how the requirements of this chapter
may interface with the requirements of Chapter 690, Zoning, and any
other applicable City ordinances, for the purpose of ensuring an efficient
application review and decisionmaking process. The requirement of a
B. The operator of an adult-oriented use or establishment in the City
licensed pursuant to this chapter shall prominently display at all times a
valid adult-oriented use license within the physically separately defined
area of the building occupied by the adult-oriented use. Possession of a
valid adult-oriented use license shall not entitle the operator of an
adult-oriented use or establishment to operate an adult-oriented use or
establishment in violation of applicable requirements of Chapter 690,
Zoning, or any other City ordinance.
C. It is unlawful:
(1) For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the City of
Reedsburg pursuant to this section.
(2) For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to permit
a person to be employed by, work for or perform in a sexually
oriented business who is not a licensed as a sexually oriented
business employee by the City of Reedsburg pursuant to this
chapter.
(3) For any person who is required under this chapter to obtain
employment with a sexually oriented business employee license to
be employed to work for or to perform in a sexually oriented
business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this section.
D. A license may be issued only for one adult-oriented establishment
located at a fixed and certain place. Any person who desires to operate
more than one adult-oriented establishment must have a license for
each.
E. A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the
application.
F. All sexually oriented businesses existing at the time of the passage of
this section must submit an application for a license within 45 days of
the passage of this section.
§ 176-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-6
1:129
preapplication staff conference shall be deemed to be waived by the City if
the operator has participated during the past 180 days in a preapplication
conference, pursuant to this section, regarding the same proposed adultoriented
use(s) and the same other use(s) in the same physically separate
defined area of a building. The Zoning Administrator may waive, in writing,
the requirement of a preapplication staff conference whenever such
requirement is determined to be not necessary to achieve an efficient
application review and decisionmaking process.
§ 176-7. Exceptions to license requirement.
§ 176-8. License application.
A. This chapter shall not be construed to restrict or prohibit the following
activities or products:
(1) Plays, operas, musicals or other dramatic works that are not
obscene;
(2) Classes, seminars or lectures which are held for a serious scientific
or educational purpose and that are not obscene; and
(3) Exhibitions, performances, expressions or dances that are not
obscene.
B. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to and do not prohibit
the simulation of sex acts which are part of a nonobscene expression.
C. Whether or not an activity is obscene shall be judged by consideration
of the below factors:
(1) Whether the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that the activity taken as a whole appeals to
the prurient interest in sex; and
(2) Whether the activity depicts or describes sexual conduct in a
blatantly offensive way, as measured against community standards;
and
(3) Whether the activity, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
A. Filing. An application for an adult-oriented use license, or for any
renewal, amendment or minor modification of such a license, shall be
filed with the City's Zoning Administrator on a form provided by the
City and dated and signed by the operator, together with the application
fee provided for in this chapter.
B. Contents. An application shall only deal with the adult-oriented use(s)
and any other use(s) that are proposed by the operator to be located
and conducted together in a single physically separate defined area of a
building. The application for an initial adult-oriented use license shall
contain or have attached to it the following information and documents
§ 176-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-8
1:130
or shall explain why any such particular requirement is not applicable
to the application. (For the required contents of a renewal, amendment
or minor modification application, see §§ 176-13 to 176-15 of this
chapter.)
(1) Name (and any aliases), street address (a post office box without a
street address is not sufficient) and telephone number of the
operator (and, at the option of the operator, the operator's fax
number and/or e-mail address if the operator consents to receive
notices or other communications relating to the application or
license by such means), and any other name under which the
operator is currently doing business or has done business at any
time during the five years immediately preceding the date of
application;
(2) If the operator is an individual, his or her date of birth, sex, race
and state of residence currently and at any time during the five
years immediately preceding the date of the application;
(3) If the operator is not an individual, the type of entity it is (e.g.,
corporation, general partnership, limited partnership, limited
liability company, joint venture, etc.), the state in which it was
formed, each state in which it is currently doing business or has
done business during the five years immediately preceding the date
of application, and the name and address of its registered agent;
(4) If the operator is not an individual, the name and the information
specified in Subsection B(2) or (3) above, whichever is applicable,
for each of the following:
(a) If the operator is a corporation, for each officer and director
and for each shareholder owning at least a 25% interest in the
corporation;
(b) If the operator is a partnership, for each general partner;
(c) If the operator is a limited partnership, for any general partner
and for any limited partner owning at least a 25% interest in
the limited partnership;
(d) If the operator is a joint venture, for each joint venturer;
(e) If the operator is a limited liability company managed by one or
more managers, for each manager and for each member
owning at least a 25% interest in the limited liability company;
if the operator is a limited liability company managed by the
members, for each member;
(f) If the operator is any other type of entity, for each person who
or which exercises or is authorized to exercise any control over
the operations of the entity;
§ 176-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-8
1:131
(5) If the operator is not the sole owner of the real property on which
the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or establishment is proposed to
be located or operated, the name, street address and telephone
number of each such owner;
(6) If the operator is not the sole and record owner of the real property
on which the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or establishment is
proposed to be located or operated, attach proof of the operator's
right to conduct the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or
establishment on such real property (e.g., copy of deed or lease);
(7) If the operator or any person required to be listed in response to
Subsection B(1) above has been convicted during the five years
immediately preceding the date of the application of obscenity,
sexual assault, prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution,
pandering, soliciting prostitutes, lewd and lascivious behavior,
public sexual gratification or other similar crimes of a sexual
nature, or of the manufacture, distribution or delivery of a
controlled substance or of a controlled substance analog, or of
possession of a controlled substance or a controlled substance
analog with intent to manufacture, distribute or deliver, or of other
similar crimes relating to the distribution or delivery of controlled
substances or controlled substance analogs, identify the person so
convicted and state the crime, the date of conviction and identify
the court and jurisdiction in which the conviction occurred (e.g.,
Circuit Court, Sauk County, Wisconsin);
(8) If the operator or any person required to be listed in response to
Subsection B(1) above has been adjudicated guilty during the five
years immediately preceding the date of application of any
ordinance violations occurring in or relating to the operation of an
adult-oriented use or establishment, identify the person so
adjudicated, state the nature of the ordinance violation, the date of
the adjudication and identify the court and jurisdiction in which the
adjudication occurred;
(9) Name and street address of any other adult-oriented use(s) or
establishment(s) owned and/or operated by the operator or by any
person required to be listed in response to Subsection B(1) above
currently or within the five years immediately preceding the date of
application, and the name, street address and telephone number of
each local governmental entity which has issued or granted any
permit or license for or with respect to each such use or
establishment;
(10) If a permit or license for an adult-oriented use or establishment
owned or operated by the operator or by any person required to be
listed in response to Subsection B(1) above has been terminated or
suspended during the five years immediately preceding the date of
the application, state the name and address of the business, the
type of permit or license terminated or suspended, the date and
§ 176-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-8
1:132
reason(s) for the termination or suspension and the name, street
address and telephone number of the governmental entity that
terminated or suspended the permit or license;
(11) Location of the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or establishment
(legal description of the real property, street address of the
building, and the floor and/or building unit designation, if
applicable);
(12) List and describe all proposed adult-oriented use(s) (e.g., adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store and/or adult
viewing facility) to be located and conducted together in the same
physically separate defined area of a building;
(13) List and describe all proposed indoor accessory uses related to and
to be located and conducted, together with the listed adult-oriented
use(s) in the same physically separate defined area of a building;
(14) List and describe all other proposed principal uses and related
accessory uses to be located and conducted, together with the
listed adult-oriented use(s) in the same physically separate defined
area of a building;
(15)Name of the business or establishment which the proposed adultoriented
use(s) will constitute or be a part of;
(16) Whether the entire building where the proposed adult-oriented
use(s) will be located will be the physically separate defined area
occupied by the proposed adult-oriented use(s) and any related
indoor accessory use(s) and, if not, attach a scale drawing showing
the boundaries of the physically separate defined area to be
occupied by such use(s) [see Subsection B(27) below], and describe
in detail the means by which such area will be physically separated
from the remainder of the building or, if applicable, from the
remainder of the building unit;
(17) Whether site and operational plan approval has been issued or
applied for with respect to the proposed adult-oriented use(s) and
any other use(s) to be located and conducted together in the same
physically separate defined area of a building and, if so, the date of
issuance of such approval or, if not issued, the date of the
application for such approval;
(18) Whether a conditional use permit has been issued or applied for
with respect to any of the use(s) proposed to be located and
conducted together with the proposed adult-oriented use(s) and, if
so, the date of issuance of such permit or, if not issued, the date of
the application for such permit and the type of conditional use
involved;
§ 176-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-8
1:133
(19) Whether any existing conditional use permit will be automatically
terminated upon issuance of the requested adult-oriented use
license;
(20) Whether a zoning ordinance amendment is necessary to
accommodate the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or establishment
and, if so, whether the required zoning ordinance has been adopted
or denied or, if pending, the date of the rezoning application;
(21) If the building in which the proposed adult-oriented use(s) is
proposed to be located is not existing, or if such building is
proposed to be modified, attach a copy of detailed building plans
that satisfy the plan requirements for a building permit;
(22) A detailed description of how the operator will ensure that
individuals who are less than 18 years of age will be excluded from
the physically separate defined area to be occupied by any
proposed adult-oriented use(s);
(23) A detailed description of how the operator will ensure that any
seminude individual appearing live and publicly in an adultoriented
use or establishment will only so appear on a stage or
raised platform which is raised not less than 23 inches above the
surrounding floor areas;
(24) A detailed description of how the operator will ensure that no
seminude individual appearing live in an adult-oriented use or
establishment will be visible to anyone outside the physically
separate defined area of the building occupied by such use;
(25) A detailed description of how the operator will ensure that no
adult-oriented printed or graphic materials displayed in an adultoriented
use or establishment will be visible to anyone outside the
physically separate defined area of the building occupied by such
use or establishment;
(26) A detailed description of how the operator will ensure that no
adult-oriented movie or other adult-oriented motion-picture
materials shown in an adult-oriented use or establishment will be
visible to anyone outside the physically separate defined area of the
building occupied by such use or establishment;
(27) Attach a scale drawing of the layout of the interior of the building in
which the proposed adult-oriented use(s) and any proposed related
indoor accessory use(s) will be conducted (or of the floor or
building unit thereof to which the proposed adult-oriented use(s)
will be limited, if applicable, but in any event showing enough of
the building interior to include the boundaries of the physically
separate defined area of the building to be occupied by such use(s),
showing:
§ 176-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-8
1:134
(a) The boundary of the physically separate defined area within
which the proposed adult-oriented use(s) and any related
indoor accessory uses will be conducted, with dimensions, and
showing any physical means by which the required physical
separation of such area will be achieved, and, if the adultoriented
use(s) will involve the retail sale or rental of
merchandise, the location where the checkout counter and
cash register will be located within such area;
(b) The location, dimensions and function of each room, cubicle or
other enclosed space to which customers or members of the
public will have access;
(c) The location, dimensions and function of each room or other
enclosed space from which customers or members of the
public will be excluded, and the means of accomplishing such
exclusion;
(d) The location, height and other dimensions, type and purpose of
any interior movable or non-floor-to-ceiling walls, partitions,
screens or other barriers; and the function of any spaces
created by such barriers, and whether customers or members
of the public, customers, club members or guests will be
admitted to or excluded from such spaces;
(e) The location and dimensions of each doorway, entryway or
passageway through which customers or members of the
public will be permitted to pass and whether the doorway,
entryway or passageway will be open and unobstructed or
closed (only exterior entrances/exits and restrooms can be
closed or obstructed);
(f) The location and dimensions of each doorway, entryway or
passageway through which members of the public, customers,
club members or guests will not be permitted to pass and the
means of accomplishing such exclusion;
(g) The location and dimensions of any raised platform or stage on
which any seminude employees or entertainers will appear live
and publicly and the height thereof above the surrounding
floor areas;
(h) The location and dimensions of the required minimum six-foot
separation zone between any raised platform or stage where
seminude employees or entertainers will appear live and
publicly and any area where customers or members of the
public will be permitted to sit, stand, move about or dance, and
the location, type, materials and dimensions of the required
physical separation barrier at the outer periphery of such
separation zone;
§ 176-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-8
1:135
(i) The location and dimensions of any bar and of any related
service area;
(j) The location and dimensions of any dance floor;
(k) The location and dimensions of any customer seating areas;
(l) The location and dimensions of any merchandise racks;
(m) The location and dimensions of any cubicles, booths, small
rooms or other small partially enclosed spaces to be used by
customers or members of the public for private viewing of
videos or any other similar purpose;
(n) The location and dimensions of any movie screen, projection
equipment, or viewing equipment;
(o) A certification that the operator has reviewed this chapter;
(p) A certification that the operator has reviewed the information
contained in or submitted with the application and that such
information is up to date, accurate and complete as of the date
of the application.
C. Incomplete applications. The Zoning Administrator may decline to
accept an adult-oriented use application for filing if it is obviously
incomplete. With respect to any filed application that is determined
upon review to be incomplete, the Administrator shall issue a written
notice to the operator, within five business days after the date of filing,
stating that the application is incomplete and listing the specific items
required to complete the application. If no such notice is issued within
such five-day period, the application shall be deemed to be complete for
purposes of processing. Upon completion of the application, the
Administrator shall notify the operator, in writing, within three business
days that the application was completed as of a specified date. In the
event the application is not completed within 60 days after the initial
filing of the application, the Administrator shall deny the application as
incomplete and shall notify the operator, in writing, of the reason for
the denial within three business days.
D. Waiver of application requirements. The Zoning Administrator may
waive, in writing, any application requirement that the Administrator
determines is not necessary for the effective review and determination
of the application. Such waivers may be issued at a preapplication staff
conference or at any time during the application review process.
E. Background check. Upon the filing of an application for an adultoriented
use license, the Zoning Administrator shall immediately
request the Police Department to conduct a background check on the
operator and on each person identified in response to Subsection B(4)
of this section. The Police Department shall promptly forward the
results of such background check(s) to the Zoning Administrator, which
§ 176-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-8
1:136
§ 176-9. Application fees. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 176-10. Decision on license application.
shall present the results of such background check(s) for the five years
immediately preceding the date of the application to the Ordinance
Committee as part of its staff report.
F. Staff report. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a staff report on
the application, which shall include the relevant results of any
background checks conducted pursuant to Subsection E above and
present such report to the Ordinance Committee. A copy of such staff
report shall be made available to the operator prior to the meeting at
which the Ordinance Committee will consider the application.
A. License. The application fees for an initial adult-oriented use license,
amendment, renewal or modification shall be as set from time to time
by the Common Council.
B. Work permit. The application fee for an adult-oriented use work permit
shall be as set from time to time by the Common Council.
A. Time limit.
(1) The Ordinance Committee shall decide each application for an
initial adult-oriented use license, or for an amendment or renewal
of such a license, within 45 days after a complete application and
the applicable fee for such application are filed with the Zoning
Administrator, unless the operator or an authorized representative
of the operator agrees to an extension of time at an Ordinance
Committee meeting, which extension is contained in the minutes of
such meeting, or is memorialized in a writing signed by the
operator or an authorized representative of the operator; provided,
however, that notwithstanding the foregoing time limit, the
Ordinance Committee may toll the remaining time for decision until
the next regularly scheduled meeting that is conducted by the
Ordinance Committee if:
(a) A required site and operational plan approval (including the
determination of the applicable physically separate defined
area), has not yet been issued with respect to the proposed
adult-oriented use(s) and any other use(s) to be located and
conducted together with such adult-oriented use(s) in the same
physically defined separate area of a building; or if
(b) The operator or a knowledgeable representative of the
operator authorized to speak for and bind the operator fails to
appear at a meeting of the Ordinance Committee at which
consideration of the application is duly scheduled, and if the
Ordinance Committee has any questions about the application
§ 176-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-10
1:137
or the proposed use(s) to which it reasonably requires answers
before deciding the application, or if the operator or the
operator's authorized representative is unable to answer such
questions without an adjournment.
(2) If the Ordinance Committee fails to decide an application for an
adult-oriented use license within the time limits established by this
chapter, the license shall be deemed to be issued on the basis of the
information provided in the application.
B. Notice and opportunity to be heard. The Ordinance Committee shall
cause a written notice to be issued to the operator not less than 10 days
prior to the date of the Ordinance Committee meeting at which the
operator's application is proposed to be considered, stating the date,
time and place of the meeting, the operator's obligation to be present in
person or by knowledgeable representative authorized to speak for and
bind the operator, and, optionally, any additional information that the
Ordinance Committee or staff believes is necessary or desirable to
decide the application. The operator shall be given an opportunity to
present its application and to respond to any concerns that members of
the Ordinance Committee have which might be the basis for denial or
the imposition of any special, limiting condition.
C. Approval. The Ordinance Committee shall approve an application for an
adult-oriented use license if the application and the proposed adultoriented
use(s) and establishment satisfy all of the requirements of this
chapter and if the Ordinance Committee does not find that there is a
reasonable probability that the operator will fail to comply with the
requirements of this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this
chapter, based on a substantial pattern of noncompliant behavior
during the five years immediately preceding the date of the application
or other clear and convincing information.
D. Conditions. The Ordinance Committee may impose reasonable
requirements and conditions to ensure compliance by the operator with
the requirements of this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this
chapter, and for such purposes may incorporate by reference in its
decision all or portions of the operator's application or other
documents. The Ordinance Committee shall specify whether any
condition imposed on its approval is a condition precedent (must be
satisfied before the license takes effect) or a condition subsequent
(must be satisfied after the license takes effect to avoid a subsequent
suspension and possible termination) and may specify a reasonable
period of time within which to satisfy any such condition. For existing
adult-oriented uses or establishments that are allowed uses pursuant to
Chapter 690, Zoning, conditions precedent shall be avoided unless they
are required to remedy serious health or safety problems or serious
adverse secondary effects in the surrounding area.
E. Physically separate defined area. In the event that the physically
separate defined area to be occupied by an existing allowed adult-
§ 176-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-10
1:138
§ 176-11. License.
The Zoning Administrator shall issue an adult-oriented use license within
five business days after Ordinance Committee approval of the application,
if there are no conditions precedent (or that such conditions have been
satisfied). If the Zoning Administrator fails to act timely pursuant to this
section, the license shall be deemed to be issued for purposes of the
operator's right to operate, but a subsequently issued license shall be
valid and binding. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no
violation of this chapter shall result from an operator of an existing adultoriented
use or establishment that is an allowed use pursuant to Chapter
690, Zoning, continuing to operate such use or establishment during the
period between the Ordinance Committee's approval of an adult-oriented
use license for such use or establishment, which is not subject to any
conditions precedent, and the issuance of such license to the operator.
An adult-oriented use license shall be personal to the operator and sitespecific
to the approved location, shall not run with the land, shall not be
transferable or assignable and shall not be applicable to an adult-oriented
use or establishment at a location different than the approved location. A
transfer or assignment of an adult-oriented use license shall automatically
terminate such license. (A simple name change by an operator shall not be
deemed to involve an assignment and require a new license, but the merger
or acquisition of an operator shall be deemed to involve an assignment
and shall require a new license.) Except as provided in § 176-12 below, any
initial, renewed or amended adult-oriented use license shall automatically
oriented use and any related interior accessory use(s) involved in the
adult-oriented use license application has not been determined and
will not be determined pursuant to Chapter 690, Zoning, in connection
with a then-currently required site and operational plan approval, the
Ordinance Committee shall determine the physically separate defined
area of such use(s) as part of the license decision.
F. Denial. The Ordinance Committee shall deny the license application if it
finds that the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or establishment fail to
satisfy the requirements of this chapter, or if it finds that there is a
reasonable probability that the operator will fail to comply with the
requirements of this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this
chapter, based on a substantial pattern of noncompliant behavior
during the five years immediately preceding the date of the application
or other clear and convincing information. The Ordinance Committee
may deny a license application for lack of specific information which it
reasonably needs to decide the application, if the operator has been
given a reasonable opportunity to supply such information. The
Ordinance Committee shall specifically state its reasons for denying
any adult-oriented use license application.
G. Minor modifications. Applications for minor modifications of adultoriented
use licenses may be informally granted, in writing, by the
Zoning Administrator.
§ 176-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-11
1:139
expire one year after the date of issuance unless it is sooner invalidated or
terminated.
§ 176-12. Satisfaction of license conditions.
A. Conditions precedent. The operator of a proposed adult-oriented use or
establishment shall satisfy all conditions precedent imposed by the
Ordinance Committee on its approval of an application for an adultoriented
use license within the time specified by the Ordinance
Committee in its decision or, if the time was not specified by the
Ordinance Committee, within 270 days after the date of approval. The
operator shall notify the Zoning Administrator, in writing, within the
time prescribed of the satisfaction of any conditions precedent and shall
either provide proof of satisfaction with such notice or request in such
notice an inspection of the premises. The Zoning Administrator shall
make any requested inspection within three business days after receipt
of such notice and shall certify to the Ordinance Committee satisfactory
compliance with any condition precedent and issue the license (or
notify the operator, in writing, why a condition has not been satisfied)
within three business days after receiving such proof or after making an
inspection. In the event that the operator fails to satisfy a condition
precedent within the time prescribed, the Ordinance Committee's
approval shall be automatically suspended. If the operator thereafter
satisfies the condition precedent within one year after the Ordinance
Committee's approval, and files with the Zoning Administrator an
updated application in which the operator certifies that the updated
information is accurate and complete, together with the fee required
for a renewal application, the Zoning Administrator shall certify to the
Ordinance Committee satisfactory compliance with the condition(s)
precedent and issue the license within three business days, unless facts
have changed materially or the requirements of this chapter have
changed materially in the interim, in which event the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a notice to the operator within three business
days that the updated application is being treated as an application for
renewal. If the Zoning Administrator fails to act timely pursuant to this
Subsection A, the action in favor of the operator shall be deemed to
have been taken timely.
B. Conditions subsequent. The operator shall satisfy any conditions
subsequent to the license and obtain the Zoning Administrator's
certification of such satisfaction within the time specified in the license
or, if such time is not specified, within 60 days after the date of
issuance. The operator shall notify the Zoning Administrator, in writing,
within the time prescribed of satisfaction of any conditions subsequent
and provide proof of satisfaction with such notice or request in such
notice an inspection of the premises. The Zoning Administrator shall
inspect the premises within three business days after receiving notice
and a request for inspection. The Zoning Administrator shall certify the
satisfaction to the Ordinance Committee (or notify the operator, in
writing, why the condition has not been satisfied) within three business
§ 176-11 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-12
1:140
§ 176-13. License renewal.
An operator wishing to renew a valid adult-oriented use license shall file
a complete renewal application with the Zoning Administrator, together
with the renewal license application fee specified above, not later than 60
days prior to the expiration of the existing license. The timely filing of a
complete renewal application and the required application fee shall entitle
an operator to continue operating an adult-oriented use or establishment
during the pendency of the application, even if the application is not decided
until after the expiration of the existing license, and until the license is
issued if the Ordinance Committee approves the application without
conditions precedent. Any amendments to this chapter that are enacted
before the Ordinance Committee's decision shall be applicable to a renewal
application. The application for renewal of an adult-oriented use license
shall contain all of the information and documents required for an initial
adult-oriented use license. Such an application may incorporate by
reference specific information filed by the operator in or attached to the
most recent application on the basis of which an adult-oriented use license
was approved by the Ordinance Committee, provided that such previous
application and any applicable attachments thereto are attached to the
renewal application or are on file with the City and readily available to
the Zoning Administrator, if the operator specifies the date of such prior
application and certifies that such information has not changed and is
up-to-date, accurate and complete as of the date of the application. Any
information that has changed since the previous application or which was
incorrectly stated in the previous application shall be updated and
corrected by the operator so that all of the information filed with the City is
accurate and complete as of the date of the application.
§ 176-14. License amendment.
An operator desiring to amend a valid adult-oriented use license shall file
an application for amendment of the license with the Zoning Administrator,
together with the amended license application fee specified above, after
requesting and participating in any preapplication staff conference. Any
amendments to this chapter that are enacted before the Ordinance
Committee's decision shall be applicable to an amendment application. The
application for amendment of an adult-oriented use license shall contain
days after receiving such proof or conducting such an inspection. In the
event that an operator fails to satisfy a condition subsequent and obtain
the Zoning Administrator's certification of such satisfaction within the
time prescribed, the license shall be automatically suspended. During
any such suspension, operations shall be prohibited. Any such
suspension shall be automatically lifted upon the Zoning
Administrator's certification to the Ordinance Committee of satisfactory
compliance with the condition(s) subsequent. If the Zoning
Administrator fails to act timely pursuant to this Subsection B, the
action in favor of the operator shall be deemed to have been taken on
the last day of the time prescribed for such action.
§ 176-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-14
1:141
all of the information and documents required for an application for an
initial adult-oriented use license and shall contain a complete and detailed
description of any proposed changes in use, operation, physical layout
or license provisions and a scale drawing showing any physical changes
in layout. Such an application may incorporate by reference specific
information filed by the operator in the most recent application on the
basis of which an adult-oriented use license was approved by the Ordinance
Committee, provided that such previous application and any applicable
attachments thereto are attached to the application, or that such documents
are on file with the City and are readily available to the Zoning
Administrator, if the operator specifies the date of such application and
certifies that such information has not changed and is up-to-date, accurate
and complete as of the date of the application. Any information that has
changed since the date of the previous application or which was incorrectly
stated in the previous application shall be updated and corrected by the
operator so that all of the information filed with the City is accurate and
complete as of the date of the application.
§ 176-15. Minor modification of license.
An operator desiring a minor modification of a valid adult-oriented use
license shall file an application for minor modification with the Zoning
Administrator, together with the minor modification application fee
specified in § 176-9A of this chapter, after requesting and participating in
any preapplication staff conference required by § 176-6 of this chapter.
The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized but not obligated to grant
a minor modification and, if practicable, the Zoning Administrator shall
give guidance to the operator during the preapplication staff conference
whether an application for a minor modification is advisable. The
application for minor modification shall contain a complete, detailed and
accurate description of the proposed minor modification(s) of the operation,
physical layout or license provisions and a scale drawing showing any
proposed physical modification(s) in layout, any information required to
update or correct any changes or inaccuracies or incomplete statements in
the information filed with the most recent application on the basis of which
the Ordinance Committee approved an adult-oriented use license so that all
of the information filed with the City is accurate and complete as of the date
of the application, together with the certification by the operator that all
such information is accurate and complete as of the date of the application,
and any other information reasonably required by the Zoning Administrator
to determine whether any proposed modification is a minor modification.
Any application for a minor modification of an adult-oriented use license
which the Zoning Administrator declines or fails to issue, in writing, within
10 business days of the filing of the application shall be deemed to be
denied. If the operator still desires to effect the proposed modification(s) in
the license, the operator shall file an application for an amended license.
§ 176-16. Suspension, adjustment or termination of license.
§ 176-14 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-16
1:142
A. Upon receipt of information providing a reasonable basis to believe that
a serious violation of this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this
chapter has occurred (for purposes of this section, "serious violation"
shall include any violation which involves criminal activity, involves the
presence of an individual of less than 18 years of age inside the
physically separate defined area of a building within which an adultoriented
use is located, or is of a type reasonably likely to result in
harmful secondary effects in the surrounding area) or that a pattern of
violations of this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this chapter
has occurred which reasonably suggests intentional violation by the
operator or a lack of concern about compliance on the part of the
operator or that materially false, misleading or incomplete information
was provided by the operator in or with an adult-oriented use
application; the Ordinance Committee may schedule a hearing to
determine whether such violations occurred (unless a court has already
made such determination), whether the operator committed or was
responsible for such violation(s), and whether adjustments in the
operation, supervision, layout or other aspects of the licensed adultoriented
use(s) or establishment are required, or whether adjustments
in the adult-oriented use license provisions are required to prevent
similar violations in the future, and with respect to materially false,
misleading or incomplete information provided in or with a license
application, what the accurate and complete information is and
whether, how and to what extent any such false, misleading or
incomplete information affected the Ordinance Committee's decision to
approve the license application and whether the license should be
adjusted or terminated in light of such information.
B. The Ordinance Committee shall cause a written notice of any such
hearing to be served upon the operator or upon the individual
apparently in charge of the adult-oriented use or establishment in the
manner of serving a summons under §§ 801.10 and 801.11(1), Wis.
Stats., not less than 10 days before the date of the hearing. The notice
shall specify the alleged violation(s), state the reason for the hearing,
and state the date, time and place of the hearing.
C. If the Ordinance Committee finds that adjustments in the adult-oriented
use license provisions are required to ensure that further similar
violations are prevented, or in light of complete and accurate
information, it may impose such additional or further requirements or
conditions on the license as are reasonably designed to prevent further
similar violations or to deal with the situation presented by complete
and accurate information, and may suspend such license for a
reasonable period of time while such adjustments are being made and
while related requirements or conditions are being implemented or
satisfied. If the Ordinance Committee finds that the operator has
intentionally committed, authorized, approved or knowingly acquiesced
in a serious violation of the provisions of this chapter or of a license
issued pursuant to this chapter, or if a felony has been committed at the
adult-oriented use or establishment for which the operator is
§ 176-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-16
1:143
§ 176-17. Appeal.
At the option of the operator, any denial by the Ordinance Committee of an
initial adult-oriented use license application or of an application to renew or
amend such a license, or any adjustment, suspension or termination of such
a license by the Ordinance Committee, or the imposition of any requirement
or condition by the Ordinance Committee, or any determination by the
Zoning Administrator that a condition of approval has not been satisfied,
may be appealed by the operator to the City Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with the procedure and with the effect set out in Chapter 690,
Zoning, § 690-12, Zoning Board of Appeals, but if the operator wishes to
challenge any such denial, condition or determination directly in court,
the Ordinance Committee shall waive any defense based on the operator's
failure to exhaust administrative remedies. Any denial by the City Clerk-
Treasurer of an adult-oriented use work permit may similarly be appealed
by the applicant to the City Zoning Board of Appeals, but if the applicant
wishes to challenge such denial directly in court, the City shall waive any
defense based on the applicant's failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
§ 176-18. Inspection.
responsible, or if the Ordinance Committee finds, based on a
substantial pattern of violations of this chapter or of a license issued
pursuant to this chapter committed by the operator or for which the
operator is responsible, that a reasonable probability exists that
violations will continue, it may terminate the license. If the Ordinance
Committee finds, in a situation where the operator provided materially
inaccurate, misleading or incomplete information in or with a license
application, that it would not grant an adult-oriented use license based
on the current information (or lack thereof) that it has, or if the license
it would grant would have different provisions in light of such
information or the lack thereof, it may terminate or adjust the license,
and may suspend the license until satisfactory information is provided
and/or for a reasonable period of time while such adjustments are
being made and while related requirements or conditions are being
implemented or satisfied.
D. The operator may be represented by legal counsel at such a hearing
and may make legal arguments, present evidence and call, examine and
cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded by a
recording device or stenographer. Exhibits shall be marked and
preserved. The Ordinance Committee shall make findings of fact and
conclusions of law to support any decision to suspend, adjust or
terminate a license. If a license is terminated pursuant to this section,
the operator shall not file an application for a new license within one
year after the date of termination.
E. The procedures of this section shall be in addition to any other remedies
that the City may have in the event of violations of this chapter or of a
license issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 176-16 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-18
1:144
§ 176-19. Requirements or prohibitions.
A. The portions of any adult-oriented use or establishment open or
proposed to be open to any customers or members of the public shall be
subject to inspection by City inspectors or police officers at any time
such use or establishment is open to the public to determine
compliance with the requirements of this chapter or of any license
issued pursuant to this chapter. The filing of an application for an adultoriented
use license (or for the renewal, amendment or minor
modification of such license) shall constitute consent to any such
inspection.
B. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his agent or
employee commits a violation of this chapter if he or she refuses to
permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for
business.
A. The following requirements or prohibitions shall apply to licensed
adult-oriented uses and establishments:
(1) The operator (if the operator is an individual), all individuals
identified in response to § 176-8 of this chapter, and all employees
and entertainers working, providing services or entertaining in an
adult-oriented use or establishment shall be at least 18 years of
age.
(2) Any adult-oriented use shall be conducted entirely within a
principal building.
(3) All adult-oriented uses located and conducted together in the same
principal building, and all related indoor accessory uses, shall be
located within the same physically separate defined area of a
principal building, and no other uses shall be permitted in such
defined area except as expressly approved in an adult-oriented use
license.
(4) Any adult-oriented use license shall either designate an entire
principal building as the physically separate defined area or shall
precisely designate the location of the boundary of such defined
area and specify the approved means of physically separating such
defined area from other portions of the building or, if applicable,
from other portions of the applicable unit of a building. In the event
that an adult-oriented use license fails to designate the applicable
physically separate defined area, however, any designation of such
defined area made pursuant to Chapter 690, Zoning, shall be
deemed to be controlling, and in the absence of such a designation,
the entire building shall be deemed to be included in such area.
(5) An adult-oriented use license shall not be issued for any adultoriented
use or establishment if the operator, use(s) or related
operation or layout in question fail to satisfy any applicable
§ 176-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-19
1:145
requirements of this chapter, Chapter 690, Zoning, or any other
City ordinance.
(6) An individual shall not appear live and publicly in an adult-oriented
use or establishment while completely nude. A female individual
shall not appear live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or
establishment without wearing at least opaque pasties and an
opaque G-string. A male individual shall not appear live and
publicly in an adult-oriented use or establishment without wearing
at least an opaque G-string. An individual appearing live and
publicly in an adult-oriented use or establishment shall not uncover
or expose to view his or her genitals or anus, and a female
individual appearing live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or
establishment shall not uncover or expose to view the areola or
nipple of her breast. The operator shall not permit an individual
appearing live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or
establishment to violate this Subsection A(6).
(7) A seminude individual shall not appear live and publicly in any
adult-oriented use or establishment other than on a raised platform
or stage that is at least 23 inches above the surrounding floor
areas. A seminude individual shall not appear live and publicly in
an adult-oriented use or establishment in an area that is not open to
and viewable by customers and members of the public generally
who are within the physically separate defined area occupied by
the adult-oriented use in which such individual is appearing. The
operator shall not permit a seminude individual appearing live and
publicly in an adult-oriented use or establishment to violate this
Subsection A(7).
(8) The raised platform or stage on which any seminude individual
appears live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or establishment
shall be separated from any area of such use or establishment
where any members of the public or customers are permitted to sit,
stand, move about or dance by a separation zone consisting of not
less than six feet of space (measured horizontally from the closest
edge of the raised platform or stage), and a rigid physical barrier
not less than 30 inches high at the outer periphery of such
separation zone. A customer or member of the public shall not sit,
stand, move about or dance within such six-foot separation zone
while a seminude individual is appearing live and publicly in such
adult-oriented use or establishment. The operator shall not permit
a customer or member of the public in an adult-oriented use or
establishment to so occupy such six-foot separation zone while a
seminude individual is appearing live and publicly in such use or
establishment.
(9) Without respect to Subsection A(7) and (8) above, a seminude
individual shall not appear live and publicly in any adult-oriented
use or establishment within six feet of any customers or members
of the public.
§ 176-19 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-19
1:146
(10) An individual less than 18 years of age shall not enter or remain in
the physically separate defined area of a building in which an adultoriented
use is located. The operator of an adult-oriented use or
establishment shall not permit any individual less than 18 years of
age to enter or remain in the physically separate defined area of a
building in which an adult-oriented use is located. The age limit
shall be prominently and clearly posted at all entrances to the
physically separate defined area of a building in which an adultoriented
use is located.
(11) A seminude individual appearing live in an adult-oriented use or
establishment shall not be visible to anyone outside the physically
separate defined area of a building occupied by such use.
(12) Adult-oriented printed or graphic materials (including, without
limitation, any advertising or packaging materials that are
themselves adult-oriented printed or graphic materials) that are
displayed within an adult-oriented use or establishment shall not be
visible to anyone outside the physically separate defined area of a
building occupied by such use.
(13) An adult-oriented movie or other adult-oriented motion-picture
materials being shown in an adult-oriented use or establishment
shall not be visible to anyone outside the physically separate
defined area of a building occupied by such use.
(14) An adult-oriented use or establishment shall comply with all
applicable requirements of Chapter 690, Zoning, and of all other
City ordinances.
(15) An adult-oriented use license shall not be granted for the operation
of an adult-oriented use or establishment in the same building as a
residential use or a motel or hotel use, unless both the adultoriented
use or motel or hotel use and the residential use are
existing allowed uses pursuant to Chapter 690, Zoning, and the
only way to access the residential use or motel or hotel use is by an
exterior entrance that is completely separate from the adultoriented
use(s) or establishment.
(16) An individual who appears live and publicly in a seminude
condition in an adult-oriented use or establishment shall not
socialize or mingle with customers or members of the public or
customers in such use or establishment and shall not work as a
bartender, waitress, waiter, hostess or host, or in any other
capacity in such use or establishment that involves direct contact
with customers or members of the public in such use or
establishment during the eight hours immediately before or after
so appearing.
(17) An operator shall not permit any criminal activity in an adultoriented
use or establishment.
§ 176-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-19
1:147
(18) A seminude individual appearing live and publicly in an adultoriented
use or establishment shall not touch any customer or
member of the public in such use or establishment, or voluntarily
allow himself or herself to be touched by a customer or member of
the public in such use or establishment. A customer or member of
the public in an adult-oriented use or establishment shall not touch
a seminude individual appearing live and publicly in such a use or
establishment and shall not voluntarily allow himself or herself to
be touched by a seminude individual appearing live and publicly in
such a use or establishment. These restrictions on touching shall be
applicable, without limitation, to any touching in connection with
the acceptance or giving a tip or other gratuity. The operator shall
not permit a customer, member of the public or seminude
individual appearing live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or
establishment to violate this Subsection A(18).
(19) A customer or member of the public in an adult-oriented use or
establishment shall not be directly and physically involved in any
entertainment involving the live public appearance of a seminude
individual. The operator shall not permit a customer or member of
the public to violate this Subsection A(19).
(20) A seminude individual appearing live and publicly in an adultoriented
use or establishment shall not fondle or otherwise touch in
an erotic or indecent manner any other entertainer or employee in
an adult-oriented use or establishment or voluntarily permit herself
or himself to be fondled or otherwise touched in an erotic or
indecent manner by any other entertainer or employee in such a
use or establishment.
(21) Any cubicle, booth or small room or other small, enclosed space
having a floor area less than 100 square feet in an adult use or
establishment, which is used by customers or members of the
public for private viewing of adult-oriented materials or other
similar purposes (but not including a restroom), shall be completely
open at one end to the main room or to an interior aisle, shall be
situated and arranged so as to be easily inspected, shall contain
seating for not more than one individual, and shall have walls not
less than six feet high without any openings separating it from any
adjoining cubicles, booths or small rooms or enclosed spaces. No
more than one customer, member of the public, employee or
entertainer shall occupy any such cubicle, booth, small room or
other small, enclosed space at any one time. The operator shall not
permit more than one individual to occupy any such cubicle, booth,
small room or other small, enclosed space at any one time.
(22) The hours that an adult-oriented use or establishment may be open
to the public shall only be 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the next day.
(23) An individual shall not perform or engage in any actual specified
sexual activities in an adult-oriented use or establishment. The
§ 176-19 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-19
1:148
operator shall not permit any individual to perform or engage in
any such activities in an adult-oriented use or establishment.
(24) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter:
(a) Each employee or entertainer working, performing any
services or entertaining in an adult-oriented use or
establishment shall possess a valid adult-oriented use work
permit issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer;
(b) The operator shall not permit any employee or entertainer to
work, perform any services or entertain in an adult-oriented
use or establishment without possessing a valid adult-oriented
use work permit; and
(c) Each employee or entertainer shall have a valid adult-oriented
use work permit on his or her person or readily accessible at all
times when working, performing any services or entertaining
in an adult-oriented use or establishment and shall display
such permit upon reasonable request by a City inspector or
police officer.
(25) Any cubicle, booth or small room or other small, enclosed space
having a floor area of less than 100 square feet, which is used by
customers or members of the public for private viewing of adultoriented
materials or other similar purposes (but not including a
restroom), shall have interior surfaces that are light-colored,
nonabsorbent and easily cleaned. Such surfaces shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
(26) All doorways, entryways or passageways within the physically
separate defined area of a building occupied by an adult-oriented
use through which any customers or members of the public are
permitted to pass, except exterior entrances/exits and restrooms,
shall not be closed, or obstructed, or off-limits to other customers
or members of the public unless specifically provided for in an
adult-oriented use license.
(27) Every act or omission of an employee or entertainer working,
providing any services or entertaining in an adult-oriented use or
establishment and every act or omission of a customer or member
of the public present in an adult-oriented use or establishment
which violates this chapter or a license issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be deemed to be the act or omission and violation of
the operator if such act or omission occurred with the
authorization, approval or knowing acquiescence of the operator,
or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the
conduct of the employee, entertainer, customer or member of the
public and diligent supervision by the operator would reasonably
have prevented the violation, and the operator shall be punishable
for such act or omission to the same extent as if the operator
committed or caused the act or omission.
§ 176-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-19
1:149
§ 176-20. Employee and entertainer permits.
(28) The operator shall be responsible for advising employees,
entertainers, customers and members of the public in an adultoriented
use or establishment of applicable requirements of this
chapter and of any license issued pursuant to this chapter. The
operator shall be responsible for closely supervising the activities
and conduct of all employees, entertainers, customers and
members of the public in an adult-oriented use or establishment in
order to prevent violations of this chapter and of any license issued
pursuant to this chapter, and to terminate any violations that do
occur as rapidly as possible, and to take such actions as may
reasonably be required to prevent any recurrence of any such
violations.
(29) Any adult-oriented use or establishment shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 690, Zoning, and all other applicable City
ordinances.
A. After the effective date of this chapter, any employee or entertainer
desiring to work, provide services or entertain within the physically
separate defined area of a building in which an adult-oriented use or
establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter is located, while such
use or establishment is open to customers or the general public, shall
obtain and possess a valid adult-use work permit before commencing or
continuing such work, services or entertaining. The City Clerk-
Treasurer is authorized to issue such permits for periods of 30 days or
one year, depending on the work plans of the applicant.
B. An application for an adult-oriented use work permit shall be filed with
the City Clerk-Treasurer on a form provided by the City and dated and
signed by the applicant. The application shall include the following
information:
(1) Name of the applicant and any aliases used within the five years
immediately preceding the date of the application;
(2) Name and address of the adult-oriented use or establishment
where the applicant proposes to work, perform services or
entertain, the nature of the work, services or entertainment to be
provided, and the anticipated duration of the work, services or
entertainment;
(3) The street address and telephone number at which the applicant
can be contacted regarding the application and permit;
(4) Applicant's date of birth;
(5) Applicant's sex;
(6) Applicant's race;
§ 176-19 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-20
1:150
§ 176-21. Violations and penalties.
After the effective date of this chapter, except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to, and no person shall:
(7) Applicant's state of residence currently and at any time during the
five years immediately preceding the date of the application;
(8) Whether the applicant has been convicted during the five years
immediately preceding the date of the application of any of the
crimes specified in § 176-8B(7)of this chapter and, if so, the
information about such conviction(s) required by that subsection;
and
(9) Whether the applicant has been adjudicated guilty during the five
years immediately preceding the date of application of any
ordinance violation occurring in or relating to the operation of an
adult-oriented use or establishment and, if so, the nature of the
ordinance violation, the date of the adjudication, and the court and
jurisdiction in which the adjudication occurred.
C. Upon the filing of an application, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall request
that the City Police Department conduct a background check on the
applicant. Any information obtained by the City Police Department
regarding the applicant shall be promptly provided to the City Clerk-
Treasurer. If the application as filed is incomplete, the City Clerk-
Treasurer shall notify the applicant, in writing, within three business
days after the date of filing, what additional information is required.
D. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall deny the license if the applicant is not at
least 18 years of age or if the Clerk finds that a reasonable probability
exists that the applicant will violate the provisions of this chapter or of a
license issued pursuant to this chapter, based on a substantial pattern
of noncompliant behavior during the five years immediately preceding
the date of the application or other clear and convincing information.
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall state the reason(s) for denial and notify
the applicant of such reasons, in writing, within five business days after
the filing of a complete application and the application fee.
E. If the applicant is at least 18 years of age, and the City Clerk-Treasurer
does not find that a reasonable probability of future violations exists,
the Clerk shall issue the license within five business days after a
complete application and the application fee required by this chapter is
filed. If the City Clerk-Treasurer fails to act within the time provided in
this section, a thirty-day license shall be deemed to be issued.
A. Operate an adult-oriented use or establishment without possessing a
valid adult-oriented use license;
B. Operate an adult-oriented use or establishment other than in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and of a valid adultoriented
use license;
§ 176-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-21
1:151
§ 176-22. Enforcement.
§ 176-23. Authorized representatives.
Any individual representing and appearing or speaking for an operator
in any dealings with the Ordinance Committee or with the Zoning
Administrator shall be deemed to be an authorized representative of the
operator unless the operator has specifically advised the City, in writing,
that such individual is not to be regarded as an authorized representative
or is only to be regarded as an authorized representative with respect to
certain specified matters.
§ 176-24. Discrepancies.
In the event of any discrepancy between a requirement imposed by the
Ordinance Committee pursuant to this chapter and a requirement imposed
pursuant to any other City ordinance, the more stringent requirement shall
control.
C. Violate any provision of this chapter or of any license issued pursuant to
this chapter;
D. Provide materially false, misleading or incomplete information in or
with an application for an initial license pursuant to this chapter, or for
a renewal, amendment or minor modification of such a license; or
E. Work, provide services or entertain in an adult-oriented use or
establishment without a valid work permit required by § 176-20 of this
chapter.
A. Legal actions. The City may institute any appropriate legal actions or
proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter or of any license
issued pursuant to this chapter by means of forfeitures or penalties,
injunction of violations, abatement or nuisances, or otherwise as
provided by law.
B. Forfeitures; penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $250 nor more than
$1,000 for each violation, plus the costs of prosecution. Each day that a
violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate violation. The
penalty for default of payment of any such forfeiture and costs shall be
imprisonment in the Sauk County Jail until payment thereof, but not
exceeding six months.
C. Adjustment, suspension, termination of license. The Ordinance
Committee may adjust, suspend or terminate a license issued pursuant
to this chapter in accordance with this chapter for violations of this
chapter or of any license issued pursuant to this chapter that are
committed by the operator or for which the operator is responsible
pursuant to § 176-16 of this chapter.
§ 176-21 REEDSBURG CODE § 176-25
1:152
§ 176-25. Other licenses, permits and approvals.
Possession by an operator of a valid adult-oriented use license shall not
eliminate the need to obtain any other license, permit or approval required
by any Village ordinance. Notwithstanding any other provision of a Village
ordinance to the contrary, any complete application for a Village license,
permit or approval needed by an adult-oriented use or establishment shall
be deemed to be automatically granted if the application is not decided
within 45 days of the date of filing (or the date of completion, if later than
the date of filing) and the payment of any applicable application fee, and the
Village shall issue a written notice to the operator of any required additional
information needed to complete any such application within 10 business
days of the date of filing.
Chapter 185
AIRPORT MINIMUM STANDARDS
§ 185-1. Purpose; intent; applicability.
A. The purpose of these minimum standard is to promote a sound
economic base upon which the Reedsburg Municipal Airport ("airport")
will thrive and experience a stable growth pattern; to ensure that the
public receives reliable, safe, adequate and nondiscriminatory air
transportation service; and to ensure that tenants and operators
receive fair, equitable and nondiscriminatory treatment in the conduct
of authorized activities at the airport.
B. The intent of these minimum standards is to categorically identify those
standards and procedures by which all persons, firms or other legal
entities conducting commercial or noncommercial aeronautical or
nonaeronautical activities at the airport shall conduct their respective
operations, thereby protecting the public health, safety and general
welfare.
C. The requirements as set forth in these standards and procedures are
intended to ultimately protect the public health, safety and other
interests and to foster and promote the continued development of the
airport in a safe and efficient manner.
D. This chapter provides minimum standards used by the airport
management and Airport Commission to guide all commercial and
business-related activities at the airport. Each activity shall be covered
by a lease/operating agreement which specifically includes, but is not
limited to, the following covenants:
(1) Hours of operation.
(2) Insurance requirements.
(3) Compliance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
§ 176-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-1
1:153
§ 185-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ACTIVITY LICENSE — Any license, permit or other authorization which is
or may be required by the United States government, the state, the City
of Reedsburg or any duly authorized agency or subdivision thereof for the
conduct of the applicant's business.
AERIAL APPLICATORS — A person or entity conducting aerial agriculture
spraying or seeding activities or other applications, such as nonagricultural
pest control, at the airport for compensation or hire.
AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITY — Any activity which involves, makes possible
or is required for the operation of aircraft or which contributes to or is
required for the safety of such operations.
AIR CHARTER — A person or entity that provides on-demand, nonscheduled
passenger, air ambulance or cargo transportation service in aircraft having
less than 30 passenger seats. The entity must operate under the appropriate
Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs).
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance invented, used or designed for navigation of
or flight in air.
AIRCRAFT OPERATION — An aircraft's takeoff from or landing at the
airport. A touch-and-go is two operations.
AIRCRAFT OWNER — A person or entity holding legal title to an aircraft, or
any person having exclusive possession of an aircraft.
AIRCRAFT PARKING AND STORAGE — The commercial operation of
renting or leasing aircraft parking and storage to the public for
compensation.
AIRCRAFT PARKING AND STORAGE AREAS — The hangar and apron
location on the airport designated by the airport owner for the parking and
storage of aircraft.
AIRCRAFT RENTAL — The commercial operation of renting or leasing
aircraft to the public for compensation.
AIRCRAFT SALES — The sale of new or used aircraft through brokerage,
ownership, franchise, distributorship, or licensed dealership.
AIRFRAME AND POWER PLANT MAINTENANCE — The commercial
operation of providing airframe and power plant services, which includes
any of the following: the repair, maintenance, inspection, constructing,
and making of modifications and alterations to aircraft, aircraft engines,
propellers and appliances, including the removal of engines for major
overhaul or aircraft painting and interior refurbishing. This category of
service also includes the sale of aircraft parts and accessories.
(4) Financial integrity.
(5) Minimum space and building requirements.
§ 185-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-2
1:154
AIRPORT — Any area of land or water which is used, or intended for use,
for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are
used, or intended for use, for airport buildings or other airport facilities
or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities located
thereon at the Reedsburg Airport which are owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by the City of Reedsburg or its tenants and operated as the City
of Reedsburg Airport.
AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN (ALP) — The Federal Aeronautics Agency (FAA)-
approved plans and drawings of an airport, depicting the layout of the
existing and proposed airport facilities.
AIRPORT MANAGER — The designated individual/firm appointed/
contracted by the airport owner, duly authorized to administer and manage
all operations of the airport and airport facilities. "Airport manager"
includes its designated representative.
ASSURANCE — A provision contained in a federal grant agreement to
which the recipient of the federal airport development assistance has
voluntarily agreed to comply in consideration of the assistance provided.
AVIATION FUEL — Flammable liquids composed of a mixture of selected
hydrocarbons manufactured and blended for the purpose of operating an
internal combustion, jet or turbine engine which meet federal fuel
standards.
AVIATION-RELATED ACTIVITY — Any activity conducted on the airport
that provides service or support to aircraft passengers or air cargo. The
following are examples of aviation-related activities: ground transportation,
restaurants, auto parking and concessions.
AVIONICS SALES AND MAINTENANCE — The commercial operation of
providing for the repair and maintenance of aircraft radios, instruments and
accessories. Such operation may include the sale of new or used aircraft
radios, instruments and accessories.
BASED AIRCRAFT — An aircraft which the owner physically locates at the
airport for an undetermined period, and, whenever absent from the airport,
its owner intends to return the aircraft to the airport for long-term storage.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY — The conduct of any aspect of a business,
concession, operation, or agency in order to provide goods or services
to any person for compensation or hire. An activity is considered a
"commercial activity" regardless of whether the business is nonprofit,
charitable, or tax-exempt.
COMMERCIAL OPERATOR (OPERATOR) — A person or entity conducting
commercial activity at the airport for compensation or hire. The operator
may be classified as either a fixed-base operator (FBO) or a specialized
aviation service operator (SASO).
COMMERCIAL SKYDIVING — A person or entity conducting skydiving or
skydiving activities at the airport for compensation or hire.
COMMISSION — The Reedsburg Municipal Airport Commission.
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:155
EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT — Crash, fire and rescue or police motor
vehicles and such other equipment as the owner or airport manager may
designate as necessary to safeguard airport runways, taxiways, ramps,
buildings and other property.
EXCLUSIVE RIGHT — A power, privilege or other right excluding or barring
another from enjoying or exercising a like power, privilege, or right. An
exclusive right can be conferred either by express or implied agreement or
by the imposition of unreasonable standards or requirements.
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA) — The federal governmental
agency responsible for governing aviation activities.
FEDERAL AVIATION REGULATIONS (FAR) — All regulations included in
the unabridged edition of pertinent federal governmental regulations.
FEDERAL OBLIGATION — Contractual commitment of the airport owner
that arises from the conveyance of the land or from a grant agreement.
FIXED-BASE OPERATOR (FBO) — A full-service commercial operator who
engages in the primary activity of aircraft refueling and a minimum of three
of the following secondary activities:
FLIGHT TRAINING — The commercial operation of instructing pilots in dual
and solo flight, in any aircraft, and related ground-school instruction as
necessary to complete a FAA pilot's knowledge test and practical flight test
for various categories of pilot certificates and ratings.
FLYING CLUB — A noncommercial and nonprofit entity organized for the
purpose of providing its members with any number of aircraft for their
personal use and enjoyment. Aircraft must be vested in the name of the
flying club owners on a pro rata share, and the club may not derive greater
revenue from the use of the aircraft than the cost to operate, maintain, and
replace the aircraft.
FUEL AND FUEL HANDLING — The transportation, sale, delivery,
dispensing, or draining of fuel or fuel waste products to or from an aircraft.
FUEL STORAGE AREA — Any portion of the airport designated temporarily
or permanently by the airport owner as an area in which aircraft fuel may
be stored or located.
A. Flight training;
B. Aircraft rental;
C. Air charter;
D. Avionics sales and maintenance;
E. Aircraft sales;
F. Aircraft parking and storage;
G. Airframe and power plant maintenance.
§ 185-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-2
1:156
GENERAL AVIATION — All civil aviation operations other than scheduled
air services and nonscheduled air transport operations for remuneration or
hire.
GRANT ASSURANCE — Any agreement made between the airport owner
and the FAA for the grant of federal funding or a conveyance of land, either
of which the City of Reedsburg agrees to use for airport purposes.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance, waste, or material which is
toxic, explosive, corrosive, flammable, infectious, radioactive, carcinogenic,
mutagenic, or otherwise hazardous, and is or becomes regulated by any
governmental authority, agency, department, commission, board, agency or
instrumentality of the United States, the State of Wisconsin, or political
subdivision thereof, and the presence of which requires investigation,
removal and/or remediation.
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR — An operator offering a single commercial
activity but without an established place of business at the airport. The City
of Reedsburg may or may not allow this type of servicing to exist at the
airport.
LEASE — The written contract between the airport and a person or entity
specifying the terms and conditions under which a person may conduct
commercial activity, as defined within these minimum standards.
LEASEHOLD IMPROVEMENT — Includes, but is not necessarily limited to,
any modification, alteration or repair, either of a structural or architectural
nature, performed by the tenant at his/her sole cost and expense. Any such
improvements shall be accomplished only after the owner has approved the
tenant's written application requesting the same.
LIGHT SPORT AIRCRAFT — Any vehicle that is used or intended to be used
for manned operation in the air for recreation or sport purposes only and
which meets the following criteria:
Maximum gross takeoff weight of 1,320 lbs. (599 kg); 1,430 lbs. for
seaplanes.
A.
Lighter-than-air light sport aircraft maximum gross weight of 660 lbs.
(300 kg).
B.
C. Maximum stall speed of 51 mph (45 knots).
Maximum speed in level flight with maximum continuous power (Vh) of
138 mph (120 knots).
D.
E. Two-place maximum (pilot and one passenger).
F. Single, nonturbine engine only, including rotary or diesel engines.
G. Fixed, ground-adjustable propeller.
H. Unpressurized cabin.
I. Fixed landing gear.
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:157
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association. All references to an NFPA
standard mean the most recent edition of that standard, as may be amended
from time to time.
NONCOMMERCIAL AVIATION FUEL USAGE — The fueling of an aircraft
by an aircraft owner, its employees or pilot using pumps and equipment
installed for that purpose. The fueling facility may or may not be attended
by the FBO that leases and operates the equipment. Only FBOs can sell and
provide for aircraft delivery of fuel into other owner-operated aircraft.
OWNER — The City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin, or its successor in title in the
event of a transfer of the airport facility, granting the Airport Commission
the authority to operate the airport and to grant and/or lease operating
rights for commercial Activity and other activity. "Owner" includes the City
of Reedsburg acting through its Airport Commission.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person on foot.
Repositionable landing gear for seaplanes, allowing the wheels to be
rotated for amphibious operation.
J.
Can be manufactured and sold ready-to-fly under a new special light
sport aircraft certification without FAR Part 23 compliance. Aircraft
must meet consensus standards. Aircraft under this certification may
be used for sport and recreation, flight training and aircraft rental.
K.
Can be licensed experimental light sport aircraft (E-LSA) if kit- or plansbuilt.
Aircraft under this certification may be used only for sport and
recreation and flight instruction for the owner of the aircraft.
L.
Can be licensed experimental light sport aircraft (E-LSA) if kit- or plansbuilt
and operated as an ultralight trainer. Aircraft must be transitioned
to E-LSA category no later than January 31, 2008.
M.
N. Will be FAA registration N-Number.
Aircraft category and class includes airplane (land/sea), gyroplane,
airship, balloon, weight-shift-control (trike land/sea), and powered
parachute.
O.
United States or foreign manufacture of light sport aircraft is
authorized.
P.
Aircraft with a standard airworthiness certificate that meet above
specifications may be flown by sport pilots. However that airworthiness
certification category will not be changed to a light sport aircraft.
Holders of a sport pilot certificate may fly an aircraft with standard
airworthiness certificate if it meets the definition of a light sport
aircraft.
Q.
May be operated at night if the aircraft is equipped per FAR 91.209 and
pilot holds at least a private pilot certificate and a minimum of a thirdclass
medical.
R.
§ 185-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-2
1:158
PERMITTEE — A person who holds a self-fueling permit issued by the
Commission.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association, or body politic; and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
PREVENTATIVE AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE — Maintenance that is not
considered a major aircraft alteration or repair and does not involve
complex assembly operations as listed in FAR Part 43, Appendix A,
Paragraph C.
ROADWAY — Any street or road, whether improved or unimproved, within
the boundaries of the airport and designated for use by ground vehicles.
SELF-SERVICE — Fueling or maintenance of an aircraft on airport property
performed by the aircraft owner or its employees in accordance with FAR
and the airport's reasonable standards or requirements.
SERVICE, MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT —
Approved equipment normally operated and/or authorized by the owner or
airport manager and/or the FAA on landing areas, runways, taxiways and
peripheral roads for the servicing, maintenance and construction of airport
facilities and services or for the servicing of aircraft. This definition shall
include equipment owned and operated by a contractor performing work on
the airport under a contractual agreement with the owner.
SPECIALIZED AVIATION SERVICE OPERATION (SASO) — An aeronautical
business that offers a single or limited service according to established
minimum standards. Examples of a SASO include, but are not limited to:
SPECIALIZED COMMERCIAL FLYING SERVICES (SCFS) — An
aeronautical business engaged in air transportation for hire for the purpose
of providing the use of aircraft for the following activities:
A. Flight training;
B. Airframe and power plant maintenance;
C. Air charter;
D. Aircraft sales;
E. Avionics sales and maintenance;
F. Aircraft parking and storage;
G. Specialized commercial flying services;
H. Aerial applicators;
I. Commercial skydiving;
J. Flying club;
K. Aircraft rental.
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:159
STATE — The State of Wisconsin and, as applicable, the State of Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aeronautics.
SUBLEASE — The written agreement stating terms and conditions under
which a third-party person leases space from a tenant for the purpose of
providing aeronautical services at the airport.
TAXI LANE — That portion of the airport apron area, or any other area, used
for access between taxiways and aircraft parking or storage areas.
TAXIWAY — A defined path established for the taxiing of aircraft from one
part of the airport to another.
TENANT — Any person that will have applied for and received written
permission to establish a leasehold or other right at the airport, whether for
commercial activity or not.
THROUGH-THE-FENCE AGREEMENT — An agreement between the owner
and a commercial adjacent property owner permitting access to the public
landing area.
THROUGH-THE-FENCE COMMERCIAL OPERATION — A commercial
activity, directly related to the use of the airport, developed or located off
airport and requiring a through-the-fence agreement.
UNICOM — A nongovernment communication facility which may provide
airport information at certain airports.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn, excepting aircraft.
VEHICLE PARKING AREA — Any portion of the airport designated and
made available temporarily or permanently by the airport owner for the
parking of vehicles.
§ 185-3. General provisions.
A. Nonstop sightseeing flights that begin and end at the same airport.
B. Crop dusting, seeding and spraying and bird chasing.
C. Banner towing and aerial advertising.
D. Aerial photography or survey.
E. Firefighting.
F. Power line or pipeline patrol.
G. Airborne mineral exploration.
H. Any other operations specifically excluded from Part 135 of FAR.
A. Upon the consideration of any applicant to conduct aeronautical
activity at the airport, the Airport Commission shall determine whether
or not the application meets the standards and qualifications as herein
§ 185-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-3
1:160
set out and whether or not such application should be granted, in whole
or in part, and, if so, upon what terms and conditions.
B. Any person conducting aeronautical activities at the airport shall, as a
condition of conducting such activities, comply with all the
requirements set forth in these minimum standards. The minimum
standards are deemed to be a part of each commercial operator's lease
or agreement with the owner. The mere omission of any particular
standard in a lease or agreement shall not constitute a waiver or
modification of the standard unless the document expressly states that
the owner waives application of that standard.
C. It is the owner's intent to have prepared and make available an airport
layout plan, which will be a scaled, dimensional layout of the entire
airport property, indicating, in general, current and proposed usage for
each identifiable segment of the airport.
D. These minimum standards will be applied to existing operators upon
renewal of the existing lease or agreement. Existing operators who are
unable to meet the minimum standards at the time of lease or
agreement renewal shall submit a plan outlining specific time lines for
complying with the minimum standards. The owner must approve the
plan prior to renewal of the lease or agreement.
E. When an operator conducts multiple commercial activity pursuant to
one lease or agreement with the owner, the commercial operator shall
comply with the minimum standards established for each separate
activity. If the minimum standards for one activity are inconsistent with
the minimum standards for another activity, then the minimum
standard that is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard shall
apply.
F. Each applicant shall be responsible to provide satisfactory evidence to
the Airport Commission of its respective technical ability and financial
responsibility, including the capability to meet the insurance
requirements as stated herein. Activities with no specific minimum
standards established in this chapter will be addressed by the owner on
a case-by-case basis in the operator's lease or agreement.
G. The owner may review the minimum standards from time to time and
may make such revisions or amendments as shall be deemed necessary
to properly protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
Upon enactment of any such amendments, all operators, tenants and
subtenants shall be required to conform to such amended standards.
H. In addition to the requirements of the FAA or the state, the owner may
establish and implement such rules and regulations as may be required
for the safe and orderly operation of the airport, the safe and orderly
operation of aircraft in the airport traffic area and airspace surrounding
the airport and the safe and orderly operation of aircraft on the ground.
§ 185-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-3
1:161
§ 185-4. Vehicular and pedestrian traffic within airport boundaries.
I. No person shall act as an operator, tenant or subtenant, or conduct any
commercial activity of any kind or nature whatsoever on the airport
until such time as the person has applied for and received permission to
and has entered into and executed a lease/operating agreement with
the owner. Each successful applicant shall, within 30 business days
after having received written approval of its application, be ready,
willing and able to enter into a written lease/operating agreement with
the owner in a form and manner prescribed by the owner. In the case of
an air charter operation which is not based at the airport but which
operates to and from the airport, the payment of all applicable parking
or other levied fees shall be deemed sufficient to meet the requirements
of this subsection.
J. The owner may waive or modify any portion of these minimum
standards for the benefit of a governmental agency performing
nonprofit public services, fire protection or emergency response
operations.
K. The owner may waive or modify any portion of these minimum
standards for any person when it is determined that such waiver is in
the best interest of the public and will not result in unjust
discrimination against other commercial operations at the airport.
A. Operation of vehicles on airport property, runway(s), taxiway(s) and
ramps. No vehicle shall enter or be driven upon or operated upon any
airport runway, taxiway, ramp, tie-down area or any area posted by
signs prohibiting the entrance thereon without prior authorization of
the owner or airport manager or for the limited purpose of accessing
business locations at the airport. The provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to emergency equipment or service, maintenance and
construction equipment when engaged in performing normal duties.
Aircraft owners may be granted authorization by the owner or airport
manager to operate a vehicle to reach their own aircraft. They shall not
at any time park a vehicle on any area used for the movement of
aircraft.
B. Speed of vehicles. Unless specifically authorized by the owner or
airport manager, vehicles shall not traverse over any runway, taxiway,
ramp or tie-down area at a speed to exceed 25 miles per hour.
C. Pedestrian traffic on airport. No pedestrian shall be allowed in
maintenance or shop areas or upon the apron or aircraft tie-down areas
unless for the purpose of embarking in or disembarking from an aircraft
or unless authorized by the owner or airport manager. Pedestrian traffic
is prohibited on taxiways, runways and outlying areas of the airport,
except for employees of the City, county, state and federal government
providing services related to the airport or contractors engaged in
airport construction or maintenance work; provided, however, that the
§ 185-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-4
1:162
§ 185-5. Minimum standards for all operators, including SASOs.
The following standards shall apply to all commercial operators and SASOs.
owner may permit pedestrian traffic in nonrunway and nontaxiway
wares for special, preapproved events.
D. Vehicle parking. All vehicles parked on the airport shall be parked in
designated areas and in accordance with posted signs or other
markings. The owner or airport manager may move or order the
removal of any vehicle improperly parked, at the vehicle owner's
expense.
A. The lease/operating agreement shall be for a term to be mutually
agreed upon between the owner, commensurate with the operator's
financial investment in its facilities.
B. The operator shall have had experience in the service it wishes to
provide for a period of five years. It will be satisfactory if the operator
has, in a reasonable supervisory position, a person with such minimum
experience requirements. Should an operator not have such experience
but be able to demonstrate to the owner's satisfaction that it has had
equivalent related experience, such will be deemed acceptable. A
statement of qualifications shall accompany the operator's letter of
intent to the owner.
C. The operator must also demonstrate that it has the financial ability or
backing, where applicable, for the construction of facilities that may be
required for the proposed commercial activity and SASOs. In addition,
the financial institution letter shall include a current financial net worth
showing that the applicant holds unencumbered current assets in a
total amount at least equaling three months' estimated maintenance
and operating expenses.
D. All commercial operators shall demonstrate to the owner's satisfaction
their ability to acquire insurance coverage as stipulated for each
particular type of commercial activity. In addition, the operator shall
include the owner as an additional insured and stipulate that the
operator will hold harmless the owner in all actions against it. Minimum
coverage shall be established as detailed in Addendum A.8 [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
E. Any operator located on the airport and performing any one or more of
the SASO categories and functions shall lease from the owner an area
to provide:
8. Editor's Note: Addendum A, General Aviator Airports, Suggested Minimum Insurance
Requirements, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 185-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:163
§ 185-6. Flight training.
(1) In no event will the square feet requirement be less than that
required by applicable building codes which, if more restrictive,
will govern.
F. Each lease/agreement with an operator and SASO entered into by the
owner shall include each of the following provisions:
(1) Fair employment and nondiscrimination provisions.
(2) Affirmative action assurances.
(3) Civil rights assurances.
(4) Nonexclusive right provision.
(5) Any other mandated provisions required by the state or federal
governments.
(6) Days and hours that the SASO will be generally open to provide the
SASO activity.
G. All operators and SASOs shall have the right, in common with others so
authorized, to use common areas of the airport, including runways,
taxiways, aprons, roadways, floodlights, landing lights, signals and
other conveniences for the takeoff, flying and landing of aircraft.
H. Any construction required of any operator or SASO shall be in
accordance with design and construction requirements of the owner
and state and federal regulations and applicable codes. All plans and
specifications shall be submitted to the owner for approval prior to the
start of construction.
I. The operator and SASO shall provide a paved aircraft apron within the
leased area to accommodate aircraft movement from the operator to
the building to the taxiway or the access to the taxiway that has been or
will be provided for the operator or SASO. Parking at hangar shall not
obstruct the taxiway.
J. All operators and SASOs shall comply with all pertinent FAR
requirements.
(1) All visitors, FBO and SASO employees should immediately report
any suspicious activity to law enforcement and/or the airport
manager.
(2) Visitors are not allowed inside fenced areas of the airport without
permission of airport manager unless preapproved by the owner or
Airport Commission, except for the limited purpose of accessing
business locations at the airport.
A. A flight training services operator provides instruction for pilots in dual
and solo flight, in any aircraft, and related ground-school instruction as
§ 185-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-6
1:164
§ 185-7. Air charter.
§ 185-8. Aircraft sales.
necessary to complete an FAA pilot's knowledge test and practical flight
test for various categories of pilot certificates and ratings.
B. Minimum standards:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area in accordance with
§ 185-5E above.
(2) The following types of insurance are required in amounts as set
forth in § 185-5D above:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(3) It is the intention of the owner to enter into and execute a lease/
operating agreement with the approved applicant as soon as
possible after such application is approved.
(4) All aircraft based at the airport shall be registered with the FAA.
(5) The operator shall comply with all pertinent FAR requirements.
A. An air charter operator provides on-demand, nonscheduled passenger,
air ambulance or cargo transportation service in aircraft having less
than 30 passenger seats. The entity must operate under the appropriate
Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs).
(1) Minimum standards:
(a) The operator shall lease from the owner an area in accordance
with § 185-5E above.
(b) The following types of insurance are required in the limits as
set forth in § 185-5D above:
[1] Aircraft liability.
[2] Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive
damage, including vehicular.
B. The operator shall comply with all pertinent FAR requirements.
A. Statement of concept. This minimum standard covers the sale of new or
used aircraft through brokerage, ownership, franchise, distributorship,
or licensed dealership.
B. The operator shall lease from the owner an area in accordance with
§ 185-5E above.
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-8
1:165
§ 185-9. Aircraft rental.
§ 185-10. Airframe and power plant maintenance.
C. Minimum standards:
(1) The operator shall provide necessary and satisfactory
arrangements for repair and servicing of all aircraft offered for
sale.
(2) The operator shall provide for new plane sales current, up-to-date
specifications and price lists for types and models of aircraft sold.
For used planes, the operator shall provide an owner history,
airframe and engine, logbooks and airworthiness documentation if
available.
(3) The following types of insurance are required in amounts as set
forth in § 185-5D:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(c) Product liability.
(4) The operator shall comply with all pertinent FAR requirements.
A. Statement of concept. An aircraft rental operator rents or leases
aircraft to the public for compensation.
B. Minimum standards:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area in accordance
§ 185-5E above.
(2) The operator shall have available for rental, either owned or under
written lease to the operator, at least one certified and currently
airworthy aircraft.
(3) The following types of insurance are required in amounts as set
forth in § 185-5D above:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(4) The operator shall provide the owner with copies of the owner's
aircraft registrations and aircraft lease documents.
(5) The operator shall comply with all pertinent FAR requirements.
§ 185-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-10
1:166
§ 185-11. Avionics sales and maintenance.
§ 185-12. Aircraft parking and storage.
A. The operation of providing airframe and power plant services includes
any of the following: the repair, maintenance, inspection, construction,
and making of modifications and alterations to aircraft, aircraft
engines, propellers and appliances, including the removal of engines
for major overhaul and aircraft painting and interior refurbishing. This
category of service also includes the sale of aircraft parts and
accessories and the removal of engines for major overhauls, aircraft
painting and interior refurbishing.
B. Minimum standards:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area in accordance with
§ 185-5E above.
(2) The operator shall provide adequate equipment to perform the
repair and maintenance as required by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(3) The following types of insurance are required in amounts as set
forth in § 185-5D above:
(a) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(b) Product liability.
(4) The operator shall comply with all pertinent FAR requirements.
A. Statement of concept. This minimum standard covers the operation of
providing for the repair and maintenance of aircraft radios, instruments
and accessories. Such operation may include the sale of new or used
aircraft radios, instruments and accessories.
B. Minimum standards:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area in accordance with
the classification established by the number of services as set forth
in § 185-5E above.
(2) The following types of insurance are required in amounts as set
forth in § 185-5D above:
(a) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(b) Product liability.
(3) The operator shall comply with all pertinent FAR requirements.
§ 185-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-12
1:167
§ 185-13. Fixed-base operator (FBO).
A. Statement of concept. This minimum standard covers the commercial
operation of renting or leasing aircraft parking and storage in the
hangar and apron location on the airport designated by the airport
owner to the public for compensation.
B. Minimum standards:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area in accordance with
the classification established by the number of services as set forth
in § 185-5E above. Said area shall include ground space and floor
space to facilitate customer use.
(2) The owner shall review with the operator any private building use
before approval of said parking and storage is permitted. If
improvements are requested by the owner, the operator shall make
the improvement before parking and storage shall commence.
(3) The operator shall provide a paved aircraft apron within the leased
area to accommodate all customer aircraft awaiting interior
storage or delivery.
(a) The following types of insurance are required in amounts as set
forth in § 185-5D above:
(b) Comprehensive liability and comprehensive property damage,
including vehicular.
(4) The operator shall comply with all pertinent FAR requirements.
A. An FBO is a full-service, commercial operator who engages in the
primary activity of aircraft refueling and a minimum of three of the
following secondary activities:
(1) Flight training;
(2) Aircraft rental;
(3) Air charter;
(4) Avionics sales and maintenance;
(5) Aircraft sales;
(6) Aircraft parking and storage;
(7) Airframe and power plant maintenance.
B. Minimum standards:
(1) The operator shall lease from the owner an area in accordance with
the classification established by the number of services as set forth
in § 185-5E above.
§ 185-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-13
1:168
(2) The FBO shall be responsible for fuel and fuel handling at the
airport by way of fuel and fuel-handling facilities provided by the
owner. The FBO shall provide a minimum of two types of aviation
fuel. The owner's fuel and fuel-handling equipment shall meet all
applicable safety requirements relative to fuel dispensing as
required by federal, state and local regulations and shall provide
reliable metering and monitoring devices which conform to federal,
state and local regulations.
(3) Dispensing trucks, bulk fuel trucks, emergency vehicles and other
vehicles approved by the owner shall be the only vehicles permitted
within the approved fuel-activity area as designated by the owner.
(4) The operator shall provide such minor repair service that does not
require a certified mechanic rating and cabin services to general
aviation aircraft as can be performed efficiently on the ramp or
apron parking area, but only within the premises leased to the
operator.
(5) The operator shall procure and maintain tools and equipment
related to the approved activity. All equipment shall be maintained
and operated in accordance with local and state industrial codes.
(6) The following types of insurance are required in amounts as set
forth in § 185-5D:
(a) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(b) Product liability.
(c) Storage tank liability, corrective action and cleanup policy.
(7) The operator shall have in its employ and on duty during the
appropriate business hours trained personnel in such numbers as
are required to meet the minimum standards set forth in this
category in an efficient manner.
(8) The operator shall maintain an accurate record of all deliveries of
aviation fuel and oil, and such records shall be subject to
examination and audit by the owner.
(9) The owner shall provide separate pumps, meters and filterequipped
dispensers, fixed or mobile, for dispensing required
grades of fuel. The owner shall provide reliable pumps and meters
to conform to legal standards for trade use as established by
federal, state and local regulations.
(10) The FBO shall pay to the owner a fuel-flowage fee and other fees as
outlined in § 185-19A below.
(11) The FBO shall comply with all pertinent FAR requirements.
§ 185-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-14
1:169
§ 185-14. Specialized commercial flying services.
§ 185-15. Aerial applicators.
A. Specialized commercial flying services is an aeronautical business
engaged in air transportation for hire for the purpose of providing the
use of aircraft for the following activities:
(1) Nonstop, sightseeing flights that begin and end at the same airport.
(2) Crop dusting, seeding and spraying and bird chasing.
(3) Banner towing and aerial advertising.
(4) Aerial photography or survey.
(5) Firefighting.
(6) Power line or pipeline patrol.
(7) Airborne mineral exploration.
(8) Any other operations specifically excluded from Part 135 of FAR.
B. Minimum standards:
(1) The operator shall lease land from the owner. The minimum areas
in each instance shall be subject to the approval of the owner. All
operators shall demonstrate that they have the availability of
aircraft suitably equipped for the particular type of operation they
intend to perform.
(2) The owner shall set the minimum insurance requirements as they
pertain to the particular type of operation to be performed. These
minimum requirements shall be applicable to all operations of a
similar nature. All operators will, however, be required to maintain
the minimum aircraft liability coverage as set forth in § 185-5D
above.
(3) The operator shall comply with all pertinent FAR requirements.
A. Aerial applicators includes aerial agricultural spraying or seeding or
other activities or applications, such as nonagricultural pest control at
the airport for compensation or hire.
B. Minimum standards:
(1) The operator shall lease land from the owner. The minimum areas
in each instance shall be subject to the approval of the owner. The
operator shall make suitable arrangements and have such space
available in the leased area for safe loading and unloading and
storage and containment of chemical materials. All operators shall
demonstrate that they have the availability of aircraft suitably
§ 185-14 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-15
1:170
equipped for the particular type of operation they intend to
perform.
(2) The owner shall set the minimum insurance requirements as they
pertain to the particular type of operation to be performed. These
minimum requirements shall be applicable to all operations of a
similar nature. All operators will, however, be required to maintain
the following types of insurance set forth in § 185-5D:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive liability and comprehensive property damage,
including vehicular.
(c) Storage tank liability, corrective action and cleanup policy.
(3) The operator shall have in its employ and on duty during
appropriate business hours trained personnel in such numbers as
may be required to meet the minimum standards herein set forth in
an efficient manner.
(4) The operator shall comply with all pertinent FAR requirements.
(5) The operator shall comply with all applicable rules and regulations
governing pesticides and other chemicals used by the operator and
employ certain safeguards and safe operating practices to prevent
spillage, including:
(a) Clean up and remove all containers at the end of each day's
activities.
(b) Maintain all loading and mixing facilities.
(c) Use dry break devices or equivalent couplings to the aircraft
loading receptacle to prevent leaks of all materials.
(d) Position aircraft and loading equipment in such a manner as to
not interfere with normal aircraft operations at the airport.
(e) Remove, in the event of a small pesticide or pesticide solution
spill, the contaminated surface material from the premises and
treat the area of the spill with SuperBugs or an equivalent. In
the event of a reportable amount of spilled pesticide, the
operator will contain the material and contact those agencies
that the state Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
regulations require.
C. The operator will keep an appropriate spill kit on site in a known and
easily accessible location.
D. The operator, for all chemicals kept or stored on the airport, shall do so
in accordance with the material safety data sheet (MSDS) requirements
for that chemical. Material safety data sheets for chemicals stored on
§ 185-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-15
1:171
§ 185-16. Flying clubs.
§ 185-17. Other aviation activity clubs or associations.
the airport shall be made available to the owner and/or airport manager
upon request.
A. Flying clubs includes a noncommercial and nonprofit entity organized
for the purpose of providing its members with any number of aircraft
for their personal use and enjoyment. Such aircraft must be vested in
the name of the flying club owners on a pro rata share, and the club may
not derive greater revenue from the use of the aircraft than the cost to
operate, maintain, and replace the aircraft.
B. Minimum standards:
(1) Any lease/operating agreement between the airport and the club
will include:
(a) A current list of members.
(b) A requirement that the club aircraft would not be used for hire
unless specifically permitted by the owner and/or airport
manager.
(2) The following types of insurance are required in amounts as set
forth in § 185-5D above:
(a) Aircraft liability.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(3) Aircraft maintenance performed on flying club aircraft shall be in
accordance with FAR. The operator shall comply with all pertinent
FAR requirements.
A. Other aviation activity clubs and associations includes, but is not
limited to, skydiving, parachuting and balloon flights.
B. Minimum standards:
(1) The area in which such activities may be conducted at the airport
will be designated by the owner. This area may be changed from
time to time as the owner sees fit. No aeronautical activities may be
conducted without the advance permission of the owner.
(2) A request to the owner at least 72 hours prior to each aeronautical
activity is required.
(3) The following types of insurance may be required in amounts as set
forth in § 185-5D above:
(a) Aircraft liability.
§ 185-15 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-17
1:172
§ 185-18. Other nonaviation tenants and/or operators.
(b) Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage, including vehicular.
(4) Persons conducting such activities shall comply with all pertinent
FAR requirements.
A. The conduct of other nonaviation activity on the airport not specifically
enumerated in this chapter is covered by the following minimum
standards.
B. Minimum standards.
(1) Any person wishing to obtain the right to conduct and/or establish
such other activity shall make application to the owner. Such
applicant shall submit the following:
(a) A complete description of the type of activity proposed.
(b) A listing and description of the types of vehicles, equipment
and machinery required for conduct of the activity.
(c) Location of off-site storage facilities for machinery, equipment
or supplies.
(d) A listing of and plan for the on-site handling of any attendees,
other persons and vehicles associated with the activity.
(e) Dates and times for the proposed activity.
(2) All lease/operating agreements for such other activities shall
include, among other things, a covenant reciting:
(a) The owner's right to restrict, limit or otherwise control such
activity in any manner it sees fit to ensure safe and unimpeded
aeronautical activity at the airport;
(b) The owner's right to designate areas for the activity and to
designate the type of security required in each such area; and
(c) Such other restrictions or limitations which the owner may
deem appropriate.
(3) All lease/operating agreements for such other activities shall also
include, among other things, a covenant reciting the tenant's
obligation and the lease/operator's obligation, in addition to all
aforementioned obligations, to protect the general public,
customers or clients and the owner from any and all damages,
claims or liability, whether by the tenant, lease/operator or others,
relating to any monetary or other loss or damage in the conduct of
any such activity resulting from or alleged to have resulted from
the owner's exercise of its rights and privileges, whether
specifically enumerated above or not.
§ 185-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-18
1:173
§ 185-19. Fuel flowage and other fees.
§ 185-20. Fueling restrictions and permit process.
(4) The following types of insurance may be required in amounts as set
forth in § 185-5D above: comprehensive public liability and
comprehensive property damage, including vehicular.
(5) Such tenants and/or other operators shall comply with all pertinent
FAR requirements, where applicable.
A. Fuel flowage fee. The collection is hereby authorized of a fuel flowage
fee by the owner from any operator dispensing aviation fuel at the
airport. The fuel flowage fee shall be made to the owner at a rate and in
a method described in the lease agreement.
B. Other airport fees.
(1) The collection of other airport fees by the owner are authorized to
include, but not limited to, the following:
(a) Vehicle parking.
(b) Aircraft handling.
(c) Hangar space rental.
(2) These fees shall be established periodically by the Airport
Commission.
A. Permit required for self-fueling. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Except for an FBO, no person shall transfer fuel into an aircraft
unless the person has first obtained a self-fueling permit from the
owner and the person complies with this chapter. A self-fueling
permit authorizes the permittee to transfer fuel only into an
aircraft owned by or leased exclusively to the permittee. Except for
an FBO, no person shall transfer fuel into an aircraft not owned by
or leased exclusively to that person, nor shall any person sell fuel to
any other airport user. The airport will not recognize an
organization formed by several aircraft owners for the purpose of
self-fueling as a single aircraft owner or exclusive lessee for the
purpose of this chapter.
(2) A self-fueling permit may be issued for self-fueling with fuel that is
stored in an underground tank within the area designated. No
other method of self-fueling is allowed.
(3) An application for a self-fueling permit shall be made by supplying
the Commission such information as is prescribed by the
Commission. The information shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to:
§ 185-18 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-20
1:174
(a) A description of the aircraft to be fueled;
(b) The employees who will operate the aircraft fuel servicing
equipment and who will conduct the fueling operations;
(c) An emergency response plan;
(d) A fuel-handling personnel training program;
(e) The fuel tank system construction plans;
(f) A fuel tank system inspection and maintenance program; and
(g) Fuel transfer procedures.
(4) At a public meeting, the Commission shall review the application to
determine whether the proposed self-fueling will comply with all
applicable ordinances, permit and lease provisions and whether the
required plans, programs and procedures are satisfactory. If the
determination is favorable, the Commission shall issue the selffueling
permit to the permittee.
(5) When issued, a self-fueling permit shall be signed by the permittee
and shall set forth, among other things, the permittee's agreement
to meet appropriate insurance, indemnity and hold harmless
requirements, and responsibility for damage to the airport. The
permit shall require the permittee's consent to reasonable
amendments or additions to permit requirements as circumstances
may warrant.
(6) An applicant for a self-fueling permit shall pay a nonrefundable
application fee as set from time to time by Common Council at the
time of application. A permittee shall pay an annual self-fueling
permit fee, which shall be as set by Common Council. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
(7) In conducting self-fueling operations, a permittee shall not vary
materially from the application information unless a written
request for a variation is submitted to and approved by the
Commission. A material variation includes, but is not limited to, a
different individual for fueling than what is stated in the application
information. The Commission may allow temporary variations from
the application information while a request for a variation is
pending.
(8) A self-fueling permit is not assignable and not transferable. Unless
it is revoked as allowed by this chapter, a self-fueling permit shall
remain effective until the termination or expiration of the land
lease that is required by this chapter.
(9) The tank system may be sold to another party, who must resubmit
for application for a self-fueling permit. At no time can the existing
§ 185-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-20
1:175
system be used until the application is approved in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter.
B. Fuel tank system.
(1) A self-fueling permit for the underground tank method shall be
issued only if the applicant has executed a standard hangar land
lease with the airport, which may be an existing lease or a new
lease.
(2) At a minimum, the lease shall include, or be amended so as to
include, the following provisions:
(a) Permission to site an underground fuel tank system in
accordance with this chapter.
(b) A security deposit in the amount of $10,000 per tank, plus the
amount of the self-insured retention (deductible) in the
pollution liability and environmental impairment insurance
that the lessee will be required to provide, with interest
payable to the lessee, to be held by the airport as the result of
any activity related to self-fueling engaged in by the permittee,
including the permittee's failure to pay the fuel flowage fee
required by this chapter. If the self-insured retention exceeds
$5,000, it may be satisfied by an irrevocable letter of credit in
favor of the Reedsburg Municipal Airport in a form acceptable
to the airport.
(c) Insurance, indemnity and hold harmless requirements to
protect the airport against liability and expense, including
insurance for fuel vendors.
(d) Requirements for tank maintenance and inspection, lessee
responsibility for damage related to fuel storage and selffueling
operations, and tank removal and site restoration at the
end of the lease, upon permit expiration or revocation or upon
expiration of the manufacturer's warranty period, whichever
comes sooner. The security deposit will be returned upon
termination of the lease and restoration of the site satisfactory
to the Airport Commission.
(e) Recordkeeping, audit and inspection rights for the airport.
(f) Incorporation of the requirements of this chapter.
(3) Prior to the lease or lease amendment being executed by the
airport, it shall be reviewed and approved by the Commission and
all appropriate state and federal agencies.
C. Fueling operations.
(1) The fuel tank system for the underground tank method must meet
all of the following requirements:
§ 185-20 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-20
1:176
(a) For each fuel type, have at least one single-compartment,
double-walled, fiberglass tank with an Underwriters'
Laboratory listing marking of UL 1316 and a minimum
capacity of 2,500 gallons, and the tank shall:
[1] Have corrosive-resistant piping that is double-walled;
[2] Have an electronic monitoring system that includes
interstitial monitoring of the tank and associated piping,
automatic tank gauging as the primary leak detection
method for the tank, and central station monitoring; and
[3] Be properly closed and removed at the end of the tank
manufacturer's warranty period or at the end of the lease
term, whichever comes sooner.
(b) Have an engineered spill-containment system for the tank and
fuel-servicing station capable of capturing a fuel release in
accordance with applicable state and federal regulations.
(c) Have an appropriate fuel-metering system.
(d) Be installed pursuant to construction plans that have been
approved by the Commission and the Wisconsin Department of
Safety and Professional Services prior to the start of
construction.
(e) Be owned by the permittee.
(2) No later than 72 hours before self-fueling operations begin, the
permittee shall notify the Administrator that construction of the
fuel tank system is complete.
(3) The permittee shall operate the fuel tank system in a safe, efficient
and clean manner and shall not allow the use of any defective fuel
tank system equipment. The permittee shall perform repair and
maintenance upon the fuel tank system as required by the lease,
applicable state laws and administrative rules.
D. Fueling operations.
(1) Any vehicle that is on the airport premises for any purpose related
to self-fueling shall use only such roadways or aircraft movement
areas as are designated by the Commission.
(2) Fueling operations during which fuel is transferred between an
aircraft fueling system and an aircraft shall occur only in the area
designated for that purpose by the Commission.
(3) No individual may perform a fueling operation unless the individual
meets all of the following requirements and does execute, without
fail, the following:
§ 185-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-20
1:177
(a) Remains with the fueling apparatus at all times during the
fueling operation;
(b) Exercises extreme caution to prevent a fuel spill and, if a spill
occurs, immediately ceases fueling operations and notifies the
Manager and or any individual the Commission designates as
an appropriate contact person;
(c) Is an employee of the permittee, but this requirement does not
apply to an individual delivering fuel into a fuel storage tank;
(d) For any fueling operation that results in the transfer of fuel into
an aircraft, can demonstrate that he or she is authorized,
trained and fully qualified to operate the fuel transfer
equipment by:
[1] Having completed, or been trained by an individual who
has completed, an accepted FAA training program; and
[2] Carrying with him or her an identification card issued by
the employer which certifies his or her qualifications.
(e) Complies with all NFPA and FAA requirements regarding fuel
transfers for aircraft fuel servicing.
(4) The permittee shall keep training records for the employees who
perform fueling operations of a minimum of three years and shall
make the training records available to the Commission upon
request.
(5) Any vehicle that transfers fuel into a storage tank shall leave the
airport upon completion of the fueling operation.
E. Fuel flow fee. The permittee shall pay a fuel flowage fee as set from
time to time by the Common Council for each gallon of fuel delivered to
permittee's fuel tank system to the airport. Payment of the fees shall be
made to the owner on the first Monday of each month for the fuel that
was delivered or transferred during the previous month. Any late
payment by 30 days or more shall be subject to interest in the amount of
1.5% per month. With each payment, the permittee shall furnish the
Administrator with a statement and documentation, by the fuel
supplier, showing the number of gallons delivered or transferred for the
applicable payment period. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
F. National Fire Protection Association. The City of Reedsburg adopts and
makes a part of this chapter as though fully set forth all of the
provisions of NFPA 30, 407 and 415. If there is any conflict between any
provision of this chapter and any provision of NFPA 30, 407 or 415, the
provision that is more stringent shall apply. Any violation of NFPA 30,
407 or 415 is a violation of this chapter.
§ 185-20 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-20
1:178
G. Compliance with other laws. A permittee shall comply with all local,
state and federal laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations now or
hereafter in force and effect applicable to any activity associated with
the storage and transfer of aircraft fuel. This includes, but is not limited
to, compliance with ordinances of Sauk County and rules of
administrative agencies of the State of Wisconsin, including Ch. ATCP
93, Wis. Adm. Code, Flammable, Combustible and Hazardous Liquids. A
permittee shall also comply with all covenants of the Reedsburg
Municipal Airport and all FAA advisory circulars and orders pertaining
to the storage, handling and dispensing of aircraft fuel and all
amendments and revisions thereto. A violation of any law, code,
ordinance, rule, regulation, circular or order referred to in this section
is a violation of this chapter.
H. Inspections, records and audits.
(1) The permittee shall make at least weekly and monthly inspections
of any fuel tank system it has as recommended by FAA Advisory
Circular 150/5230-4B, Aircraft Fuel Storage, Handling and
Dispensing on Airports, and shall maintain a written record of such
inspections. The permittee shall also keep and maintain written
records of all fuel brought to the airport for self-fueling purposes
(including dates, suppliers and quantity) and of all fuel quantities
transferred into aircraft by aircraft identification numbers. The
permittee shall also maintain accurate records of fuel product
monitoring to ensure that there is no leakage from any fuel storage
tanks it has. Copies of monthly leak-detection reports generated by
an underground fuel tank monitoring system must clearly identify
the tank owner, the tank location and the tank's contents and shall
be provided to the Administrator every three months. The records
required by this subsection shall be kept for a minimum of five
years and shall be made available to the Administrator upon
request.
(2) In addition to the records required by Subsection H(1), the
permittee shall:
(a) Provide the Commission with information and records which
are requested for the purpose of determining compliance with
this chapter, including, but not limited to, records pertaining to
business organization and ownership of equipment, and
employee status; and
(b) Promptly forward to the Administrator copies of any fire or
safety inspection reports, underwriting audits or insurance
company reviews that relate to the permittee's self-fueling
operations at the airport, including its fuel tank system. The
permittee shall also allow the Administrator, or his or her
designee, to inspect the permittee's fuel tank system for the
purpose of determining compliance with this chapter.
§ 185-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-20
1:179
(3) The airport shall have the right, during reasonable hours and upon
reasonable advanced notice, to audit the permittee's records
regarding its self-fueling operations at the Reedsburg Municipal
airport.
I. Additional requirements.
(1) The permittee shall provide for the adequate handling and disposal,
away from the airport, of all trash, garbage and other refuse
generated as a result of its self-fueling operations.
(2) The permittee shall handle, use, store and dispose of fuel and all
other material, including hazardous materials, owned or used by it
at the airport in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and
local laws, codes, rules, regulations and ordinances, including rules
of the Commission.
J. Enforcement.
(1) The failure to comply with any requirement of this chapter is a
violation of this chapter. Any potential violation of this chapter may
be investigated by the Commission or the Commission's designee.
If the Commission determines that a violation has occurred, he or
she may do any of the following:
(a) If the violation jeopardizes the safety of persons or property,
order the permittee to cease self-fueling operations until the
violation is corrected and take reasonable steps to ensure
compliance with the order;
(b) Issue a written and or verbal warning; or
(c) Make a written report of the violation to the Commission.
(2) If a written report of a violation is made to the Commission, the
Commission shall, either at its monthly meeting or call a special
meeting, review all relevant information and determine whether a
violation of this chapter occurred and, if a violation occurred, what
consequences should be imposed. The determination must be by a
majority of the Commission members present.
(3) If the Commission determines that a violation of this chapter
occurred, it may impose any or all of the following consequences:
(a) Recommend legal action;
(b) Order the permittee to take certain action consistent with this
chapter, the permit or the lease, or
(c) Revoke the self-fueling permit for a time certain.
(4) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100, nor more than $5,000,
for each day of each violation, together with the costs of
§ 185-20 REEDSBURG CODE § 185-20
1:180
§ 185-21. Storage policy for private hangars on airport property.
enforcement. Each requirement of this section that is violated
constitutes a separate violation. In addition to forfeiture, the
airport may seek such other relief, legal or equitable, as is
available.
A. All hangars must be used for an aeronautical purpose. FAA considers
the following uses aeronautical:
(1) Storage of active aircraft;
(2) Shelter for maintenance, repair or refurbishment of aircraft, but
not the indefinite storage of nonoperational aircraft;
(3) Noncommercial construction of amateur-built or kit-built aircraft;
(4) Storage of aircraft handling equipment (e.g., tow bar, glider tow
equipment, workbenches, tools and materials used to service
aircraft); and
(5) Storage of materials related to an aeronautical activity (e.g.,
balloon and skydiving equipment, office equipment, teaching tools).
B. Provided the hangar is used primarily for an aeronautical purpose, an
airport may permit nonaeronautical items stored in hangars, provided
they do not interfere with the aeronautical use of the hangar.
C. While airports may develop more restrictive rules, FAA would not
consider nonaeronautical storage to interfere with the aeronautical use
of the hangar unless the items:
(1) Impede the movement of the aircraft in and out of the hangar;
(2) Displace the aeronautical contents of the hangar. A vehicle parked
at the hangar while the vehicle owner is using the aircraft will not
be considered to displace the aircraft;
(3) Impede access to other aeronautical contents of the hangar;
(4) Are used for the conduct of a nonaeronautical business or
municipal agency function from the hangar, including storage of
inventory); and
(5) Are stored in violation of airport rules and regulations, lease
provisions, building codes or local ordinances.
D. If the airport has empty hangars with no demand for nautical use, the
airport can rent hangar space for temporary nonaeronautical storage,
provided:
(1) Nonaeronautical storage is preapproved by FAA;
(2) A fair market value commercial rental rate is charged; and
§ 185-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-21
1:181
§ 185-22. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 192
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 192-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business in which the owners or employees
engage in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing,
replacing, selling, or servicing alarm systems.
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices or single device
such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into 110-volt AC line or
otherwise receives electrical energy arranged to signal the presence of
a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the Police and Fire
Departments are expected to respond. In this section, the term "alarm
(3) The hangar reverts to aeronautical use as soon as there is demand.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as
follows:
(1) First offense penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $5
nor more than $500, together with the costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall
be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are
paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Second offense penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any
ordinance or part of an ordinance of this chapter who shall
previously have been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance
within one year shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000 for each such offense, together with
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such forfeiture
and costs, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until such
forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding six
months.
B. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the
owner from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a
violation of any provision of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Reedsburg Police
Department, City Building Inspector, City Public Works Director and/or
the City Airport Commission, depending on the provision violated.
§ 185-21 REEDSBURG CODE § 192-1
1:182
system" shall include the terms "automatic holdup alarm systems," "burglar
alarm systems" and "manual holdup alarm systems," as those terms are
hereinafter defined, and fire alarm systems which monitor temperature,
humidity or any other condition directly related to the detection of fire.
Excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this section are
alarm systems used to alert or signal persons within the premises in which
the alarm system is located of an attempted, unauthorized intrusion or
holdup attempt or fire.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
ANNUNCIATOR — The instrumentation of an alarm console at the receiving
terminal of a signal line through which both visual and audible location has
been activated or which, in the event of malfunction, may also indicate line
trouble.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A telephone answering service providing among
its services the service of receiving, on a continuous basis through trained
employees, emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter
immediately relaying the message by live voice to the dispatch center of the
Police and Fire Department.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — An alarm system which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
AUTOMATIC HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system in which the
signal transmission is initiated by the action of the robber.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system which signals an entry or
attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
CENTRAL STATION — An office to which remote alarm and supervisory
signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits.
DIRECT CONNECT — An alarm system which has the capability of
transmitting system signals to the Police and Fire Department.
FALSE ALARMS — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of owner or
lessee of an alarm system or his employees or agents or other undetermined
cause. False alarm does not include alarms caused by tornadoes or other
violent climatic conditions.
INTERCONNECT — To connect an alarm system to a voice-grade telephone
line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard
telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an
emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system.
MANUAL HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system in which the signal
transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an
observer thereof.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading directly into the
dispatch center of the Police and Fire Department that is for the purpose
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-1
1:183
of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis and which is
identified as such by a specific number included among the emergency
numbers listed in the telephone directory or numbers in sequence
therewith.
SUBSCRIBER — A person who buys or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm
system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor
and/or service the alarm system.
§ 192-2. Administrative rules.
The Chief of Police may promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the
implementation of this chapter. Any such rules shall require the approval of
the Common Council.
§ 192-3. Automatic dialing devices.
No person shall interconnect any automatic dialing device to a Police or
Fire Department primary trunk line. No person shall permit such devices
which were installed prior to the effective date of this chapter to remain
interconnected from any property owned or controlled by that person. Such
devices may be connected to a central station or an answering service.
Relaying messages so received by the Police or Fire Department shall only
be done person-to-person on the telephone line.
§ 192-4. Direct connections to Police Department. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Direct connections to the Police or Fire Department are prohibited, but
may be authorized pursuant to the direct connection policies of each
department. If a direct connection is permitted, an annual connection
charge as set from time to time by the Common Council shall be imposed.
§ 192-5. Testing.
A. No alarm business or alarm system designed to transmit emergency
messages to the Police Department shall be tested or demonstrated
without prior notification and approval of the Police Department
dispatcher. Alarm businesses or alarm system owners or lessors will be
advised on proper test procedure.
B. No alarm system relayed through intermediate services to the Police
Department may be tested to determine the Police Department's
response without first notifying the appropriate authority. However, the
Police Department may inspect or test on-site alarm systems authorized
under this chapter.
C. Alarm systems shall be in compliance with all pertinent response
policies of the Police Department.
§ 192-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 192-6
1:184
§ 192-6. Notification.
When the service provided by an alarm business to its subscribers is
disrupted for any reason by the alarm business or the alarm business
becomes aware of such disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscribers
by telephone that protection is no longer being provided. If, however, the
alarm business has written instructions from its subscriber not to make
such notification by telephone during certain hours, the alarm business may
comply with such instructions.
§ 192-7. Fee for answering alarms.
A. Generally. Each false alarm requires response of public safety
personnel, involves unnecessary expense to the City, increases the risk
of injury to persons or damage to property and dilutes the overall public
safety protection to the City. Such false alarms constitute a public
nuisance and must be abated.
B. Intentional. No person shall intentionally cause the activation of a
burglar/fire alarm device knowing that no criminal activity, fire or other
emergency exists.
C. False alarms; administrative charges.
(1) Any person, business, corporation or other entity having a
permissible alarm system with alarm devices at one or more
locations in accordance with the Chapter shall pay to the City a
charge for false alarms responded to by the Police or Fire
Department in a calendar year, as set from time to time by the
Common Council. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) This subsection is intended to impose a strict liability on the
person, business, corporation or other entity responsible for alarm
connection to either the police alarm panel or to the alarm
receiving firm to which the Police and Fire Department have
responded and shall be applied regardless to the cause of the false
alarm, excepting those alarms excluded from the definition of "false
alarm." Failure to pay such administrative charges shall be
collectible as a forfeiture upon prosecution and conviction thereof,
together with an additional forfeitures which may be imposed
under Subsection E hereof for violation of this section for allowing
or maintaining conditions or acts violative to the intent of this
section of eliminating and minimizing the occurrence of false
alarms, together with costs of prosecution.
D. Waiver of fee. If a possessor of the alarm shows to the satisfaction of the
Chief of Police or the Fire Chief, as applicable, that such false alarm was
not the result of negligence or improper maintenance, or other good
and sufficient cause beyond the reasonable control of the possessor of
§ 192-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-7
1:185
§ 192-8. City liability.
The City of Reedsburg shall be under no duty or obligation to a subscriber
or to any other person concerning any provision of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, any defects in an alarm system or any delays in
transmission or response to any alarm; however, this in no way shall be
construed that it is not the proper function of law enforcement to respond
to alarms.
Chapter 199
AMUSEMENTS
the alarm, such fee may be waived and the response shall not count as
a false alarm in computing the fee established under Subsection C.
E. Other violations. Any person, corporation or other entity violating this
section in any manner, other than for collection of unpaid
administrative charges treated in the preceding Subsection C of this
section, shall be fined not less than $50 and not more than $500 for
each separate violation. Every day a violation continues shall constitute
a separate violation. When any premises located in the City is owned,
leased or occupied by two or more persons as joint tenants, tenants in
common, joint lessees, or in any other manner, each person shall see
that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and each person
may be subjected to a penalty on violation of this section.
F. Default of payment for forfeiture and/or costs. On default of payment of
forfeiture and/or costs under the immediately preceding Subsection C
and/or E, such person or responsible officer of the violating corporation
or other entity shall be confined in the County Jail until the same be
paid but not to exceed a length of time specified by the court which
length of time shall not exceed six months. Upon nonpayment of fee, the
amount due may be placed on the tax roll as a special charge pursuant
to § 66.0703, Wis. Stats.
§ 192-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 192-8
1:186
ARTICLE I
Dances and Dance Halls
[Adopted as Sec. 12.04 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 199-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PRIVATE DANCE — Any dance given at any home and not held for profit,
or any dance given by permanently organized clubs, fraternal orders or
societies, where the attendance is limited to the members of the society,
club or order and the guests of the members of said societies, clubs, or
orders admitted by invitation only when no fee or other payment of any kind
is made by guests, or any dance given by school association in a school
building or by any person conducting a class of dancing or dancing school.
PUBLIC DANCE — Any dance or ball to which admission may be had by
the public generally without restriction upon the payment of a fee, or by
the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token obtained for
money or in which a charge is made for the caring of clothing or other
property.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL — Any room, place or space in which a public dance
is intended to be held.
§ 199-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful to hold any public dance in any public dance hall until
the public dance hall in which the same may be given or held shall first have
been duly licensed for such purposes. No person shall permit any room or
building owned or controlled by him to be used for the purpose of a public
dance hall unless the same shall be licensed as herein provided.
§ 199-3. License application.
A. Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file
with the City Clerk-Treasurer a written application upon a blank form
furnished by the City. Such application shall contain the name or names
of the applicant or applicants, his or their address, the premises on
which the applicant proposes to conduct public dances, the name of the
owner of the premises, and a statement of whether or not the applicant
has ever been convicted of violating any ordinance regulating the
conduct of public dances and public dance halls.
B. Such application shall be accompanied by a bond executed to the City
Clerk-Treasurer in the penal sum of $500 and be signed by two
sufficient sureties to be approved by the Common Council, which bond
shall be conditioned for the faithful observance of the provisions of this
section for the prompt payment of any fines that may be imposed
hereunder and for the payment of such inspection fees as shall be
charged against such license issued pursuant hereto.
§ 199-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-3
1:187
§ 199-4. Property conditions.
All public dance halls and facilities appertaining thereto shall be kept at
all times in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition, and all stairways and
other passages and all rooms connected with a public dance hall shall be
kept open and well-lighted during public use. Proper ventilation must be
maintained at all times. Suitable toilet facilities shall be maintained with
separate toilets for each sex.
§ 199-5. Revocation of license. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The license of any dance hall shall be revoked by the Council upon a
sufficient showing of a violation of any provision of this article or any
other law or ordinance applicable to public dances or public dance halls. A
violation as set forth hereinbefore by any person conducting a public dance,
whether the holder of the license for said hall or some other person, shall
be sufficient for revocation hereunder, provided no license shall be revoked
except upon five days' notice of hearing and after the holder of said license
shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Whenever a license is revoked, no
new license shall be issued for the premises covered by said revoked license
or to the holder thereof for a period of one year from the date of revocation.
§ 199-6. Prohibited acts.
No person conducting a public dance, his agent or manager, or the holder
of a public dance license shall:
C. The annual license fee shall be as set from time to time by Common
Council, which fee shall accompany the application. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. Upon compliance with the foregoing provisions, a license shall be
issued, which license shall be signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk-
Treasurer. Each license granted hereunder shall expire on January 1 on
each year. A copy of this article shall be furnished with each license.
Each license shall state plainly the date of issuance and expiration, the
name of the licensee and the location of the public dance hall licensed.
Each license shall be prominently displayed on the premises licensed.
A. Permit any minor under 15 at a public dance unless accompanied by a
parent or natural guardian.
B. Permit any intoxicated person in or about the dance hall or adjoining
stairs or premises.
C. Permit the sale, transportation or consumption of any kind of
intoxicating liquor or beverages in or about a public dance hall.
D. Permit any loud, obscene or boisterous conduct in or about a public
dance hall.
§ 199-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 199-6
1:188
ARTICLE II
Shows and Exhibitions
[Adopted as Sec. 12.05 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 199-7. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SHOW AND AMUSEMENTS — Includes any exhibition within the City of
animals, wax or other figures, feats or circus riding, rope or wire dancing,
sleight-of-hand performance or any circus, carnival, shooting gallery,
carousel, roller-skating rinks, or any other exhibition or the carrying on or
operation within the City of any such show, exhibition or business.
§ 199-8. Theaters exempt.
This article shall not require a license for permanent theater
establishments.
§ 199-9. Licenses required.
No person shall operate within the City any show or amusement without
first having obtained a license from the City for that purpose and without
having paid the necessary fee as hereinafter provided and prescribed.
§ 199-10. Application.
Any person desiring to transfer the business as aforesaid shall obtain a
license application form from the City Clerk-Treasurer. He shall fill out this
application form stating the nature and place or places where his business
is to be carried on, the length of time for which license is desired, a
general description of the things intended to be exhibited, the name and
permanent address of the applicant of the firm, person or corporation which
he represents and the place or places of residence of the applicant of the
firm, person or corporation which he represents and the place or places
of residence of the applicant for two years previous. Such application shall
be accompanied by the fee hereinafter required, and no license shall be
granted until the provisions of this section have been complied with.
§ 199-11. Issuance of license.
Upon approval of the license committee and the payment of the required
license fee, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a license for the time
specified in the application.
§ 199-12. Fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
The fee for any such license shall be as set from time to time by Common
Council for the following:
§ 199-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-12
1:189
§ 199-13. Revocation.
The Mayor or Chief of Police may at any time revoke any license for a
violation of this article or any ordinance of the City or any law of the state
or of the United States. When a license shall be revoked, no refund of any
unearned portion of the license fee shall be made. Notice of such revocation
and the reason or reasons therefor, in writing, shall be served personally
upon the person named in the application or upon the person actively in
charge of said show, exhibition or business.
A. For all circus or animal shows or any combination thereof having one
ring, for each additional ring, and for each side show or other stand or
concession traveling therewith.
B. For all merry-go-rounds on revolving wheels carrying passengers and
for all slides, swings, bird shows, lifting machines, blowing and striking
machines, lunch counters, and refreshment stands and other similar
exhibitions and devices for each stand or show.
C. For any show or entertainment given in a tent depending on the seating
capacity.
D. For any roller-skating rink.
§ 199-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 199-13
1:190
ARTICLE III
Amusement Game Devices
[Adopted as Sec. 12.06 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 199-14. License required.
No person shall maintain or operate any pinball machines, shuffleboards,
music boxes, or any other form of game run for profit in the City unless the
owner or the party having such game, machine or amusement in custody
shall have obtained a license to operate the same from the City.
§ 199-15. Display of license.
Upon the issuance of any such license to any person, there shall be
prominently displayed at such game, machine or amusement or attached to
said machine, game or amusement the license so issued, so that it may be
open to inspection at any time.
§ 199-16. Fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
For each such game, machine or amusement, there shall be paid to the City
Clerk-Treasurer a license fee as set by Common Council for any part of a
year and all such licenses shall expire on June 30 after being issued.
§ 199-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-16
1:191

ARTICLE IV
Miniature Golf
[Adopted as Sec. 12.07 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 199-17. License required.
No person shall operate any miniature golf grounds, Tom Thumb Golf
Grounds, Peter Pan Golf Grounds or any other like or similar place or
amusement within the City without first having obtained a license therefor
as hereinafter provided.
§ 199-18. Application, hearing, fee.
Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk-Treasurer and
shall be accompanied by the license fee of $25, and said application shall be
thereafter acted upon by the Council, who may grant or refuse such license
in its discretion, after a two-week notice has been given by publication in
a newspaper published in the City for the public hearing, such notice to
specify therein the purpose of such hearing and at which time the place
of such hearing is to be held and at which hearing all persons residing in
said City and desiring so to do may be heard. All licenses issued after such
hearing shall expire on December 31 following the granting thereof, and all
such licenses may be revoked by the Council on five days' notice, for cause.
§ 199-19. Hours of operation.
No licensee shall keep open his place of business between 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. All licensees shall conduct their places of business in an orderly
and quiet manner, and no licensee shall be permitted to keep his place of
business illuminated more than 30 minutes after the closing down herein
provided.
§ 199-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-19
1:193

ARTICLE V
Pool and Billiard Halls
[Adopted as Sec. 12.09 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 199-20. License required.
No person shall keep a billiard table, pool table, pigeon hole table or
bowling alley within the City without having obtained a license therefor.
§ 199-21. Fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
The sum to be paid for such license shall be as set from time to time by
the Common Council per year per each billiard table, pool table, pigeonhole
table or bowling alley, wherever kept.
§ 199-22. Minors restricted. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Notices shall be conspicuously posted in every such saloon, billiard hall,
and bowling alley as follows: "Minors are not permitted to play here unless
accompanied by parent or guardian."
§ 199-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-22
1:195
Chapter 210
ANIMALS
§ 199-22 REEDSBURG CODE § 199-22
1:196
ARTICLE I
Protection, Licensing and Control
[Adopted as Secs. 29.01 to 29.22 and 29.24 of the former Municipal
Codebook]
§ 210-1. Adoption of standards.
The provisions of Chs. 95 (Animal health), 174 (Dogs) and 951 (Crimes
against animals), Wis. Stats., exclusive of any penalties, are adopted by
reference and are made part of this chapter, so far as applicable. This
article meets the criteria of adoption for participation in the rabies control
program as approved by the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade
and Consumer Protection.
§ 210-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms mean:
ANIMAL — Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
ANIMAL AT LARGE — An animal shall be deemed to be at large when off
the property of the owner and not under restraint or control.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person designated by government
agency to enforce the ordinances of the municipality and state statutes,
adopted by reference, as they pertain to animal control.
ANIMAL SHELTER/CITY POUND — Any facility operated by a humane
society, or municipal agency, or its authorized agents, for the purpose of
impounding, caring for, animals held under the authority of this article or
state law.
COMPANION DOG — A dog trained or being trained for assisting a disabled
person.
CONFINED — Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his
agent, to an escape-proof building, vehicle or other enclosure.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal that normally can be considered tame
and converted to home life, such as cats and dogs.
EXOTIC DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any wild animal which is not native to
Wisconsin and may have been domesticated, such as ferrets and primates.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Municipal Health Officer or a duly designated
representative.
KENNEL, PET SHOPS AND GROOMING ESTABLISHMENTS — Any
premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding,
breeding, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling of domestic animals
or who engages in sale of birds, snakes, hamsters, rabbits or other pets or
who engages in the business of grooming of domestic animals. "Grooming
establishment" does not apply to a veterinarian clinic or hospital where
grooming is incidental to the care provided.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:197
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The licensing authority shall be the Municipal
Clerk or its delegated agent.
OWNER — Any person who owns, harbors or keeps an animal. Where an
animal is kept by a family, the head of the household shall be responsible for
the requirements of this article. Any animal shall be deemed to be harbored
if it is fed and/or sheltered by a person.
PUBLIC NUISANCES — Any animal or animals which:
RENDER STERILE — A surgical procedure that has been performed on
an animal that renders it incapable of siring or bearing offspring. Includes
neutering and spaying.
RESTRAINT — Any animal secured by a leash, lead, or under the control of
a responsible person and obedient to that person's command, or within the
real property limits of its owner.
TRAINED INDIVIDUAL — Has the meaning as defined in Ch. ATCP 13, Wis.
Adm. Code.
VETERINARIAN — Has the meaning as defined in Ch. ATCP 15, Wis. Adm.
Code.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL (CLINIC) — Any establishment maintained and
operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of
disease and injuries of animals.
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal that, when unprovoked, inflicts bites,
injures, kills, or attacks a human being or domestic animal on either public
or private property.
A. Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
Attacks persons or animals without provocation when they were
peacefully conducting themselves, where they were lawfully entitled to
be;
B.
C. Trespasses on school grounds, parks or cemeteries;
D. Is repeatedly at large;
E. Damages private or public property;
F. Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion.
Exceptions. Notwithstanding the definition of a vicious animal above:
No animal may be declared vicious if death, injury or damage
is sustained by a person who, at the time such was sustained,
was committing a trespass of the land or criminal trespass of
the dwelling upon premises occupied by the owner of animal,
or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or
was committing or attempting to commit a crime or violating or
attempting to violate an ordinance which protects person or
property.
(1)
A.
§ 210-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 210-2
1:198
WILD ANIMAL — Any live monkey or other nonhuman primate, raccoon,
skunk, fox, wolf, bear, coyote, poisonous snake or any snake exceeding three
feet in length, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other warm-blooded
animal, which can normally be found in the wild state.
§ 210-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of this community by:
§ 210-4. Duties of Chief of Police and police officers.
No animal may be declared vicious if death, injury or damage
was sustained by a domestic animal that, at the time such was
sustained, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the
animal.
(2)
No animal may be declared vicious if the animal was protecting
or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the
animal from an unjustified attack or assault.
(3)
No animal may be declared vicious for acts committed by said
animal while being utilized by a law enforcement agency for law
enforcement purposes while under the control and direction of a
law enforcement officer.
(4)
A. Regulating and controlling the number of animals per residence;
B. Requiring the removal of animal defecation from public property;
C. Requiring dogs and other animals to be cared for in such a manner that
they will not become a public nuisance;
D. To designate the responsibilities of the Chief of Police, police officers,
and Health Officer in achieving these purposes; and
E. To ensure licensure and rabies vaccination of all owned dogs and cats in
the community.
A. The Chief of Police (and thereby the Police Department) shall serve as
the Department of Animal Control.
B. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to employ and discharge an
animal control officer. The Chief shall be in charge of procedures for the
transferring of animals to an animal shelter.
C. The Reedsburg Police Department shall make a reasonable effort to
ascertain the ownership of all impounded animals and, if ascertained,
shall notify said owner of the fact of the impounding of such animal.
D. The Chief of Police shall direct all police officers to:
(1) Capture all domesticated animals running at large (or which are
reported to be at large), which are in violation of the provisions of
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:199
§ 210-5. Licensing and rabies vaccination required.
this article, and to impound the same in an approved animal shelter
facility.
(2) Capture and legally dispose of all other animal nuisances in the
City of Reedsburg.
E. Issue/order quarantines on animals when deemed necessary for public
health reasons.
A. Dog and cat license:
(1) Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any
dog or cat over five months of age within the City of Reedsburg
shall obtain a license as herein provided except that this
requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or cat
within the municipality for not longer than 30 days.
(2) Written application for licenses shall be made to the licensing
authority, which shall include the name and address of the
applicant, a description of the animal, the appropriate fee and
rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian. Only a licensed
veterinarian may administer a rabies vaccination and sign a rabies
certificate.
(3) If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs and cats shall be
valid for a period of one year.
(4) Licensing fees shall not be required for companion or
governmental police dogs. Every person owning such a dog shall
receive, annually, a free dog license upon application. However, all
other requirements are applicable.
(5) Upon acceptance of the license application, fee and rabies
certification, the licensing authority shall issue a durable tag
stamped with an identifying number and the year of issuance. Tags
should be designed so that they may be conveniently fastened or
riveted to the animal's collar or harness.
(6) Dogs and cats must wear license and rabies vaccination tags at all
times when off the premises of the owner. Exceptions shall be for
dogs during competition.
(7) The licensing authority shall maintain a record of the identifying
numbers of all tags and shall make this record available to the
public.
(8) The license year commences on January 1 and ends on the
following December 31. Applications for license may be made 30
days prior to the license year. Persons applying for a license during
the licensing year shall be required to pay 50% of the fee stipulated
§ 210-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 210-5
1:200
in this section if the animal becomes five months of age after July 1
of the licensing year.
(9) The licensing authority, or agent, shall assess and collect a late fee
as set from time to time by Common Council if the owner fails to
obtain a license prior to April 1 of each year, or within 30 days of
acquiring ownership of a licensable animal, or if the owner failed to
obtain a license on, or before, the animal reached licensable age.
[Amended 4-27-2009; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(10) A cat or dog license shall be issued after showing evidence of
rabies vaccination and payment of the applicable fee. The Common
Council shall establish cat license fees and dog license fees in
accordance with § 174.05, Wis. Stats. Evidence of neutering,
spaying or other method of rendering the animal sterile, from a
licensed veterinarian, will be required. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(11) A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a
replacement fee as set from time to time by Common Council.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(12)No person may use any license for any animal other than the
animal for which it was issued.
(13)Kennel operators are not required to license individual animals.
B. Rabies vaccination required.
(1) The owner of a dog or cat shall have the animal vaccinated by a
licensed veterinarian within 30 days after the animal reaches four
months of age. An owner who imports an animal into the City of
Reedsburg that has reached five months of age must have the
animal vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies
vaccination from this state or another state. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) The owner of an animal shall have the animal revaccinated:
(a) Before the date that the immunization expires as stated on the
certificate;
(b) If no date is specified, within three years after the previous
vaccination.
(3) If any animal for which the owner holds a current rabies certificate
is involved in a bite or scratch incident, the owner shall isolate and
confine the animal under supervision of a licensed veterinarian for
at least 10 days from the date of the incident. Supervision of a
veterinarian includes, at a minimum, examination of the animal on
the first day of isolation, on the last day of isolation and one
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:201
§ 210-6. Penalties for violation of licensing and/or vaccination.
Whoever violates §§ 210-1 through 210-5 above shall forfeit not less than
$25 nor more than $100, together with costs, for each violation.
§ 210-7. Permits.
intervening day. If the observation period is not extended and if
the veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat had not exhibited any
signs of rabies, the animal may be released from quarantine at the
end of the observation period.
(4) Any animal involved in a bite or scratch incident that has not been
vaccinated, or has not been revaccinated within the prescribed
times, must be confined at a place designated by the animal control
officer or Police Department.
(5) The owner of any animal involved in a bite or scratch incident is
responsible for any expenses incurred for the veterinarian's
examination and quarantining of the animal.
(6) Failure of the owner to deliver an animal to a veterinarian or place
of quarantine as directed within 24 hours shall be grounds for a
Judge to issue an order authorizing the animal control officer or
Police Department to seize said animal and make such delivery as
intended at the owner's expense.
A. Pet shops. Permit required.
(1) No person may operate a pet shop unless he or she holds a valid
permit issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The fee for such permit
shall be as set from time to time by the Common Council. (A kennel
license shall also be obtained if dogs and/or cats are sold.)
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) Operation. Pet shops shall be operated in accordance with all
federal, state and City requirements for pet shops. Shops in
violation of requirements shall be given no more than 30 days to
comply with the written orders of the Health Officer or similarly
authorized state or federal official.
(3) Immunization. No pet shops may sell or offer for sale any dog or cat
five or more months old unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated
against rabies by use of a vaccine currently licensed by the United
States Department of Agriculture. The vaccine shall be
administered by a licensed veterinarian. A certificate of vaccination
identifying the dog or cat, including its approximate age and date
of vaccination, and signed by the vaccinating Veterinarian shall be
given the purchaser at the time of sale.
§ 210-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 210-7
1:202
(4) Record of sale. Every pet shop shall keep a record of every dog and
cat sold by its establishment, setting forth the date and source of
acquisition, date of rabies vaccination, the date of sale, and the
name and address of the purchaser. Such records shall be
maintained on the pet shop premises for at least one year following
the date of sale of each dog and cat, and such records shall be open
to inspection by the animal control officer or Police Department at
all times during which the pet shop is open to the public.
(5) Sale of bats, foxes, raccoons, and skunks prohibited. No pet shop
may engage in the purchase, keeping, distribution, or sale of any
species of bats, foxes, raccoons, or skunks.
B. Kennels. Permit required.
(1) No person shall operate a kennel unless he or she has a permit
issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The fee for such permit shall be
as set from time to time by the Common Council. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
(2) The kennel shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition,
devoid of all rodents, vermin, and objectionable odors.
(3) The interior walls, ceiling, floors, partitions, and appurtenances of
all such structures shall be whitewashed or painted annually or as
the animal control officer or Police Department shall direct.
(4) The kennel is not a health hazard or nuisance.
(5) The kennel complies with all applicable zoning laws.
(6) The kennel shall not be a hazard to the public safety or general
welfare.
(7) Owners of kennels shall have every animal (only dogs, cats, and
ferrets can be vaccinated for rabies) over five months of age
vaccinated for rabies and shall comply with § 210-7A(2) and (3).
C. Grooming establishment. Permit required.
(1) No person may operate a grooming establishment without a valid
permit issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The fee for such permit
shall be as set from time to time by the Common Council.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) The animal-grooming establishment shall be operated in
accordance with the following:
(a) The floor of any room in which grooming operations are
conducted or in which animals are kept shall be covered with
§ 210-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-7
1:203
§ 210-8. License and permit issuance and revocation.
an impervious, smooth, washable surface. The floors shall be
cleaned and disinfected daily.
(b) All animal hair and manure shall be removed from the floors
daily and shall be stored in tightly covered, waterproof
containers in such a manner as to prevent a nuisance until final
disposal.
(c) In each grooming establishment that uses a bathtub, such
bathtub shall be large enough to accommodate the largest
animal groomed. Such tub shall be of approved material and
shall be properly connected to an approved water system
consisting of hot and cold running water and to an approved
sewer or waste disposal system.
(d) No animals shall be kept in any grooming establishment other
than during regular office hours unless a valid kennel or pet
shop permit is also issued for the same location. Nothing in this
section shall apply to an establishment where grooming is
incidental to the operation of a veterinary hospital.
(e) The premises shall be kept free of insect and rodent
infestation.
(f) The premises shall be maintained and operated in a nuisancefree
manner.
D. Posting of permit. Every kennel, pet shop, or grooming establishment
permit issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer shall be posted in a
conspicuous place open to the public.
E. Restricted species. No person shall keep, sell, or offer for sale any
exotic domesticated or wild animals and construct or use shelters
therefor within the City of Reedsburg without the written permit of the
City.
(1) This provision may not apply to the keeping of small caged birds,
small caged animals, reptiles or aquatic and amphibian animals
solely as pets.
(2) No permit shall be required for any veterinary hospital (clinic),
animal shelter or government-operated zoological park.
A. The City Clerk-Treasurer may revoke any dog or cat license, after a
hearing by the Ordinance Committee, if the person holding the license
refuses or fails to comply with this article.
B. Any person whose license or permit is revoked shall, within 10 days
thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored,
and no part of the license or permit fee shall be refunded. For any
§ 210-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 210-8
1:204
§ 210-9. Animals at large.
animal, a receipt from an animal shelter, veterinarian or other
individual must be obtained as proof of proper disposal.
C. It shall be a condition of the issuance of any license or permit to any
kennel, grooming establishment or pet shop that the Police Department
shall, with reasonable cause, be permitted to inspect all animals and the
premises where the animals are kept during normal business hours and
shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, obtain an inspection
warrant to perform such inspection.
D. If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the
application, the licensing authority may refuse to issue a license or
permit.
E. No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals within 20 years
of conviction shall be issued an animal license or permit or granted a
license to operate a kennel, pet shop or grooming establishment.
A. Animals are not permitted to be at large in the City of Reedsburg at any
time. Animals are at large when the animal is in any public street, alley,
park, or other public grounds or when off of the premises of the owner
or person who has custody of said animal and not restrained by a leash,
animal transport cage, or similar device, the only exception being if,
within one hour after an animal escapes from either the owner or the
person having custody of the animal, the owner or custodian of the
animal reports the escape of the said animal to the Police Department.
[Amended 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1875-18]
B. All owners shall exercise proper care and control of their animals to
prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
C. Every female dog and cat in heat shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot
come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding.
D. Any animal declared "vicious" shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) While on the owner's or caretaker's property, a vicious animal,
must be:
(a) Securely confined indoors; or
(b) In a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to
prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent
the animal from escaping. The pen or structure must be
constructed with chain link fencing for all four sides and top. If
the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the
sides must be imbedded in the ground no less than two feet, or
have a concrete pad for the bottom; or
§ 210-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-9
1:205
§ 210-10. Penalties for animals at large.
(c) Securely leashed or chained to an immovable object with the
owner or caretaker being present.
(2) While off the owner's or caretaker's premises, the vicious animal
must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not
exceeding four feet in length and under the control of a responsible
person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause
injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, but
must prevent it from biting any person or animal.
(3) All owners or caretakers of vicious animals shall display, in
prominent places on their premises, near all entrances to the
premises, signs in letters of not less than two inches high using the
words WARNING — VICIOUS ANIMAL. A similar sign is required to
be posted on the kennel or pen of the animal.
(4) No person may sell or transfer possession of a vicious animal to
another person without first notifying the person to whom the
vicious animal is being sold or transferred of the fact that such is a
vicious animal.
(5) The animal control officer or Police Department employee, after
conducting an investigation in the circumstances surrounding an
unprovoked animal attack, is hereby empowered to declare the
animal in question vicious. The owner of the animal declared
vicious shall be served personally or by certified mail, with return
receipt, an order declaring the animal vicious. Any animal owner
aggrieved by said order may petition the Ordinance Committee for
a review of the order in accordance with the procedure set forth
herein. Upon receipt of the petition of the aggrieved owner, the
Ordinance Committee shall schedule and conduct a hearing. The
hearing shall be conducted in conformance with Ch. 227, Wis.
Stats. After the hearing, the owner or keeper of the animal shall be
notified in writing of the determination. If the owner or keeper of
the animal contests the determination, he or she may, within 30
days, seek review of the decision by the Circuit Court. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
(6) In the event the animal control officer or Police Department
employee has probable cause to believe that an animal has caused
serious injury to a person or persons by an attack without
provocation, the officer may proceed under § 174.01(1), Wis. Stats.
A. Any person who permits any animal to run at large in the City of
Reedsburg in violation of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not less than $15, nor more than $25, together with costs, for the
first offense. For each subsequent offense, the owner shall be assessed
the amount of the preceding fine, plus an additional $10, the maximum
§ 210-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 210-10
1:206
§ 210-11. Prohibition against animals in public grounds and
facilities.
§ 210-12. Reporting of animal bite incidents.
All bite incidents occurring in the City of Reedsburg, in which any animal
(including family pets) bites a person, or is suspected of biting a person,
shall be reported within 24 hours by the attending physician or the victim
or victim's guardian (if medical assistance was not sought) to the Police
Department or animal control officer.
§ 210-13. Impoundment, quarantine and violation notices.
fine being $100, together with the costs of prosecution. [Amended
7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1875-18]
B. Any person who shall permit any animal to run at large in the City of
Reedsburg in violation of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not less than $30, nor more than $50, together with costs, for the
second offense. For each subsequent offense, the owner shall be
assessed the amount of the preceding fine, plus an additional $20, the
maximum fine being $200, together with the costs of prosecution.
[Amended 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1875-18; at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Reedsburg Police Department personnel are authorized to catch and
impound animals at large, with such authorization to include the
pursuit of animals upon non-animal-owner private property. It shall be a
violation of this article to interfere with the animal control officer or the
Police Department employee in the performance of their duties.
A. An owner or person having control of any dog or any other animal shall
not permit said dog or other animal to enter into or be upon any public
park (except Popple Nature Area, Smith Conservancy, or the Dog Park,
if issued a permit), school grounds, public building, or other public
grounds, even if said animal is leashed and within the immediate
control of the owner or custodian of the animal. An exception shall be
given for companion dogs, governmental police dogs, and authorized
students and visitors. [Amended 3-25-2013]
B. Animals of any kind in any number may be kept for exhibition or
amusement purposes, provided permission is granted by the Common
Council upon application duly made. The Common Council shall grant
such permission for such period of time as it deems necessary. All rules
as to sanitation found in § 210-7C shall govern the maintenance of the
premises or building where such animals are kept.9
9. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 29.12, which immediately followed this subsection, of the
former Municipal Codebook was repealed 3-25-2013.
§ 210-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-13
1:207
§ 210-14. Animals creating nuisance.
§ 210-15. Animal care.
A. Unrestrained and nuisance animals shall be taken by Police Department
or animal control officer and impounded in a temporary or permanent
animal shelter and confined in a humane manner.
B. When an animal is causing a public nuisance and its owner cannot be
contacted at the time of the complaint, it may be impounded by the
Police Department or animal control officer after an attempt to contact
the owner is unsuccessful. After impoundment, reasonable attempts
shall be made to contact the owner.
C. Any Police Department employee or animal control officer who has
reasonable cause to believe an animal has bitten a person or another
animal shall issue a quarantine. A quarantine may be delivered by
personal service, registered mail or by posting a quarantine sign in two
conspicuous places on the property. Any animal owner aggravated by
such quarantine may within 30 days petition the Common Council for a
hearing. The Council will then conduct a hearing to determine if the
quarantine shall remain in effect or be withdrawn. The quarantine
remains in effect until after the hearing unless properly rescinded.
A. No person shall own, keep, have in his possession, or harbor any animal
that, by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise,
shall cause serious annoyance or disturbances to any individual or to
the neighborhood.
B. No person shall own, keep, have in his possession, or harbor any animal
that causes property damage outside of the owner or keeper's own
property or causes severe damage to wildlife.
C. Upon the receipt of a complaint, the Police Department may investigate
and, where appropriate, shall issue a formal warning to the owner of
the animal which is the subject of the complaint requiring that the
animal be confined in such a manner as to have the animal cease the
actions which are violating this article.
A. No owner shall fail to provide his or her animal(s) with sufficient good
and wholesome food and potable water, proper shelter and protection
from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering,
and with humane care and treatment.
B. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork, or
otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight,
cockfight, or other combat between animals, or between animals and
humans.
C. No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
§ 210-13 REEDSBURG CODE § 210-15
1:208
§ 210-16. Removal of animal defecation from public and private
properties.
§ 210-17. Penalties for failure to remove animal defecation.
Any person who violates § 210-16 shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not
less than $15 nor more than $25, together with costs, for the first offense.
For each subsequent offense, the owner will be assessed the amount of
the preceding fine, plus an additional $10, the maximum fine being $100,
together with the costs of prosecution. If the violation continues, each day's
violation shall be deemed a separate violation.
D. No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a
prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other
competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or
offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business
agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
E. Chickens or ducklings or other fowl younger than eight weeks of age
may not be given away, bartered, or sold in quantities of less than six to
a single purchaser.
F. Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal shall stop at once and shall attempt to report such injury or
death to the animal's owner or the Police Department if the owner
cannot be found.
G. No person shall expose any poisonous substances, whether mixed with
food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal,
provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose, on his own
property, poisons designed for the purpose of rodent or pest
extermination.
A. An owner or person having custody of any dog or any other animal shall
not allow any animal to defecate on any school ground, public street,
alley, sidewalk, tree bank, park, and/or other public grounds or any
private property within the City of Reedsburg, other than the premises
of the owner or person having custody of said animal unless said
defecation is removed immediately. This shall not be applicable in cases
in which a person is being assisted by a companion dog.
B. All pens, yards, structures or areas where animals are kept shall be
maintained in a nuisance-free manner. Droppings and manure shall be
removed regularly and disposed of properly so not to attract insects or
rodents, become unsightly or cause objectionable odors.
C. No defecation or manure shall be dumped or left on any street, alley,
sidewalk, nor on any open area or lot in any portion of the City;
provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit
the use of manure as fertilizer for lawns and gardens in keeping with
ordinary and customary practices.
§ 210-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-18
1:209
§ 210-18. Restrictions on number and kinds of animals per
residence or apartment.
§ 210-19. Exceptions to restrictions on number of animals.
§ 210-20. Location of doghouses, pens, and kennels.
§ 210-21. Chief of Police may order dogs and cats confined.
Whenever the safety of the public shall require it, the Chief of Police, by
notice published in the local newspaper, may order that for a period of 20
days after the date of the notice, no dogs and/or cats shall be permitted to
A. No residence or apartment in the City limits (exempt commercial
establishments specifically licensed in this chapter) shall house or keep
more than a total of four cats and/or dogs.
B. No residence or apartment in the City limits (exempt commercial
establishments specifically licensed in this chapter) shall house or keep
more than two of any other domestic or wild animals more than four
months of age, except in areas zoned as agricultural.
C. At no time shall any residence or apartment house keep any
domesticated skunks, raccoons, bats, foxes or wolf hybrid.
A. Birth of puppies or kittens. The owner or person who has custody of a
dog or cat may retain the puppies or kittens born of said dog or cat
which exceed the permissible numbers set forth in § 210-18 for 12
weeks after the birth of the animals. If, after that time, there are more
than a total of four cats and/or dogs in any one residence or apartment,
the owner or person having custody of the dogs and cats will be in
violation of § 210-18.
B. Agricultural zoned lands. Section 210-18 shall not be applied to lands
zoned agricultural in the City of Reedsburg as long as no nuisance to
the immediate neighborhood is created thereby.
A. No doghouse, pen, or kennel shall be maintained closer than 20 feet to
any tenement or apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse,
retail food store, building used for school, religious or hospital
purposes, or residence other than that occupied by the owner or
occupant of the premises upon which said dogs are kept.
B. No doghouse, pen, or kennel shall be maintained closer than 10 feet of
any property adjacent to the property occupied by the owner or
occupant of the premises upon which said dogs are kept.
C. No dog shall be leashed or chained on the property occupied by the
owner or occupant of the premises where said dog can reach within 10
feet of any public sidewalk, street, or alley, or property adjacent to the
property occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which said dogs are kept.
§ 210-18 REEDSBURG CODE § 210-21
1:210
go abroad in any of the streets, roads, lanes, alleys or public places without
being properly muzzled with a secure muzzle or being led by a chain or
other secure fastening.
§ 210-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-24-2007; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Unless a penalty is specified elsewhere in this article for a violation of a
section of this article, the forfeiture shall be not less than $5 nor more
than $500, upon conviction for each offense, together with the costs of
prosecution.
§ 210-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-22
1:211

ARTICLE II
Feeding Wild Animals
[Adopted as Sec. 29.23 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 210-23. Prohibition.
No person or persons shall engage, within the City of Reedsburg, the
artificial feeding of any large, nondomestic, wildlife including, but not
limited to, members of the deer family, wild turkeys, pheasants, wolf, coyote
or bear. "Artificial feeding" is defined as the placement of shelled corn and/
or other types of grain, salt or minerals on the ground or in feeders, troughs
or other types of structures or receptacles for the purpose of promoting the
feeding of such large wildlife animals. This prohibition shall not apply to the
feeding of songbirds, squirrels and other small, nondomestic wildlife.
§ 210-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article, upon conviction, shall forfeit not less than
$25 nor more than $150, together with costs for the first offence. For each
subsequent offense, however, the owner will be assessed the amount of the
previous fine plus an additional $25; the maximum fine being $500, together
with the cost of prosecution. If the violation continues, each day's violation
shall begin a separate violation.
§ 210-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-24
1:213

ARTICLE III
Bird Sanctuary
[Adopted as Ch. 28 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 210-25. Location and designation.
The entire area embraced within the limits of the City of Reedsburg be, and
the same is hereby designated as, a bird sanctuary.
§ 210-26. Applicability and exceptions.
§ 210-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the article shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3 of this Code.
A. It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest, in
any manner, any bird or wildfowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests;
provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be
congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they
constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of
the proper health authorities of the City of Reedsburg, then in such
event, said health authorities shall meet with the representatives of the
Reedsburg Federated Women's Club, Humane Society, and bird club or
as many of said clubs as are found to exist in the City of Reedsburg,
after having given at least three days' actual notice of the time and
place of said meeting to the representatives of said clubs.
B. If as a result of said meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to
abate such nuisance, then said birds may be destroyed in such number
and in such manner as is deemed advisable by said health authorities
under the supervision of the Chief of Police of the City of Reedsburg.
§ 210-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-27
1:215
Chapter 217
ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC
§ 217-1. Purpose; severability.
§ 217-2. License required.
A. It is the purpose of the Common Council of the City of Reedsburg to
regulate the assemblage of large numbers of people, in excess of those
normally needing the health, sanitary, fire, police, transportation and
utility services regularly provided in the City of Reedsburg, in order
that the health, safety and welfare of all persons in the City of
Reedsburg, residents and visitors alike, may be protected.
B. It is the intent of the Common Council of the City of Reedsburg that all
sections and provisions of this chapter have an independent existence,
and, should any section or provision be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is the intent of
the Common Council of the City of Reedsburg that any section or
provision so declared shall be severable from and shall not affect the
validity of the remainder of this chapter.
A. No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, act as
entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage, or sell or give tickets to an
actual or reasonably anticipated assembly of 3,000 or more people
which continues or can reasonably be expected to continue for 18 or
more consecutive hours, whether on public or private property, unless a
license to hold the assembly has first been issued by the Common
Council of the City of Reedsburg, application for which must be made at
least 30 days in advance of the assembly. A license to hold an assembly
issued to one person shall permit any person to engage in any lawful
activity in connection with the holding of the licensed assembly.
B. As used in this chapter:
ASSEMBLY — A company of persons gathered together at any location
at any single time for and purpose.
PERSON — Any individual natural human being, partnership,
corporation, firm, company, association, society or group.
C. A separate license shall be required for each day and each location in
which 3,000 or more people assemble or can reasonably be anticipated
to assemble; the fee for each license shall be as set from time to time by
Common Council. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. A license shall permit the assembly of only the maximum number of
people stated in the license. The licensee shall not sell tickets to nor
permit to assemble at the licensed location more than the maximum
permissible number of people.
§ 210-27 REEDSBURG CODE § 217-2
1:216
§ 217-3. Conditions for issuing license.
Before he may be issued a license, the applicant shall first:
E. The licensee shall not permit the sound of the assembly to carry
unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the location of the
assembly.
F. This chapter shall not apply to any regularly established permanent
place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium, coliseum, or
other similar permanently established place of assembly for assemblies
which do not exceed by more than 250 people the maximum seating
capacity of the structure where the assembly is held.
G. This chapter shall not apply to government-sponsored fairs held on
regularly established fairgrounds nor to assemblies required to be
licensed by other laws and regulations of this municipality.
A. Determine the maximum number of people which will be assembled or
admitted to the location of the assembly, provided that the maximum
number shall not exceed the maximum number which can reasonably
assemble at the location of the assembly in consideration of the nature
of the assembly and provided that, where the assembly is to continue
overnight, the maximum number shall not be more than is allowed to
sleep within the boundaries of the location of the assembly by the
zoning or health ordinances of the municipality;
B. Provide proof that he will furnish, at his own expense, before the
assembly commences:
(1) A fence, completely enclosing the proposed location, of sufficient
height and strength to prevent people in excess of the maximum
permissible number from gaining access to the assembly grounds,
which shall have at least four gates, at least one at or near four
opposite points of the compass;
(2) Potable water, meeting all federal and state requirements for
purity, sufficient to provide drinking water for the maximum
number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one gallon
per person per day and water for bathing at the rate of at least 10
gallons per person per day;
(3) Separate enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting all state
and local specifications, conveniently located throughout the
grounds, sufficient to provide facilities for the maximum number of
people to be assembled at the rate of at least one toilet for every
200 females and at least one toilet for every 300 males together
with an efficient, sanitary means of disposing of waste matter
deposited, which is in compliance with all state and local laws and
regulations. A lavatory with running water under pressure and a
continuous supply of soap and paper towels shall be provided with
each toilet;
§ 217-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-3
1:217
(4) A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste, in compliance with
state and local laws and regulations, sufficient to dispose of the
solid waste production of the maximum number of people to be
assembled at the rate of at least 2.5 pounds of solid waste per
person per day, together with a plan for holding and a plan for
collecting all such waste at least once each day of the assembly.
Also sufficient trash cans with tight-fitting lids and sufficient
personnel to perform the task;
(5) Physicians and nurses licensed to practice in Wisconsin sufficient
to provide the average medical care enjoyed by residents of
Wisconsin for the maximum number of people to be assembled at
the rate of at least one physician for every 1,000 people and at least
one nurse for every 1,500 people, together with an enclosed,
covered structure where treatment may be rendered, containing
separately enclosed treatment rooms for each physician, and at
least one emergency ambulance available for use at all times;
(6) If the assembly is to continue during hours of darkness,
illumination sufficient to light the entire area of the assembly at the
rate of at least five footcandles, but not to shine unreasonably
beyond the boundaries of the enclosed location of assembly;
(7) A free parking area inside of the assembly grounds sufficient to
provide parking space for the maximum number of people to be
assembled at the rate of at least one parking space for every four
persons;
(8) Telephones connected to outside lines sufficient to provide service
for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at
least one separate line and receiver for each 1,000 persons;
(9) If the assembly is to continue overnight, camping facilities in
compliance with all state and local requirements as set forth in the
Wisconsin Administrative Code and ordinances of this municipality
sufficient to provide camping accommodations for the maximum
number of people to be assembled;
(10) Security guards, either regularly employed, duly sworn, off-duty
Wisconsin peace officers or private guards, licensed in Wisconsin,
sufficient to provide adequate security for the maximum number of
people to be assembled at the rate of at least one security guard for
every 750 people;
(11) Fire protection, including alarms, extinguishing devices and fire
lanes and escapes, sufficient to meet all state and local standards
for the location of the assembly as set forth in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and ordinances of this municipality, and
sufficient emergency personnel to efficiently operate the required
equipment;
§ 217-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 217-3
1:218
§ 217-4. Application.
(12) All reasonably necessary precautions to ensure that the sound of
the assembly will not carry unreasonably beyond the enclosed
boundaries of the location of the assembly;
(13) A bond, filed with the Clerk-Treasurer of this municipality, either in
cash or underwritten by a surety company licensed to do business
in Wisconsin at the rate of $1 per person for the maximum number
of people permitted to assemble, which shall indemnify and hold
harmless this municipality or any of its agents, officers, servants
and employees from any liability or causes of action which might
arise by reason of granting this license, and from any cost incurred
in cleaning up any waste material produced or left by the assembly.
A. Application for a license to hold an actual or anticipated assembly of
3,000 or more persons shall be made, in writing, to the governing body
of this municipality at least 30 days in advance of such assembly.
B. The application shall contain a statement made upon oath or
affirmation that the statements contained therein are true and correct
to the best knowledge of the applicant and shall be signed and sworn to
or affirmed by the individual making application in case of a
corporation, by all partners in the case of a partnership or by all officers
of an unincorporated association or group or, if there be no officers, by
all members of such association, society or group.
C. The application shall contain and disclose:
(1) The name, age, residence and mailing address of all persons
required to sign the application by Subsection A and, in the case of
a corporation, a certified copy of the Articles of Incorporation,
together with the name, age, residence and mailing address of each
person holding 10% or more of the stock of said corporation;
(2) The address and legal description of all property upon which the
assembly is to be held, together with the name, residence and
mailing address of the record owner(s) of all such property;
(3) Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to be
held or a statement made upon oath or affirmation by the record
owner(s) of all such property that the applicant has permission to
use such property for an assembly of 3,000 or more persons;
(4) The nature or purpose of the assembly;
(5) The total number of days and/or hours during which the assembly
is to last;
(6) The maximum number of persons which the applicant shall permit
to assemble at any time, not to exceed the maximum number which
can reasonably assemble at the location of the assembly, in
§ 217-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-4
1:219
consideration of the nature of the assembly, or the maximum
number of persons allowed to sleep within the boundaries of the
location of the assembly by the zoning ordinances of this
municipality if the assembly is to continue overnight;
(7) The maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any;
(8) The plans for fencing the location of the assembly and the gates
contained in such fence;
(9) The plans for supplying potable water, including the source,
amount available and locations of outlets;
(10) The plans for providing toilet and lavatory facilities, including the
source, number and location, type, and the means of disposing of
waste deposited;
(11) The plans for holding, collection and disposing of solid waste
material;
(12) The plans to provide for medical facilities, including the location
and construction of a medical structure, the names and addresses
and hours of availability of physicians and nurses, and provisions
for emergency ambulance service;
(13) The plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly,
including the source and amount of power and the location of the
lamps;
(14) The plans for parking vehicles, including size and location of lots,
points of highway access and interior roads, including routes
between highway access and parking lots;
(15) The plans for telephone service, including the source, number and
location of telephones;
(16) The plans for camping facilities, if any, including facilities available
and their location;
(17) The plans for security, including the number of guards, their
deployment, and their names, addresses, credentials and hours of
availability;
(18) The plans for fire protection, including the number, type and
location of all protective devices, including alarms and
extinguishers, and the number of emergency fire personnel
available to operate the equipment;
(19) The plans for sound control and sound amplification, if any,
including number, location and power of amplifiers and speakers;
(20) The plans for food concessions and concessionaires who will be
allowed to operate on the grounds, including the names and
§ 217-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 217-4
1:220
§ 217-5. Issuance.
The application for a license shall be processed within 20 days of receipt
and shall be issued if all conditions are complied with.
§ 217-6. Revocation.
The license may be revoked by the governing body of this municipality at
any time if any of the conditions necessary for the issuing of or contained in
the license are not complied with, or if any condition previously met ceases
to be complied with.
§ 217-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 224
BICYCLES
§ 224-1. Registration requirement.
Any person who resides in the limits of the City of Reedsburg and owns or
operates a bicycle(s) within such City limits shall be required to properly
register and tag (as hereinafter provided) such bicycle(s).
§ 224-2. Registration, identification tag, cancellation.
addresses of all concessionaires and their license or permit
numbers.
D. The application shall include the bond required in § 217-3B(13) and the
license fee.
A. The provisions of this legislation may be enforced by injunction in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
B. The holding of an assembly in violation of any provision or condition
contained in this legislation shall be deemed a public nuisance and may
be abated as such.
C. Any person who violates § 217-2A or who violates any condition upon
which he is granted a license may be fined not less than $1 nor more
than $200. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
A. Every owner or operator of any bicycle within the City shall file with the
City Police a complete description of such bicycle upon a blank form to
be provided for the purpose, which filing of description shall constitute
a registration of such bicycle for the purpose of this chapter. Such
registration shall be serially numbered and be kept on file by the City
Police as a record.
§ 217-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-2
1:221
§ 224-3. Safe operation requirements.
B. Immediately upon the registration of a bicycle, the City Police
Department shall issue an identification tag serially numbered to
correspond with the registration of said bicycle. Such tag shall be, by
the owner of such bicycle, affixed to the rear fender or back of the seat
of such bicycle and shall hereafter remain as affixed unless removed by
a police officer of the City for cause or for replacement with another tag
upon reregistration. A charge as set by Common Council from time to
time shall be made for the registration and license of such vehicle
pursuant to this section. A charge as set by Common Council shall be
made for the issuance of a duplicate tag in case such tag shall be lost,
stolen, mutilated, or sold. [Amended 8-13-2012; at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Before any bicycle can be registered under this section, the same must
be presented by the owner to the City Police to be by them examined as
to its mechanical condition. If they find the mechanical condition of said
bicycle to be safe, they shall issue a license therefor. If they find such
bicycle to be unsafe, they shall have the authority to refuse to issue
such license.
D. The Chief of Police or other police office may cancel the registration of
and remove the identification tag from any bicycle being operated upon
any of the streets of the City in an unsafe manner, and in violation of any
state law or local ordinance, and such cancellation of registration and
removal of tag shall be in addition to other penalties provided
hereunder. The Chief of Police or other police officer may impound the
bicycle of any person violating any provision of this chapter. Such
bicycle shall be impounded no longer than 14 days and shall be released
only upon the owner's compliance with this chapter.
E. Within 10 days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall have
changed ownership or be dismantled and taken out of operation, such
information shall be reported to the City Police by the person in whose
name the bicycle has been registered.
A. No person shall operate any bicycle upon a street carelessly or
heedlessly in disregard of the rights and safety of others, and without
due caution or at speeds so as to endanger the property, life or limbs or
any person or without due regard to traffic, surface and width of the
street and any other condition of whatever nature then existing.
B. No person shall attach any other vehicle or device to a bicycle or
operate the same in connection therewith upon the streets except for
those devices or vehicles specifically designed for use with bicycles. No
bicycle shall have more than the designed number of riders as
determined by the number of seats and handlebars attached to the
frames. No bicycle shall be allowed to operate after dark without at
least one white light in front and a red taillight or red reflector in the
rear.
§ 224-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 224-3
1:222
§ 224-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall operate any bicycle not properly registered or
carrying a proper identification tag as required herein upon any street
in the City, or who shall operate such bicycle in an unsafe manner or in
violation of any state law, this chapter or any other local ordinance shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 615,
Vehicles and Traffic, § 615-23, of the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
§ 224-5. Restricted area for bicycles on sidewalks.
Bicycling is allowed on sidewalks, except in the downtown district on Main
Street between Webb Avenue and Park Street. Bicyclists on sidewalks shall
yield to pedestrians, give an audible warning before passing pedestrians,
and pass with care.
Chapter 231
BLASTING
§ 231-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
BLASTING — A method of loosening, moving or shattering masses of solid
matter by use of explosive compounds to prepare stone for building and/or
ornamental use or to prepare property for development.
PERSON — Any individual, partner, corporation, company, trustee or
association, together with the respective servants, agents and employees
thereof.
§ 231-2. Permit required.
No person shall blast or cause to be detonated any explosive or carry on
any blasting operations within the City and the extraterritorial zoning area
(ET) without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Clerk-Treasurer.
Application shall be made a minimum of three days prior to blasting period
C. Every person operating a bicycle shall comply with the traffic
ordinances of the City of Reedsburg which are applicable to operators
of any vehicle except for those provisions which refer to the required
equipment on motor vehicles.
D. No trick riding allowed on City streets, sidewalks or a public property
unless appropriately designated by the Department of Public Works.
"Trick riding" shall be defined as operation without manual control of
handlebars, weaving, jumping and any other method which necessitates
the element of unusual and extraordinary skill and involves
unnecessary risk voluntarily undertaken.
§ 224-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-2
1:223
and shall expire upon completion of the blasting job for which the permit
was obtained.
§ 231-3. Application.
All application for permits hereunder shall be made in writing upon the
written form provided by the City and distributed by the City Clerk-
Treasurer. All applications for permits hereunder shall be signed by the
applicant and filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer. The City Clerk-Treasurer
shall immediately refer all applications for permits hereunder to the City
Engineer. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a permit hereunder only after
receiving the recommendation of the City Engineer and the duly executed
check for the permit fee as hereinafter provided and a submittal of a plan of
operation, if required, as approved by the City Engineer.
§ 231-4. Fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
Each blasting permit application shall be as set from time to time by
Common Council, payable to the City of Reedsburg.
§ 231-5. Proof of state license
An applicant for such permit shall furnish satisfactory proof that the blaster
holds a blaster's license issued by the state Department of Safety and
Professional Services.
§ 231-6. Bond or insurance.
Any blaster for such license shall be required to file with the City Clerk-
Treasurer a surety bond or public liability insurance policy for not less
than $1,000,000 for injuries, including accidental death of any person and
subject to the same limit for each person, for not less than $2,000,000 for
one accident, and property damage insurance for not less than $100,000.
§ 231-7. Control of amount of explosives.
To reduce to a minimum the noise, concussion or jar and dangers that
explosives produce, a holder of a blasting permit shall denote the minimum
amount of such explosives necessary to perform the task for which the
explosive is required.
§ 231-8. Time restrictions.
No blasting or detonation of any explosives shall be carried on within the
City or ET between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or on Sundays or holidays unless
specifically provided for in the permit issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 231-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 231-9
1:224
§ 231-9. Notice of blast to officials.
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a copy of the permit to the Chief of
Police and the Fire Chief indicating the dates, times and locations of such
blasting. The blaster in charge shall notify the Department of Safety and
Professional Services.
§ 231-10. Statutory requirements
The blaster in charge shall comply with any applicable state requirements
per Ch. SPS 307, Wis. Adm. Code..
§ 231-11. Warnings.
Warning signs of blasting shall be conspicuously posted 24 hours prior and
a warning whistle shall be blown before every blast.
§ 231-12. Storage of explosives.
No explosives or detonators or blasting caps unused at the end of a day shall
remain at the blast site overnight, but shall be returned to an appropriate
storage facility.
Chapter 242
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
A. At least 24 hours prior to initial blasting at a blast site, the blaster in
charge shall make a reasonable effort to notify, in writing or verbally, all
residents or owners of affected dwellings or other structures, as
determined under Subsections B and C, that a blasting operation is to
begin.
B. Affected dwellings or other structures within the City shall be
determined based on the scaled-distance equation, W = (D/Ds) 1/2.
Using a scaled-distance factor, Ds, of 55, affected dwellings or other
structures shall be those located within the distance, D, of the
controlled blasting site area for the weight per delay W of explosives to
be used.
Note: An example calculation to determine D is as follows: For four
pounds of explosives, D = Ds(W) 1/2 = 55(4) 1/2 = 110 feet.
C. Adjacent properties and affected dwellings or other structures within
the ET shall include all those within a maximum 600-foot radius of the
blast site or as calculated under the above formula, whichever is
greater.
§ 231-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-12
1:225

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
§ 242-1. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the design, construction,
alteration, demolition, and moving of all buildings and structures.
§ 242-2. Title.
These regulations shall be known and cited as the "Municipal Building
Code" and shall be construed to secure their expressed intent and to
ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they are dependent upon
building construction.
§ 242-3. Adoption of state and national standards. [Amended
6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 1843-17; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The following state and national codes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted by the municipality and become a part of this chapter, used
to govern the construction of one- and two-family, commercial, industrial
and institutional buildings within the boundaries of the City of Reedsburg:
Chs. SPS 305, 307, 316, 320-325, 327, 360-366, and 381-387, Wis. Adm.
Code; Ch. 101, Wis. Stats.; the International Building Code (IBC); ANSI
A117.1; the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) barrier-free chapters 1
to 10;10 the National Electric Code (NEC); and the National Fire Protection
Association, NFPA 13, 13d, 13r, 20, 24, 25 and 70.
§ 242-4. Applicability.
All buildings and structures hereafter erected, altered, repaired, moved or
demolished that are used or designed to be used for the purpose herein
defined shall comply in full with the requirements of this chapter.
A. Zoning laws. No provision of this chapter shall be construed an
alternative to any lawful zoning regulations.
B. New buildings. The construction requirements of this chapter shall
apply to one- and two-family dwellings, including row houses not
exceeding two families, to their accessory structures, and to parts
thereof which are hereafter erected.
C. Existing buildings. This chapter shall also apply to buildings and
conditions described in this section:
(1) An existing building to be occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling, which building was not previously so occupied.
10.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 242-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-4
1:227
(2) An existing structure that is altered or repaired, when the cost of
such alteration or repair exceeds 50% of the equalized value of the
structure, said value to be determined by the assessor of the
municipality.
(3) Additions and alterations, regardless of cost, made to an existing
building, when deemed necessary in the opinion of the Building
Inspector, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter for
new buildings. The provisions of Subsection D shall also apply.
(4) Roof coverings. Whenever more than 25% of the roof covering of a
dwelling is replaced in any twelve-month period, all roof covering
shall be in conformity with applicable sections of this chapter.
(5) Additions and alterations. Any addition or alteration, regardless of
cost, made to a dwelling shall be made in conformity with
applicable sections of this chapter.
D. Alterations and repairs. The following provisions shall apply to
buildings altered or repaired.
(1) Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations
to any existing building or structure accommodating a legal
occupancy and use but of nonconforming type of construction
which involves either the structural members of floors or roofs,
beams, girders, columns, bearing or other walls, room, heating and
air-conditioning systems, arrangement, light and ventilation,
changes in location of exit stairways or exits, or any or all of the
above, then such existing construction shall be made to conform to
the minimum requirements of this chapter applicable to such
occupancy and use and a given type of construction.
(2) Repairs. Repairs for purposes of maintenance, or replacements in
any existing building or structure which do not involve the
structural portions of the building or structure, or which do not
affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or
efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection, or exterior
aesthetic appearance and which do not increase a given occupancy
and use shall be deemed "minor repairs."
(3) Alterations when not permitted. When any existing building or
structure, which for any reason whatsoever does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter, has deteriorated from any cause
whatsoever to an extent greater than 50% of the equalized value of
the building or structure, no alterations or moving of such building
or structure may be permitted. Any such building or structure shall
be considered a menace to public safety and welfare and shall be
ordered vacated and thereafter demolished and debris removed
from the premises. The site shall then be leveled with clean fill and
seeded.
§ 242-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 242-4
1:228
(4) Alterations and repairs required. When any of the structural
members of any building or structure have deteriorated from any
cause whatsoever to less than their required strength, the owner of
such a building or structure shall cause such structural members to
be restored to their required strength, failing in which the building
or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and shall
be vacated and thereafter no further occupancy of use of the same
shall be permitted until the regulations of this chapter are complied
with.
(5) Extent of deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration of
any existing building or structure shall be determined by the
Building Inspector.
(6) Use of unsanitary building. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use or
permit the occupancy or use of any building or structure that is
unsanitary or dilapidated, or deteriorated, or out-of-repair, thereby
being unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, until the
regulations of this chapter have been complied with.
E. Razing of buildings. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to act
for the municipality under the provisions of § 66.0413, Wis. Stats.,
relating to the razing of buildings, and all acts amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto. The municipal Treasurer is authorized to place
the assessment and collect the special tax as therein provided.
§ 242-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-4
1:229

ARTICLE II
Department of Building Inspection
§ 242-5. Creation.
There is hereby created the Department of Building Inspection. The
Building Inspector appointed by the municipality shall act as head of this
Department.
§ 242-6. Duties.
The Building Inspector is vested with the authority and responsibility to
enforce all laws controlling safe building construction. He shall make
periodic inspection of existing public buildings to determine their safety.
He shall make inspections at the site of buildings damaged by any cause
whatsoever to determine the safety of buildings affected thereby.
§ 242-7. Authority.
The Building Inspector or his authorized agent shall have the power and
authority at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to enter upon any
public or private premises and make inspection thereof and to require the
production of the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating
work being done or the required license therefor. No person shall interfere
with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to the above-described
representatives of the municipality while in the performance of their duties.
§ 242-8. Recordkeeping.
There shall be kept in the Department of Building Inspection a record of
all applications for building permits. There shall be kept in the Department
of Building Inspection a record of all inspections made, and of all removal
and condemnation of buildings, and a record of all fees collected showing
the date of their receipt. The Building Inspector shall make a written annual
report to the governing body of the municipality relative to these matters.
§ 242-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-8
1:231

ARTICLE III
Building Permits
§ 242-9. Permits required.
No building or structure or any part thereof shall hereafter be built,
enlarged, altered, repaired or demolished within the municipality or moved
into or out of the municipality except as hereinafter provided, unless a
permit thereof shall first be obtained by the owner or his agent from the
Building Inspector. Permits required are as follows:
§ 242-10. Application for permits.
Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a blank
form to be furnished by the Building Inspector and shall state the name and
address of owner of the building and the owner of the land on which it is to
be erected, the name and address of the designer, and shall set forth a legal
description of the land on which the building is to be located, the location
of the building, the house number thereof and such other information
as the Building Inspector may require. With such application, there shall
be submitted to the Building Inspector two complete sets of plans, an
erosion control plan, a water calculation sheet, an energy calculation sheet,
specifications and two copies of a survey, as needed.
A. Building;
B. Air conditioning;
C. Wrecking or razing;
D. Heating;
E. Moving of buildings;
F. Occupancy.
A. Survey. The survey shall be prepared and certified by a surveyor
registered by the State of Wisconsin, shall be made in no case prior to
one year prior to the issuance of a building permit, and shall bear the
date of the survey. The certified survey shall also show the following:
(1) Location and dimensions of all buildings on the lot, both existing
and proposed;
(2) Dimensions of the lot;
(3) Dimensions showing all setbacks of all buildings on the lot;
(4) Proposed grade of proposed structure, to City or village datum;
(5) Grade of lot and of road opposite lot;
(6) Grade and setback of adjacent buildings. If adjacent lot is vacant,
submit elevation of nearest buildings on same side of road;
§ 242-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-10
1:233
§ 242-11. Waiver of some requirements.
At the option of the Building Inspector, the plans, data, specifications and
survey need not be submitted with an application for permit to execute
minor alterations and repairs to any building, structure or equipment,
provided the proposed construction is sufficiently described in the
application for permit.
§ 242-12. Plan approval; construction supervision.
All plans, data and specifications for the construction of any building or
structure or for any construction in connection with existing buildings and
structures, other than one- and two-family residences, containing more than
25,000 cubic feet, total volume, submitted with an application for permit
shall bear the seal of the registered architect or registered engineer. The
plans shall also be stamped as approved as required by the Department of
Safety and Professional Services of the State of Wisconsin. Such building
or structure shall be constructed under the supervision of an architect or
engineer who shall be responsible for its erection in accordance with the
approved plans. No permit shall be granted for such structure unless such
(7) Type of monuments at each corner of lot;
(8) Watercourses or existing drainage ditches;
(9) Seal and signature of surveyor.
B. Plans and specifications.
(1) All plans shall be drawn to a scale not less than 1/4 inch per foot, on
paper or cloth in ink, or by some other process that will not fade or
obliterate, and shall disclose the existing and proposed provisions
for water supply, sanitary sewer connections and surface water
drainage. All dimensions shall be accurately figured. Drawings that
do not show all necessary detail shall be rejected. A complete set of
plans for residential construction shall consist of:
(a) All elevations;
(b) All floor plans;
(c) Complete construction details;
(d) Fireplace details (3/4 inch per foot) showing cross section of
fireplace and flues;
(e) Plans of garage when garage is to be built immediately, or
location of garage when it is to be built at a later date.
(2) All plans shall remain on file in the office of the Building Inspector
until the building permit is issued for the building, after which time
the Building Inspector may return the same to owner and keep one
on file.
§ 242-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 242-12
1:234
construction will be under the supervision of an architect or engineer, as
required by the Wisconsin Statutes. A written statement to this effect shall
be filed with the Building Inspector by the architect or engineer along with
the application for permit.
§ 242-13. Drainage.
§ 242-14. Moving damaged buildings.
No building shall be repaired, altered or moved within or into the
municipality that has deteriorated or has been damaged, by any cause
(including such moving and separation from its foundation and service
connections in case of moved buildings), 50% or more of its equalized value,
and no permit shall be granted to repair, alter or move such building within
or into the municipality.
§ 242-15. Issuance of permits.
A. Grading of lots. The plans shall show the present and proposed grades
of the lot on which it is proposed to erect the building for which a
permit is sought and of the immediately adjoining property in sufficient
detail to indicate the surface water drainage before and after the
completion of grading. No permit shall be issued if the erection of the
building and the proposed grades shall unreasonably obstruct the
natural flow of water from the surface of adjoining property or obstruct
the flow of any existing ravine, ditch, drain or stormwater sewer
draining neighboring property, unless suitable provision is made for
such flow by means of an adequate ditch or pipe, which shall be shown
on the plans and shall be constructed so as to provide continuous
drainage at all times.
B. Stormwater drainage. No dwelling shall be erected, nor shall existing
provisions for conveyance of water from the roof of any dwelling be
altered or replaced, unless provision is made to convey water from the
roof of the dwelling in such a manner that such water will not, directly
or indirectly, pass thence into the sanitary sewer system. No
stormwater or surface water drains may be connected with the sanitary
sewer system, whether installed above or below the surface of the
ground.
A. If the Building Inspector finds that the proposed building will comply in
every respect with this chapter, other municipal ordinances, and all
laws of the State of Wisconsin and lawful orders issued pursuant
thereto, he shall issue a building permit. After being approved, the
plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect which
involves any of the above-mentioned ordinances, laws or orders, or
which involves the safety to the building, except with the written
consent of the Building Inspector filed with such application.
B. In case adequate plans are presented, the Building Inspector, at his
discretion, may issue a permit for a part of the building before receiving
§ 242-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-15
1:235
§ 242-16. Revocation of permits.
the plans and specifications of the entire building. It shall be unlawful
to commence work on any building or alteration before the building
permit has been issued. The issuance of a permit upon the plans and
specifications shall not prevent the Building Inspector from thereafter
requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications of
from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when
in violation of any ordinances of the municipality or laws of the State of
Wisconsin or lawful orders issued pursuant thereto.
C. For the construction of buildings requiring approval of the Department
of Safety and Professional Services, no permit shall be issued until such
approved plans are received by the Building Inspector.
A. The Building Inspector may revoke any permit, certificate of occupancy,
or approval issued under the regulations of this chapter and may stop
construction or use of approved new materials, equipment, methods of
construction, devices, or appliances for any of the following reasons:
(1) Whenever there is a violation of any regulation of this chapter or of
any other ordinance, law, or lawful orders or Wisconsin statute
relating to the same subject matter;
(2) Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes dangerous
to life or property;
(3) Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provisions of
the application for permit or of the permit;
(4) Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, there is
inadequate supervision provided on the job site;
(5) Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made
in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data specifications,
or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or
approval was based;
(6) Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an
approval or occupancy given by the Building Inspector for the use
of any new materials, equipment, methods or construction devices,
or appliances.
B. The notice revoking a permit, certificate of occupancy, or approval shall
be in writing and may be served upon the applicant for the permit,
owner of the premises, and his agent, if any, and on the person having
charge of construction.
C. A revocation placard shall also be posted by the Building Inspector
upon the building, structure, equipment, or premises in question.
D. After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted, it
shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any
§ 242-15 REEDSBURG CODE § 242-16
1:236
§ 242-17. Approved plans.
construction operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit
which has been so revoked shall be null and void, and before any
construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as required
by this chapter, shall be procured and fees paid therefor, and thereafter
the resumption of any construction or operation shall be in compliance
with the regulation of this chapter.
A. A weatherproof card signed by the Building Inspector indicating the
permit has been issued shall be posted at the job site during
construction. After issuance of a building permit, the approved plans
shall not be altered unless any proposed change is first approved by the
Building Inspector as conforming to the provisions of this chapter.
B. The building permit shall become void unless operations are
commenced within four months from the date thereof, or if the building
or work authorized by such permit is suspended at any time after work
is commenced for a period of 60 days.
C. Before any work is commenced or recommenced after the permit has
lapsed, a new permit shall be issued at the regular fee rate. In any
event, the work required to construct a one- or two-family residence
shall be completed within 18 months of the date of issuance of the
permit.
§ 242-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-17
1:237

ARTICLE IV
Moving of Buildings; Razing
§ 242-18. Permit required; fee. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No person shall move any building or structure upon any of the public
ways of the City without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building
Inspector and upon the payment of the required fee as set from time to time
by Common Council. Every such permit issued by the Building Inspector
for the moving of a building shall designate the route to be taken, the
conditions to be complied with, and shall limit the time during which said
moving operations shall be continued. The permit application shall be made
not less than seven days prior to the intended moving date.
§ 242-19. General provisions.
No permit shall be issued to move a building within or into the City and
to establish it upon a location within the City until the Building Inspector
has made an investigation of such building at the location from which it is
to be moved and is satisfied from such investigation that said building is
in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet
the requirements of this building code in all respects. Should any repairs,
improvements, or remodeling be contemplated or required with respect to
said building, the same shall be made insofar as possible before the said
building is taken from the premises from which it is to be moved. A complete
plan of all further repairs, improvements and remodeling with reference
to such building shall be submitted to the Building Inspector, and he shall
make a finding of fact to the effect that all such repairs, improvements
and remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of this building
code, and that when same are completed, the building as such will so
comply with said building code. In the event a building is to be moved from
the City to some point outside its boundaries and the boundaries of the
extraterritorial zone, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans
and specifications for proposed alterations to such building and placing of
the building on a permanent foundation as set forth in § 242-21B below may
be disregarded.
§ 242-20. Review of application and criteria.
A. The application shall include exterior elevations of the building and
accurate photographs of all sides and views. If the exterior of the
building will be altered, the application shall include plans and
specifications for the alterations.
B. The Building Inspector shall inspect the building and the site at which it
is to be relocated.
C. The Building Inspector shall issue a permit if it is determined that the
exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the building to be
moved or moved and altered will not be so at variance with either the
§ 242-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-20
1:239
§ 242-21. Continuous movement.
§ 242-22. Street repair.
Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall, within one day
after said building reaches its destination, report that fact to the Building
Inspector, who shall thereupon, in the company of the Director of Public
Works, inspect the streets and highways over which said building has been
moved and ascertain their condition. If the removal of said building has
caused any damage to any streets or highways, the person to whom the
permit was issued shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they were
before the permit was granted. On the failure of the said permittee to do
so within 10 days thereafter to the satisfaction of the City, said body shall
repair the damage done to such streets and hold the person obtaining such
permit and the sureties on his bond responsible for the payment of same.
§ 242-23. Tree trimming.
If the movement of the building over the City streets and/or alleys requires
the trimming of trees, the same shall be done by a business or individual
who is regularly engaged in such service and is preapproved by the Director
of Public Works. It shall be the responsibility of said business or individual
to clean all trimming debris and replace any trees substantially damaged
during the move. On the failure of this business or individual to do so to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works within 10 business days after
said move, the City will clean up and/or replace such trees if necessary
and hold the person obtaining the permit and the bond responsible for the
payment of such expenses.
§ 242-24. Bond.
exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the buildings
already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate
neighborhood, or the character of the applicable district established by
the zoning ordinances of the City, or any ordinance amendatory thereof
or supplementary thereto as to cause a substantial depreciation in the
property values of said neighborhood within said applicable district.
A. The movement of buildings shall be a continuous operation during all
the hours of the day and at night, until such movement is fully
completed. All of such operations shall be performed with the least
possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to
remain overnight upon any street crossing or intersection, or so near
thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant or any other public
facility.
B. The building shall be placed on a permanent foundation constructed in
conformance with the building code within 120 days of the first day that
the building is moved from its prior location.
§ 242-20 REEDSBURG CODE § 242-24
1:240
§ 242-25. Insurance.
The Building Inspector shall require, in addition to said bond above
indicated, public liability insurance covering injury to one person in a sum
of not less than $100,000 and for one accident in a sum not less than
$300,000, together with property damage insurance in a sum not less than
$50,000, or such other coverage as deemed necessary.
§ 242-26. Violations and penalties.
In addition to those penalties set forth in § 242-49 of this chapter, any
person violating § 242-21B above shall, upon conviction of such violation, be
subject to a forfeiture of $25 for each day beyond the permitted 120 days
that the building remains unplaced on a permanent foundation, together
with costs of prosecution.
A. Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way in
the City, the party applying therefor shall give a bond to the City in a
sum to be fixed by the Building Inspector and which shall not be less
than $1,000 or as set from time to time by Common Council; said bond
to be executed by a corporate surety or two personal sureties to be
approved by the City Administrator conditioned upon, among other
things, the indemnification to the City for any costs or expenses
incurred by it in connection with any claims for damages to any persons
or property, and the payment of any judgment, together with the costs
and expenses incurred by the City in connection therewith, arising out
of the removal of the building for which the permit is issued. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
B. Unless the Building Inspector, upon investigation, shall find it to be a
fact that the excavation exposed by the removal of such building from
its foundation shall not be so close to a public thoroughfare as to permit
the accidental falling therein of travelers, or the location, nature and
physical characteristics of the premises and the exposed excavation
such as to make intrusion upon the premises and the falling into such
excavation of children under 12 years of age unlikely; the bond required
shall be further conditioned upon the permittee erecting adequate
barriers and, within 48 hours, filling in such excavation or adopting and
employing such other means, devices or methods approved by the
Building Inspector and reasonably adopted or calculated to prevent the
occurrences set forth herein.
C. If the applicant proposes to alter the exterior of the building, the
applicant shall give a bond in an amount not less than $1,000 or as set
from time to time by Common Council to the effect that the applicant
will complete the proposed exterior alterations in the manner set forth
in the plans and specifications and by a date certain. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 242-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-27
1:241
§ 242-27. Razing of buildings.
Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall
notify all utilities having service connections within the building, such as
water, electric, gas, sewer, and other connections. A permit to demolish or
to remove a building shall not be issued until it is ascertained that service
connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators,
have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. Excavations
shall be filled with solid fill to match lot grade, within 30 days of removal
of the structure. Any excavation shall be protected with appropriate fences,
barriers and/or lights.
§ 242-27 REEDSBURG CODE § 242-27
1:242
ARTICLE V
Fees, Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy
§ 242-28. Fees. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
Before receiving a building permit, the owner or his agent shall pay the fee
specified in the current City Fee Schedule on file in the City’s offices or
available on the City’s website. In applying the provisions of this chapter in
respect to new work, existing buildings, alterations and repairs, the physical
value of the work shall be determined by the Building Inspector on the basis
of current costs, or as otherwise provided in the local ordinances.
§ 242-29. Unusual construction.
When applications for unusual technical design or magnitude of
construction are filed, the Building Inspector may refer such plans and
specifications to the Department of Safety and Professional Services, State
of Wisconsin, for analysis and recommendations as to the safety of design in
compliance with this chapter.
§ 242-30. Inspections.
A. Notification. Upon notification from the permit holder or his agent,
required inspections of the construction of any buildings, structures or
equipment shall be made as follows:
(1) Inspection to determine if the location on the premises is in
compliance with approved certified lot or plot plan of the premises
and the terms of the permit;
(2) Inspection to determine if the construction of footings as to
thickness, width, placing of reinforced steel, if required, and
foundation walls is in compliance with approved plans, data and the
terms of the permit;
(3) Inspection of all wall, floor and roof framing, firestopping, and
bracing when completed, and of all pipes, chimneys, ventilating
and other ducts, shafts and equipment when in place, but before
any such work is covered, enclosed or concealed by other
construction;
(4) Inspection prior to laying concrete for basement floor to inspect
subgrade, drain tile, and forms;
(5) Final inspection. Upon the completion of any building, structure,
equipment, or construction for which a permit was issued and
before the same is occupied or used, a final inspection shall be
made by the Building Inspector, and until such building, structure,
or equipment is in compliance with all the requirements of this
chapter and terms of the permit, no occupancy shall be maintained.
§ 242-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-30
1:243
§ 242-31. Stop-work order.
Whenever the provisions of this chapter or of the plans approved
thereunder are not complied with, a stop-work order shall be served on the
owner or his representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the site
of the construction. Such stop-work order shall not be removed except by
written notice of the Building Inspector after satisfactory evidence has been
supplied that the violation has been corrected.
§ 242-32. Certificate of occupancy.
If the construction conforms to the requirements of this chapter, a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued.
B. Coordinated inspections. All provisions of the laws and regulations of
the municipality, and of legally adopted rules of local fire and health
officials in respect to the operation, equipment, housekeeping, fire
protection, handling and storage of flammable materials, liquids and
gases and the maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions of use in
occupancy in all buildings shall be strictly enforced by the
administrative officials to whom such authority is delegated. Whenever
inspection by any authorized enforcement officer discloses any violation
of the provisions of this chapter, or of any other rules, regulations, or
laws, he shall immediately notify the administrative officer having
jurisdiction of the violation.
C. Certified report. The Building Inspector may require a certified report
of all required inspections, as regulated by this chapter, from the
registered architect or registered engineer supervising the
construction of any building, structure, or equipment requiring their
supervision. Such certified report shall state in detail that all
construction work has been executed in accordance with all of the
regulations of this chapter, approved plans, specifications, terms of the
permit, and data filed with the application for permit; and, further, that
such construction work was executed in accordance with accepted
architectural and engineering standard procedures.
D. Appeal. Any person feeling himself aggrieved by any order or ruling of
the Building Inspector may appeal from such ruling to the Zoning Board
of Appeals within 20 days after written notice of such ruling shall have
been delivered to him. Such appeal is to be in writing, setting forth the
order appealed from, and the respects in which said person feeling
himself aggrieved claims that said order or ruling is erroneous or
illegal. Said notice of appeal shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall
thereupon notify the Building Inspector of said appeal, and the appeal
shall be heard at the next meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
said Zoning Board of Appeals, after consideration thereof, shall affirm,
reverse of modify said ruling as is just in the premises. The ruling or
order of the inspection shall be enforced until changed by said Zoning
Board of Appeals.
§ 242-30 REEDSBURG CODE § 242-32
1:244
A. Inspections.
(1) The Building Inspector shall make a final inspection of all new
buildings, additions, and alterations. If no violations of this or any
other ordinance be found, the Building Inspector shall issue a
certificate of occupancy, stating the purpose for which the building
is to be used.
(2) No building nor part thereof shall be occupied in any manner which
conflicts with the conditions set forth in the certificate of
occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all
applicable fees as set forth in the current City Fee Schedule on file
in the City’s offices or available on the City’s website have been
paid. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Use discontinued.
(1) Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Building Inspector
shall order such use or occupancy discontinued and the building or
portion thereof vacated by notice served on any person using or
causing such use or occupancy to be continued, and such person
shall vacate such building or portion thereof within 10 days after
receipt of the notice or make the building or portion thereof comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Any building, structure, or premises, or any part thereof, hereafter
vacated or damaged by any cause whatsoever so as to jeopardize
public safety or health shall not hereafter be occupied or used
under an existing certificate of occupancy or without the same until
an application has been filed and a new certificate of occupancy
issued. This Subsection B(2) shall not apply to buildings used
entirely for dwelling purposes.
C. Change. It shall be unlawful to change the use of any building,
structure, premises, or part thereof without first obtaining from the
Building Inspector an approval of such change in the occupancy or use,
and a certificate of occupancy therefor.
D. Hardship. The Building Inspector shall have the authority and power to
permit the occupancy of any building or structure in the municipality,
prior to issuance of an occupancy certificate, in all cases of hardship as
in his judgment and discretion warrant occupancy before final stage of
completion as set forth in the code. Before granting such permission,
the Building Inspector shall first examine the premises and determine if
it is safe and sanitary. The Building Inspector shall determine the time
within which such building or structure can be completed; such time
should not exceed 120 days.
§ 242-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-32
1:245

ARTICLE VI
Terminology
§ 242-33. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings assigned to them in this section, unless already defined in Ch.
SPS 320, Wis. Adm. Code. Words and phrases not herein otherwise defined
shall have the meanings accepted by common usage.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A part of a principal building, or a supplemental
building located on the same lot with a principal building and generally used
for storage, private garage, or other use customarily incident to a residence
use.
ADDITION — Any new construction whereby an existing building or
structure, or building or structure in course of construction, is increased in
area or cubical content.
ADJOINING LOT LINE — The line between adjoining lots, plots of land, or
parcels of land of different or same ownership.
ALLEY — A right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting properties. A street shall not be considered an alley.
ALTERATION — Any change or modification in construction or occupancy.
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms which is occupied or which is
intended or designed to be occupied by one family for living and sleeping
purposes.
APPROVED — As to materials and types of construction, refers to approval
by the state or a licensed building engineer as the result of investigation
and tests conducted by said association or by reason of accepted principles
or tests conducted by said association or by reason of accepted principles
or tests by national authorities or technical or scientific organizations.
AREA — As applied to dimensions, the maximum horizontal projected area
of a building, structure, room, apartment or open space, not including
overhangs.
BEARING — That area of any structural unit of a building or structure which
is in direct contact with the supports which receive the loads from that unit.
BUILDING — Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The officer charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter or his regularly authorized deputy. Same for
"building official."
BUILDING, EXISTING — A building erected prior to the adoption of this
chapter or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
CITY — Any political subdivision which adopts this chapter for regulation
within its jurisdiction.
§ 242-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-33
1:247
CUBIC CONTENTS — The actual cubic space enclosed within the outer
surfaces of the outside or enclosed walls, outer surfaces of the roof and the
finished surfaces of the lowest floors of a building or structure. Does not
include the contents of courts that are open to the sky.
DWELLING — A building which is designed or used or which is intended to
be used as a residence or place of abode.
EQUIPMENT — As specifically regulated by this chapter, includes heating,
cooling, air-conditioning, and ventilating systems; plumbing and sanitary
systems; electric light and power systems; telephone, electronic and radio
signal and annunciator systems; dry cleaning, dyeing and washing
machines; elevators and dumbwaiters; gas pipe systems; standpipes;
sprinkler systems; fire protection apparatus, fire extinguishers, and pumps;
oil burners, stokers, and conveyors; refrigerating systems; devices,
machinery and apparatus of every description; furnaces, boilers, high- or
low-pressure steam systems; gasoline pumps; all movable or portable
containers of every description; all air pressure or other tanks; and all other
self-contained systems used in conjunction with buildings or structures.
ESTABLISHED GRADE — The grade of the street, as established by
ordinance, at the center line of the street.
EXISTING — A building, structure, equipment, or premises completed or in
course of construction, or used or occupied, and for which a legal permit
has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter.
FLOOR AREA — The net area of any floor space enclosed by exterior walls,
firewalls, or absolute fire separation, exclusive of open spaces.
FOOTINGS — That portion of the foundation of a structure that spreads and
transmits loads directly to the soil or the piles.
LINTEL — The beam or girder placed over an opening in a wall that
supports the wall construction above.
LOT — A parcel of land in a single ownership occupied or to be occupied by
not more than one principal or main building and the accessory buildings or
uses customarily incident to it, including such open spaces as are required
by this or other codes, and having its principal frontage upon a street.
LOT LINE — A line or lines dividing one lot; plot of land, or parcel of land
from an adjoining lot, plot of land, or parcel of land.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING, ETC. — A lawfully existing building
(premises, structure, use, materials, or equipment), which does not conform
to the requirements of this chapter.
OCCUPANCY or USE — The purpose for which a building, structure,
equipment, materials or premises or part thereof is used or intended to be
used as regulated by this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, persons, partnerships, firm, organization,
association or corporation, their agents, heirs or assigns.
§ 242-33 REEDSBURG CODE § 242-33
1:248
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A single main building or structure on a lot for
specific use or occupancies.
REQUIRED — Mandatory by provisions of this chapter.
ROOM — A space within a building or structure completely enclosed with
walls, partitions, floor, and ceiling, except for necessary openings for light,
ventilation, ingress and egress.
SHALL — As used herein, is mandatory; same for "must."
SQUARE FOOTAGE OF BUILDING — The actual area in square feet
enclosed by the exterior perimeter of the building walls on each separate
floor level.
STAIRWAY — Three or more risers shall constitute a stairway.
STORY — The space in a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next above or below or roof next above.
STRUCTURE — As specifically regulated by this chapter, anything which is
constructed, erected, and framed of component parts and which is fastened,
anchored, or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground for any
occupancy or use whatsoever, excluding fencing.
UNUSUAL CONSTRUCTION — Any construction methods or materials not
covered in this chapter.
WALLS — Walls shall be defined as follows:
BEARING WALL — A wall which supports any load in addition to its own
weight.
A.
CAVITY WALL — Wall built of masonry units or of plain concrete, or a
combination of these materials, so arranged as to provide an air space
within the wall and in which the facing and backing (inner and outer
parts) of the wall are tied together with metal ties.
B.
C. CURTAIN WALL — A nonbearing wall between columns or piers.
D. EXTERIOR WALL — An outer enclosing wall of a building or structure.
FACED WALL — A wall in which the masonry facing and backing are so
bonded as to exert common action under load.
E.
NONBEARING WALL — A wall that supports no load other than its own
weight.
F.
PANEL WALL — A nonbearing wall in skeleton construction, built
between columns or piers and wholly supported at each story.
G.
PARTITION — An interior vertical structure usually of light construction
serving to enclose an area, room, space, or division, extended from floor
to ceiling, and having wall surfaces of approved materials as permitted
by this chapter.
H.
I. RETAINING WALL — Wall used to resist laterally imposed pressures.
§ 242-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-33
1:249
VENEERED WALL — Wall having masonry facing which is attached to
the backing but not so bonded as to exert common action under load;
also having outer facing for the purpose of providing ornamentation,
protection, or insulation.
J.
§ 242-33 REEDSBURG CODE § 242-33
1:250
ARTICLE VII
General Design and Material Requirements
§ 242-34. General design.
See Detail (a), Typical House Section.11
§ 242-35. Garage requirements.
See Detail (a).12
A. Application. All one and two-family dwellings shall conform to the
requirements of this chapter. A building which contains a use of
occupancy other than one- and two-family units shall follow the
applicable requirements of the IBC as adopted by the state.
B. Repairs. Every building and all parts thereof shall be kept in good
repair, and the roof shall be maintained to prevent leakage. All
rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed therefrom to prevent
dampness in the walls and ceilings.
C. Cleanliness. Every building shall be kept reasonably clean and shall
also be kept reasonably free from any accumulation of dirt, filth,
rubbish, garbage, or other matter in or on the same, or in the yards,
courts, passages, areas or alleys connected with or belonging to the
same.
D. Street exposure. Every building shall front on at least one street, unless
otherwise permitted by local regulations.
(1) Existing buildings not fronting on a street shall be provided with an
unobstructed fire access lane, not less than 15 feet in width, from a
public thoroughfare to the building.
A. Foundations and footings. Attached private garages shall be provided
with the same type footings and foundations as required herein for the
principal building. Detached private garages may be built with a
continuous floating slab of reinforced concrete not less than four inches
in thickness.
B. Floor surface. The floor in all private garages shall be of concrete
construction. No openings or pits in the floor shall be permitted, except
for drainage.
C. Construction. Private garages shall be constructed as follows: See
Detail (c) for detached garages.13
11.Editor's Note: Detail (a) and other details referred to in this article are on file and
available for reference in the City's offices.
12.Editor's Note: Detail (a) and other details referred to in this article are on file and
available for reference in the City's offices.
13.Editor's Note: Detail (c) and other details referred to in this article are on file and
available for reference in the City's offices.
§ 242-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-35
1:251
§ 242-36. New materials and methods.
All new materials, methods of construction, devices and equipment shall be
approved by the Building Inspector for use in buildings by the procedure
herein provided when they are proved to be the equal of those specifically
required by this chapter; or he may adopt the recommendations and
approvals of the Department of Safety and Professional Services, State
of Wisconsin, through structural or engineering analysis or such other
committee as may be established by this or other local ordinances.
§ 242-37. Testing.
(1) Load-bearing foundation walls and piers, masonry walls, and
partitions shall be constructed as regulated herein except as stated
above.
(2) Detached private garages of wood-frame construction shall be
constructed with the following minimum requirements:
(a) Studs may have a maximum spacing of 24 inches on centers.
(b) Diagonal corner bracing may be applied on the inside surface
of studs.
(c) Corner posts may consist of two two-inch by four-inch studs or
a single four-inch by four-inch stud.
(d) Horizontal bracing and collar beams may be two-inch by sixinch
with a maximum spacing of four feet on centers.
(3) Attached private garages shall be of the same type of construction
as that of the principal building and as further regulated in this
chapter.
A. Unless based on accepted engineering designs, all new building
materials, appliances, equipment, systems, or methods of construction
not provided for in this chapter shall be subjected to tests that simulate
the actual conditions which occur in normal use. Such tests shall be
made at the expense of the applicant at an independent testing
laboratory, and copies of the test results shall be kept on file in the
office of the Building Inspector. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. The Building Inspector may accept duly authenticated reports from
recognized authoritative sources in respect to the use of any new
materials, methods, or systems of construction complying with
applicable specifications and standards of accepted engineering
practices or any such new materials, methods or systems of
construction approved by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services, State of Wisconsin.
§ 242-35 REEDSBURG CODE § 242-38
1:252
§ 242-38. Prefabricated dwellings or accessory buildings.
Prefabricated assemblies not capable of design by accepted engineering
analysis shall be subjected to tests. When prefabricated assemblies are
not readily accessible for inspection at the site, a registered engineer or
architect of the state in which the assembly is manufactured shall furnish
a certified report of inspection. All tests and inspection records shall be
accessible to the Building Inspector at all times during fabrication and
erection of the building or assembly unit, or such records as he may
designate shall be filed with him.
§ 242-39. Identification of products.
All materials shall be identified by the approved label, the grade mark, the
trademark, or by other approved manufacturer's identification.
§ 242-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-39
1:253

ARTICLE VIII
One- and Two-Family Dwellings
§ 242-40. Administration.
The Building Inspector, as certified by the Department of Safety and
Professional Services, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and
enforce all of the provisions of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code.14
§ 242-41. Permit required. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No person shall build or cause to be built any one- or two-family dwelling
without first obtaining a state uniform building permit for such dwelling.
Such building permit shall be furnished by the City. A copy of such permit
issued shall be filed with the City Building Inspection Department. Fees
as set forth in the City's current Fees Schedule shall be paid prior to the
issuance of a permit.15
14.Editor's Note: See Chs. SPS 320-325, Wis. Adm. Code.
15.Editor's Note: The current Fees Schedule is on file in the City's offices and available on the
City's website.
§ 242-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-41
1:255

ARTICLE IX
Manufactured Homes
§ 242-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure which complies with the standards
set forth in 24 CFR Part 3280, designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein.
§ 242-43. Permits. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
No manufactured home may be placed in the City of Reedsburg without
first obtaining from the Building Inspector a building permit. Said permit
shall cover all on-site activities, including, where applicable, the following:
foundation; electrical hook-up; connection to water and sewer systems;
installation of exit platforms and stairs; and any additions or garages that
will be constructed on site. Fees for the permit shall be according to the
current City Fee Schedule on file in the City’s offices or available on the
City’s website.
§ 242-44. Compliance with other provisions.
All on-site construction related activities pertaining to a manufactured
home for which a building permit is issued shall conform to the applicable
requirements of Chs. SPS 320-325, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 242-45. Exits.
Every manufactured home for which a permit is issued shall have at least
one exit door which has a system of landings and stairs which meet the
requirements of § SPS 321.04, Wis. Adm. Code. Every other exterior door,
whether one or more, shall have, at a minimum, a landing which complies
with § SPS 321.04, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 242-46. Occupancy.
No manufactured home may be occupied until the Building Inspector is
satisfied that the requirements of this article have been met and has issued
a certificate of occupancy stating such.
§ 242-47. Modifications.
No alteration or modification may be made to a manufactured home or its
systems which is not in compliance with the standards set forth in 24 CFR
Part 3280.
§ 242-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-48
1:257
§ 242-48. Interpretation.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to imply that the local Building
Inspector is to inspect any part of the manufactured home or its mechanical
systems which was installed by the manufacturer and in place prior to
placement of the structure at the site.
§ 242-48 REEDSBURG CODE § 242-48
1:258
ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 242-49. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure in violation of any provisions of this chapter or to
cause, permit or suffer any such violations to be committed, or fail to obtain
a Building Permit. Any violation shall be subject to forfeiture as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, and shall also be subject to the
payment of double permit fees. If in any action a permit was issued, it shall
not constitute a defense; nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty
on the part of the Building Inspector constitute a defense.
§ 242-50. Failure to obtain permit.
Any person who commences work prior to obtaining a building permit shall
be subject to forfeiture as set forth in § 242-49 and shall also be subject to
the payment of double permit fees.
§ 242-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-50
1:259
Chapter 282
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 282-1. Firearms and ammunition; discharge, possession and sale.
§ 282-2. Throwing or shooting of arrows, stones, and other missiles
prohibited. [Amended 10-18-2012]
No person shall throw or shoot any object, arrow, stone, or other missile
or projectile, by hand or by any other means, at any other person or at, in,
or onto any building, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park, playground, or
other place within the City of Reedsburg, with the exceptions as follows:
A. Discharging and carrying of firearms. No person except a sheriff, police
officer or other law officer shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle,
spring gun, air gun, or pneumatic pellet gun of any description within
the City of Reedsburg. [Amended 6-22-2009]
B. Possession of ammunition and sale to minors. No minor person under
the age of 18 years shall have in his possession any ammunition for any
spring gun, air gun, or pneumatic pellet gun unless accompanied by
parent, guardian or any person 18 years or more.
C. No person shall intentionally sell or give away any firearm, rifle, spring
gun, air gun, or pneumatic pellet gun, or ammunition therefor, to any
person under the age of 18 years unless accompanied by a parent or
legal guardian.
D. No person under the age of 18 years of age shall have in his possession
any firearm, rifle or ammunition therefor, unless accompanied by
parent or legal guardian.
E. Supervised ranges and hunting within City. This section shall not
prevent the maintenance and use of duly supervised rifle or pistol
ranges authorized by the Common Council, but shall be deemed to
prohibit hunting within the City, except where owners or occupants of
private premises shall have been issued written permits to hunt or
shoot on such premises by the Chief of Police after he shall have
determined that such privileges are necessary for the protection of life
or property and subject to such safeguards as he may impose for the
safety of the lives and property of other persons within the City.
A. In archery class conducted on school district property under the
supervision of a qualified instructor; or
B. At any bona fide business location where the sale of archery equipment
takes place on a professionally developed indoor archery range; or
C. At a designated outdoor archery range approved by the Common
Council; or
§ 242-50 REEDSBURG CODE § 282-2
1:260
Chapter 290
FIRE PREVENTION
D. Hunting at least 300 feet from any building, or having building owner's
permission, and having permission from the landowner; or
E. Bow fishing for rough fish per § 29.405, Wis. Stats.
§ 282-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-2
1:261

ARTICLE I
Fire Department/Fire Inspector Powers and Duties
[Adopted as Secs. 5.07 to 5.15 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 290-1. Apparatus and equipment.
§ 290-2. Police power of department.
A. The Chief shall have control of all apparatus used by the Department
and shall be responsible for its proper maintenance. Emergency repairs
may be authorized by the Chief.
B. No apparatus shall be used for any purpose except for firefighting
within the City limits, or in training therefor, except pursuant to an
agreement approved by the Mayor after the Chief has given his
recommendations on such use. With the approval of the Chief, such
apparatus may be used for emergency purposes other than firefighting
within the City. A written report of all such uses shall be made quarterly
to the Common Council.
C. No person shall wilfully injure, in any manner, any hose, hydrant, or fire
apparatus belonging to the City, and no vehicle shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street,
private driveway or other place, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire,
without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
A. The Chief and assistants or officers in command at any fire are vested
with police authority at fires. Any officer of the Department may cause
the arrest of any person failing to give the right-of-way to the Fire
Department in responding to a fire.
B. The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any fire
within which no person, excepting firefighters and police officers and
those admitted by order of any officer of the Department, shall be
permitted to come. The Chief may cause the removal of any property
whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such
property from fire or to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect the
adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire he may order the
removal or destruction of any property necessary to prevent the further
spread of the fire. He may also cause the removal of all wires or other
facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the
same impedes the work of the Department during the progress of the
fire.
C. Any firefighter, while acting under the direction of the Fire Chief or
other officer in command, may enter upon the premises adjacent to or
in the vicinity of any building or other property then on fire for the
purpose of extinguishing such fire, and no person shall hinder, resist or
obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his duty.
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-2
1:263
§ 290-3. Fire Inspector duties.
§ 290-4. False fire alarm prohibited.
No person shall give or cause to be given any false fire alarm.
§ 290-5. Regulation of burning. [Amended 10-8-2001]
D. Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders
of the Fire Chief or officer in command and may be required to render
assistance in fighting the fire or in removing or guarding property. Such
officer may cause the arrest of any person or persons refusing to obey
said orders.
A. The Chief shall hold the office of Fire Inspector, with power to appoint
one or more deputy fire inspectors, who shall perform the same duties
and have the same powers as the Fire Inspector.
B. The Fire Inspector shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, semiannually,
all buildings, including their premises, designed for occupancy by more
than one family, and all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares
open to the public within the City limits for the purpose of noting and
causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire. The
Inspector shall also investigate the storage and handling of explosives
and flammable liquids within the City.
C. Whenever any City inspection by the Fire Chief or his deputies reveals a
fire hazard, the Chief or his deputies shall serve a notice, in writing,
upon the owner of the property, giving said owner a reasonable time in
which to remove the hazard. If the fire hazard is not removed within the
time allowed, it shall be a nuisance. The Fire Chief or his deputy may
have the same removed by the City, and the cost of such removal may be
recovered in an action by the City against the owner of the property and
shall be a lien against such property.
D. The Chief shall keep a written record card of each property inspected
which shall conform to the requirements of the Industrial and
Commercial Development Commission and shall make the report of
inspections required by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
E. No person shall deny the Chief or his deputies free access to any
property within the City at any reasonable time for the purpose of
making fire inspections. No person shall hinder or obstruct the Fire
Inspector or his deputies in the performance of their duties or refuse to
observe any lawful direction given by them.
A. Except as provided in this section, no person shall build or maintain an
open fire any place within the City of Reedsburg. An "open fire" means
any fire maintained outside of a business, dwelling or manufacturing
§ 290-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 290-5
1:264
§ 290-6. Fire hydrants.
§ 290-7. Mutual fire aid.
The Chief of the Fire Department may authorize and permit fire companies
of the City to go to aid another city, village, town or fire district in
extinguishing a fire or fires therein, provided no more than one truck shall
be authorized and permitted to leave the City at one time.
§ 290-8. Emergency key boxes. [Added 10-13-2003]
facility and not confined to a receptacle approved by the Chief of the
Fire Department, which shall be constructed of either brick, boiler iron,
concrete or sheet metal.
B. Gas and charcoal grills are permitted.
C. Firepits are permitted for social gatherings. Firepits shall only be used
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
D. A patio fireplace is permitted as long as it is either a commercially
purchased unit that encloses the entire fire within the fireplace unit, or
a homemade unit of brick and/or iron. The chimney area and fire
viewable area of a patio fireplace shall be screened with a sparkreduction
device at all times the patio fireplace is in operation.
E. Burning barrels are prohibited from and after April 30, 2002.
F. Only a readily combustible fuel source that consists of gas, wood,
charcoal or manufactured fireplace logs or pellets shall be burned in a
patio fireplace or firepit.
G. The burning of trash, leaves, woods with chemical treatment (i.e.
railroad ties, fence posts, power poles, treated lumber) or other treated
materials that tend to create noxious or annoying similar discharge is
not permitted.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use fire hydrants owned or
maintained by the City of Reedsburg. Members of the City of Reedsburg
Fire Department are specifically excluded from this prohibition when
the use is in the furtherance of their duties as firefighters.
B. Certain fire hydrants within the City shall be designated for both fire
and nonfire use. Those hydrants shall be painted blaze orange. A list of
those hydrants shall be compiled and from time to time changed by the
Director of the City Utility. That list shall be accessible to the public
during normal business hours.
C. All hydrants designated in this category may be used by City employees
for City functions. Any other individual wishing to use these hydrants
for any purpose whatsoever must obtain a written permit from the
Director of Utility.
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-8
1:265
§ 290-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, of this Code
of the City of Reedsburg.
A. Installation. A Fire Department emergency key box shall be installed on
all business, public and commercial buildings, multiple-family dwellings
where access to interior units is through a common secured entrance,
industrial facilities, residential care facilities or where a property within
the Fire Department's jurisdiction is protected by an automatic fire
alarm or fire sprinkler/suppressions system.
B. Box type and location. The Fire Chief or a designated representative
shall approve the type and location of the emergency key box prior to
installation. The owner of a structure required to have an emergency
key box shall keep a key in the lock box that will allow access to the
building and all locked or secured areas within the building.
C. Applicability. This article shall apply to all buildings subject to it for
which a building permit is issued after October 23, 2003.
§ 290-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 290-9
1:266
ARTICLE II
Fire Limits; Adoption of Standards
[Adopted as Ch. 26 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 290-10. Adoption of fire limits.
The following shall be and are hereby declared to be the fire limits in the
City of Reedsburg:
§ 290-11. Adoption of standards.
§ 290-12. Violations and penalties.
A. Beginning at the intersection at the north line of the Chicago
Northwestern Railway right-of-way with the east bank of the Baraboo
River;
B. Continuing northeasterly along the bank of the Baraboo River to a point
opposite the alley north of East Second Street;
C. Thence east along the center of this alley to North Park Street;
D. Thence south along the center of North Park Street to East Second
Street;
E. Thence east along the center of East Second Street to the center of
North Locust Street;
F. Thence south along the center of Locust Street to the north line of the
Railway right-of-way;
G. Thence northwesterly along the north line of the Railway right-of-way
to the point of beginning.
A. The following orders and codes of the Wisconsin Administrative Code,
Rules of the Department of Safety and Professional Services (SPS), are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the City Fire
Prevention Code. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Chapter SPS 332, Public Employee Safety and Health;
(2) Chapter SPS 307, Explosives and Fireworks;
(3) Chapter SPS, 310, Flammable and Combustible Liquids;
(4) Chapter SPS 340, Gas Systems;
(5) Chapters SPS 361-365, Commercial Building Code;
(6) Chapter SPS 314, Fire Prevention.
B. A copy of these codes is on file in the City Hall.
§ 290-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-12
1:267
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, use, occupy, or maintain any
building or structure in violation of any provisions of this article, or to
cause, permit or suffer any such violations to be committed. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3,
of this Code of the City of Reedsburg. It shall be the responsibility of the
offender to abate the violation as expeditiously as possible, and each
day that such violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. If in any action a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, nor
shall any error, oversight, or dereliction of duty on the part of the
Building and/or Fire Inspector constitute a defense.
§ 290-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 290-12
1:268
Chapter 297
FIREWORKS
§ 297-1. Private use and sale.
No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale, use, keep, discharge or
explode any fireworks except any fireworks not specifically excluded from
the definition contained in § 167.10(1), Wis. Stats., within the limits of the
City unless he shall be authorized by a fireworks permit as hereinafter
provided. The term "fireworks" as used in this section shall be defined as
provided in § 167.10(2), Wis. Stats., and shall be deemed to include all
rockets, or similar missiles, containing explosive fuel.
§ 297-2. Fireworks permits. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Fireworks, other than those prohibited by the laws of the State of
Wisconsin, may be used and displayed in open fields, rivers, lakes and ponds
by public authorization, fair associations, amusement parks, park boards,
civic organizations, and other groups of individuals when a permit for such
display has been granted by the Mayor. All applications shall be referred to
the Fire Chief for investigation, and no permit shall be granted unless the
Mayor, from the report of the chief, determines that the applicant will use
the fireworks in a public exhibition and that all reasonable precautions will
be handled by a competent operator and conducted in a suitable, safe place
and manner. Before granting any fireworks permit, the Mayor shall require
the applicant to post with the City Clerk-Treasurer an approved indemnity
bond in the sum of $2,000 or as set from time to time by Common Council
for the payment of all claims that may arise by reason of injuries to persons
or property from handling, use or discharge of fireworks under such permit.
Chapter 306
GARAGE SALES
§ 306-1. No permit required; standards.
Garage, yard, rummage, and other similar sales from residential premises
do not require permits or licenses but shall meet the following standards:
A. Not exceed four consecutive days.
B. Occur no more than once per month on any one parcel.
C. Hours shall be 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
D. All items shall be stored out of public view from a street and/or sidewalk
on nonsale days.
E. Sales are prohibited on vacant lots.
§ 290-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-1
1:269
§ 306-2. Exceptions.
This section does not prohibit the sale of individual vehicles and trailers.
Additional sales per year shall be allowed under each of the following
circumstances:
Chapter 315
HEALTH AND SANITATION
§ 315-1. Legislative authority.
The Sauk County Health Committee and/or the Sauk County Health Officer
shall have the same powers and authority that a City Health Officer and/or
City Board of Health would have within the City. (In this Code, references to
"Health Officer" shall mean the Sauk County Health Officer.)
§ 315-2. Health Officer duties and powers.
F. Signs shall not be placed in the tree bank or any public right-of-way.
A. The sale is a result of the resident of that parcel moving to another
parcel.
B. The sale is conducted through the estate or legal guardian of the
resident.
A. General duties. The Health Officer under the supervision of the Board of
Health shall: [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Maintain continuous sanitary supervision over his/her territory.
(2) Promote the spread of information as to the causes, nature and
prevention of prevalent diseases and the preservation and
improvement of health.
(3) Enforce the health laws, rules and regulations of the Wisconsin
Department of Health Services, the state and City, including the
laws relating to contagious diseases contained in Chs. 250 and 251,
Wis. Stats.
(4) Take steps necessary to secure prompt and full reports by
physicians of communicable diseases and prompt and full
registration of births and deaths.
(5) Keep and deliver to his/her successor a record of all his official acts.
(6) Make an annual report to the Wisconsin Department of Health
Services and to the Common Council and such other report as they
may requested.
§ 306-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 315-2
1:270
§ 315-3. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Health may make reasonable and general rules for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and for the prevention of the
creation of health nuisances and the protection of the public health and
welfare, and may, where appropriate, require the issuance of licenses and
permits. All such regulations, when approved by the Common Council, shall
have the same effect as ordinances, and any person violating any of such
regulations and any lawful order of the Board shall be subject to a penalty
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, of this Code of the City
of Reedsburg.
§ 315-4. Abatement of health nuisances standards.
The Health Officer together with the Board of Health may abate health
nuisances in accordance with §§ 250 and 251, Wis. Stats., which are
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein.
§ 315-5. Communicable diseases standards.
Chapter 252, Wis. Stats., and Ch. DHS 145, Wis. Adm. Code, are adopted
by reference and made a part of this chapter and the Health Officer shall
enforce the provisions thereof.
§ 315-6. Regulation of nuisance-type businesses.
§ 315-7. Introduction of fluoride into water system.
B. Materials and supplies. The Health Officer shall have authority to
procure (upon approved City budget), at the expense of the City, all
record books, quarantine cards and other materials needed by the
Board of Health, except such as are furnished by the Wisconsin
Department of Health Services.
A. Permit required. No person shall conduct, with the City, any business
which has a tendency to create a public nuisance, except upon permit
issued by the Board of Health and subject to such conditions as the
Board may impose.
B. Definition. A business which has a tendency to create a public nuisance
is one which, unless property regulated, may create the condition
creating a public nuisance as defined in Chapter 402, Nuisances,
§ 402-2, of this Code of the City of Reedsburg.
C. This section is enacted pursuant to § 66.0415, Wis. Stats.
A. Upon receiving the consent and approval of the Wisconsin Department
of Health Services and until further direction of the Common Council,
the Board of Health shall proceed with the introduction of
approximately 0.7 to 0.75 of fluoride to every million parts of water
§ 315-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-7
1:271
§ 315-8. Compulsory connection to sewer and water.
§ 315-9. Smoking prohibited in certain areas; use of tobacco
products prohibited. [Amended 6-28-2010; 11-11-2019 by Ord. No.
1897-19]
being distributed in the water supply system of the City, and the Board
may from time to time, upon approval by the Wisconsin Department of
Health Services, change the proportions thereof.
B. Insofar as the facilities, equipment, place and employees subject to the
jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission may be needed and used
in connection with this public health program, they shall be so used in
the project as facilities and agents of and for the City, and the cost
thereof shall be paid out of the general fund of the City.
(1) The Health Officer shall make periodic reports to the Common
Council as to the status of such service and conduct surveys and
research as to the beneficial effect of this program and project on
the citizens of this community.
A. Notice to connect. Whenever sewer and water become available to any
building used for human habitation, the Building Inspector shall notify,
in writing, the owner thereof to connect all facilities. If such person to
whom the notice has been given shall fail to comply for more than 10
days after the notice, the Building Inspector shall cause the necessary
connections to be made and the expense thereof shall be assessed as a
special tax against the property pursuant to § 66.0701, Wis. Stats.
B. Abatement of privies and cesspools. After connection to a water main
and public sewer, no privy, privy vault or cesspool shall be constructed
or maintained upon such lot or parcel and shall be abated upon 10 days'
written notice for such abatement by the Building Inspector. If not so
abated, the Building Inspector shall cause the same to be done and the
cost thereof assessed as a special tax against the property.
C. The City of Reedsburg Utility Commission may extend the time for
connection hereunder or may grant other temporary relief where strict
enforcement would work an unnecessary hardship without
corresponding public or private benefit.
A. Purpose. The Common Council of the City recognizes that smoking of
cigarettes and tobacco products is hazardous to an individual's health
and may affect the health of nonsmokers/smokers when they are
involuntarily in the presence of smoking. Reliable scientific studies
assessed by credible health officials have found that secondhand
tobacco smoke is a significant health hazard for children, elderly
people, and individuals with cardiovascular disease or impaired
respiratory function. Air pollution caused by smoking is an offensive
annoyance and irritant. Smoking results in serious and significant
physical discomfort to nonsmokers. This section is adopted pursuant to
§ 315-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 315-9
1:272
the authority provided in Wis. Stats. § 101.123(4m) for the purpose
of protecting the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of
the people of the City, especially recognizing the health interests of
nonsmokers, who constitute a majority of the population.
B. Wis. Stats. § 101.123, (2017-18 Wisconsin Statutes updated through
2019 Wis. Act 18) to the extent that it requires any act to be performed
or prohibited, is hereby adopted, and incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein, as a part of this section.
C. Definitions. The definitions set forth in Wis. Stats. § 101.123(1) are
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth
herein, provided that the term "Enclosed place" defined in Wis. Stats.
§ 101.123(1)(ak), shall be deemed to include any enclosed indoor area
as defined in this subsection. The following words, terms and phrases,
when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A facility operated by a child-care provider
that provides care and supervision for four or more children under
seven years of age for less than 24 hours a day.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — Any product containing or
delivering nicotine, or any other substance, whether natural or
synthetic, intended for human consumption through the inhalation of
aerosol or vapor from the product. The term electronic smoking device
includes, but is not limited to, devices manufactured, marketed, or
sold as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pens, mods, tank systems,
or under any other product name or descriptor. The term electronic
smoking device includes any component part of a product, whether or
not marketed or sold separately.
EMPLOYMENT — Any trade, occupation, or process of manufacture
or any method of carrying on such trade, occupation or process of
manufacture in which any person may be engaged.
ENCLOSED PLACE — All space between a floor and a ceiling that is
bounded by walls, doors, or windows, whether open or closed, covering
more than 50% of the combined surface area of the vertical planes
constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall includes any retractable
divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or
permanent. A 0.011 gauge screen with an 18 by 16 mesh count is not a
wall.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The person, or his or her agent who ultimately
controls, governs or directs the activities aboard a public conveyance
or within or at a place where smoking is regulated under this section,
regardless of the person's status as owner or lessee.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — Any enclosed indoor area that employees
normally frequent during the course of employment, including an office,
work area, elevator, employee lounge, restroom, conference room,
§ 315-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-9
1:273
meeting room, classroom, hallway, stairway, lobby, common area,
vehicle or employee cafeteria.
PRIVATE CLUB — A facility used by an organization that limits its
membership and is organized for a recreational, fraternal, social,
patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any enclosed indoor place that is open to the public,
regardless of whether a fee is charged, or a place to which the public
has lawful access or may be invited.
RESTAURANT — Has the meaning given in § 97.01(14g).
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any store or shop in which retail sales is
the principal business conducted.
SMOKING — Burning or holding, or inhaling or exhaling, or carrying
any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, hookah, or any other lighted
or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, including
marijuana, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form.
Smoking includes the use of an electronic smoking device.
D. Prohibition against smoking. Except as otherwise provided, it shall be
unlawful for any person to engage in smoking in a sports arena, bus
shelter, public conveyance or any of the following enclosed places:
(1) Residence halls or dormitories owned or operated by a college or
university.
(2) Child-care centers, including outdoor areas on the premises when
children are present.
(3) Educational facilities, outdoor spaces, or grounds.
(4) Inpatient health care facilities.
(5) Theaters.
(6) Restaurants.
(7) Taverns.
(8) Private clubs.
(9) Retail establishments.
(10) Common areas of multiple-unit residential properties.
(11) Lodging establishments.
(12) State, county, City, village or town buildings.
(13) Areas in city parks as posted and so designated by the board of
park commissioners, including, but not limited to, the athletic field/
bleachers and dugouts, playground and swing set areas, and park
restrooms.
§ 315-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 315-9
1:274
(14) City-owned or leased motor vehicles and equipment.
(15) Public forms of transportation, including, but not limited to, motor
buses, taxis, or other public passenger vehicles.
(16) All enclosed places, in addition to those listed above, that are
places of employment, or that are public places.
E. Exceptions. The prohibition against smoking does not apply in the
following places:
(1) All outdoor places not identified in Wis. Stats. § 101.123(2)(d).
(2) A private residence.
(3) A room used by only one person in an assisted living facility as his
residence.
(4) A room in an assisted living facility in which two or more persons
reside if every person who lives in the room smokes and has made a
written request to the person in charge of the facility to be placed
in a room in which smoking is allowed.
(5) Designated outside areas located on the premises of a restaurant,
tavern, private club, or retail establishment.
F. Responsibility of persons in charge.
(1) No person in charge may allow any person to smoke in violation of
this section at a location that is under the control or direction of the
person in charge.
(2) No person in charge may provide matches, ashtrays, or other
equipment for smoking at any location where smoking is
prohibited.
(3) A person in charge shall make reasonable efforts to prohibit
persons from smoking at a location where smoking is prohibited by
doing all of the following:
(a) Posting signs setting forth the prohibition and providing other
appropriate notification and information concerning the
prohibition.
(b) Refusing to serve a person, if the person is smoking in a
restaurant or tavern.
(c) Asking a person who is smoking to refrain from smoking and, if
the person refuses to do so, asking the person to leave the
location.
(d) If a person refuses to leave the location after being requested
to do so, the person in charge shall immediately notify an
appropriate law enforcement agency of the violation.
§ 315-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-9
1:275
(4) A person in charge of a restaurant, tavern, private club, or retail
establishment may designate an outside area located a reasonable
distance from any entrance where smoking is permitted.
G. Uniform signs. All properties and establishments regulated by this
section are required to post no smoking signs in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Department of Safety and Professional
Services to notify all persons of this section.
H. Inspection and enforcement. The county health department, the county
sheriff's department, the City police department, the City Zoning
Administrator or designee agency shall have the power to enter any
premises within its jurisdiction that are subject to the smoking ban to
ascertain whether the premises are in compliance with this section and
to take appropriate enforcement action pursuant to this section or Wis.
Stats. § 101.123, including, in the case of the sheriff or any law
enforcement agency, issuing citations for any violation.
I. Penalties.
(1) Forfeiture. Any person, agent, firm or corporation violating
Subsection D of this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit an
amount established by the City.
(2) Forfeiture. A person, agent, firm or corporation violating
Subsection F of this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit an
amount established by the City.
(3) Maximum forfeiture. For violations of Subsection F of this section,
no person in charge may be required to forfeit more than the total
amount established by the City for all violations occurring on a
single day.
J. Clean indoor air; intent and construction. The City finds that it is in the
interest of the health, safety and welfare of the community to adopt by
reference Wis. Stats. § 101.123. It is the intent of the Common Council
of the City that where there may be a conflict between Wis. Stats.
§ 101.123 and this section that the most restrictive section shall apply.
K. Nuisance, injunction. The repeated violation of this section is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided
under this section, the City may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any
violation of this section. Such application for relief may include seeking
a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction.
L. It shall be unlawful to use any tobacco products as defined by Wis. Stat.
139.75(12) on and/or within 20 feet of premises owned by the
Reedsburg School District within the City of Reedsburg. Any person,
agent, firm or corporation violating this section shall, upon conviction,
forfeit an amount established by the City.
§ 315-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 315-10
1:276
§ 315-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-24-2007]
For a violation of a section of this chapter, the forfeiture shall be not less
than $5 nor more than $500 upon conviction for each offense, together with
the costs of prosecution.
Chapter 324
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§ 324-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as, referred to, or cited as the "Historic
Preservation Ordinance, City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin."
§ 324-2. Authority, purpose and intent.
A. Authority. These regulations are adopted under authority granted by
§ 62.23(7)(em) of the Wisconsin Statutes. Therefore, the Common
Council of the City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin ordains these historic
preservation regulations.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety,
and general welfare of this community.
C. Intent. The intent of this chapter is to:
(1) Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and
preservation of such improvements, sites and districts that
represent or reflect elements of cultural, social, economic, political
and architectural history.
(2) Safeguard historic and cultural heritage as embodied and reflected
in such historic structures, sites and districts.
(3) Stabilize and improve property values, and enhance the visual and
aesthetic character of the City of Reedsburg.
(4) Protect and enhance the City of Reedsburg's attractions to
residents, tourists and visitors and serve as a support and stimulus
to business and industry.
(5) Educate the public regarding the need and desirability of the
national, state and municipal historic preservation program.
(6) Foster civic pride in the City of Reedsburg's notable
accomplishments.
D. Interpretation. These regulations shall be interpreted and applied to
accomplish the purpose and intent stated above, provided such
interpretation and application do not unreasonably restrict or limit the
right of any person to own, sell, lease to another, enjoy, improve or
§ 315-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-2
1:277
§ 324-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMISSION — The Historic Preservation Commission as created by
§ 324-4.
COMMON COUNCIL — The Common Council of the City of Reedsburg,
Wisconsin.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area designated by the Common Council
pursuant to § 324-7 that contains two or more sites or improvements which
have been determined to meet the criteria set forth in § 324-5.
HISTORIC PROPERTY — An historic site, an historic structure, or an
historic district.
HISTORIC SITE — Any parcel of land designated by the Common Council
pursuant to § 324-7 that meets the criteria set forth in § 324-5.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any improvement which has been designated by
the Common Council pursuant to § 324-7 that meets the criteria set forth in
§ 324-5.
IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, work of art or any fixture
or appurtenance to the real property, including streets, alleys, sidewalks,
curbs, lighting fixtures or signs.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, or limited liability
company, trust, estate, association or any other legal entity.
otherwise use any real or personal property in which he or she has an
equitable or legal interest.
E. Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands and
waters within the territorial boundaries of the City of Reedsburg. The
jurisdiction of this chapter shall not include any lands or waters within
the extraterritorial district of the City of Reedsburg as set forth in
§ 690-15 of Chapter 690, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Reedsburg,
Wisconsin.
F. Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
G. Repeal. Ordinance No. 1321-95 is hereby repealed in its entirety. All
other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the City of Reedsburg
inconsistent or conflicting with this chapter, to the extent of the
inconsistency only, are hereby repealed.
H. Effective date. This chapter shall be in effect after a public hearing,
adoption by the City of Reedsburg Common Council, and publication or
posting as provided by law.
§ 324-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 324-4
1:278
§ 324-4. Administration.
A. Historic Preservation Commission.
(1) Creation, composition. The Historic Preservation Commission is
hereby created and shall consist of seven members appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council. The
members of the Commission shall serve without compensation and
may be removable by the Mayor and the Common Council without
cause. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to be the
Chairman of the Commission. The Mayor shall appoint one
alternate member, who shall act with full power only when a
member of the Commission is absent or is unable to vote because of
a conflict of interest. One of the principal members of the
Commission shall be a member of the Common Council. The
remaining principal members and the alternate member of the
Commission shall be adult residents of the City of Reedsburg with
an interest in historical and cultural preservation.
(2) Term. The members of the Commission, including the Chairman
and the designated alternate member, shall serve for a three-year
term. Those terms shall be staggered as two three-year terms, two
two-year terms and three one-year terms at the time of initial
appointment.
(3) Powers and duties. The Commission shall have the following
powers and duties.
(a) Pursuant to § 324-6, the Commission shall review and issue its
recommendation with respect to nominations to designate a
site, improvement or area as an historic property.
(b) Pursuant to § 324-8, the Commission shall review applications
for certificate of review and shall issue its certificate of review.
(c) The Commission shall assist persons applying to have property
listed on the State Register of Historic Places or the National
Register of Historic Places with the application process.
(d) The Commission shall provide information to interested
persons regarding investment tax credit programs, grants or
loans that may be available with respect to historic
rehabilitation efforts. The Commission shall assist interested
individuals in understanding and meeting the eligibility
requirements for such programs.
(e) The Commission shall educate the public regarding the
benefits to the community, businesses and property owners
from historic preservation.
(4) Prohibited conduct.
§ 324-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-4
1:279
§ 324-5. Criteria for historic designation.
(a) No member of the Commission may use his or her position to
obtain financial gain or anything of substantial value for the
private benefit of himself, or his or her immediate family, or for
an organization with which he or she is associated.
(b) A member of the Commission shall recuse himself or herself
from the discussion, the vote or the preparation of the
Commission's written recommendation with respect to any
nomination of real or personal property in which the member
owns or has a material financial interest.
B. Common Council. The Common Council shall have the responsibility of
designating historic property pursuant to § 324-7.
A. A site, improvement or district shall be designated as an historic
property only if it is significant in national, state or local history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture.
B. The quality of significance required to be designated as an historic
property is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects
that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship, feeling and association and that satisfy any of the
following conditions:
(1) Association with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of history.
(2) Association with the lives of persons significant in the past.
(3) Embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction or that represent the work of a master or
that possess high artistic values.
(4) Representation of a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction.
(5) Yielding, or likely to yield, information important to prehistory or
history.
C. Notwithstanding § 324-5B, no cemetery, birthplace or grave of a
historical figure, property owned by a religious institution or used for
religious purposes, reconstructed historic building, property primarily
commemorative in nature or property that has achieved significance
within the past 50 years may be considered eligible for designation as
an historic property unless it is an integral part of a district that meets
the criteria of significance under § 324-5B or unless it falls within at
least one or the following categories:
(1) A religious property deriving primary significance from
architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance.
§ 324-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 324-5
1:280
§ 324-6. Procedure for historic designation.
(2) A birthplace or grave of an historical figure of outstanding
importance if there is no appropriate site or building directly
associated with his or her productive life in the vicinity of that
birthplace or grave.
(3) A cemetery which derives its primary significance from the grave of
a person of transcendent importance, age, distinctive design
features or association with historic events.
(4) A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable
environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a
restoration master plan and when no other building or structure
with the same association has survived.
(5) A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age,
tradition or symbolic value has invested it with its own exceptional
significance.
(6) A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it is of
exceptional importance.
A. Nomination process.
(1) Any resident of the City of Reedsburg may nominate a site,
improvement or area for designation as an historic property. The
nomination shall be made on a form prepared by the Commission.
The nomination shall be delivered to the Chairman of the
Commission.
(2) A nomination under this chapter does not constitute a nomination
to the State Register of Historic Places or the National Register of
Historic Places.
(3) The nomination form prescribed by the Commission shall require
the following information:
(a) The name and address of the individual submitting the
nomination.
(b) The location of the site, improvement or area being nominated
for designation as an historic property.
(c) The names and addresses of any person or persons who own all
or part of the site, improvement or area being nominated for
designation as an historic property.
(d) A statement and explanation that the site, improvement or area
being nominated for designation as an historic property is
eligible for designation under § 324-5.
§ 324-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-6
1:281
§ 324-7. Designation of historic property.
§ 324-8. Regulation of historic property.
B. Written recommendation. The Commission shall make a written
recommendation to the Common Council with respect to whether the
site, improvement or area nominated should be designated an historic
property.
A. Upon receipt of a recommendation, the City shall fix a time and place of
a public hearing before the Common Council within 30 days on the
Historic Preservation Commission's recommendation and cause notice
to be given as follows: by publishing a Class 2 notice under Chapter 985
of the Wisconsin Statutes; and by mailing a notice thereof to any person
having an interest in the property described by the nomination.
B. Following the public hearing, the Common Council shall decide whether
to approve the Commission's recommendation, modify and approve the
Commission's recommendations or disapprove the Commission's
recommendation. The decision of the Common Council shall be by a
majority vote. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. After a site, improvement or area has been designated as an historic
property pursuant to the procedures set forth in §§ 324-6 and 324-7, the
owner or person responsible for such historic property shall not
reconstruct, alter or demolish all or any part of the exterior of the
historic property or construct any improvement upon the historic
property (such actions are collectively referred to herein as
"alterations") or cause or permit any alterations to be performed upon
the historic property unless a certificate of review has been issued by
the Commission.
B. The Commission shall consider any application for a certificate of
review in light of the following factors:
(1) Whether the proposed alteration would detrimentally change,
destroy or adversely affect any exterior feature of the historic
property.
(2) In the case of a site or improvement located within an historic
district, whether the proposed alteration conforms to the purpose
and intent of this chapter and to the objectives and design criteria
of the historic preservation plan, if any, for that historic district.
(3) Whether the historic property that would be subjected to the
proposed alteration is of such architectural or historic significance
that its demolition or change would be detrimental to the public
interest and contrary to the general welfare of the residents of the
City of Reedsburg.
§ 324-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 324-8
1:282
§ 324-9. Rescission of designation.
The designation that a site, improvement or area is an historic property may
be rescinded by either of the following procedures:
C. Within 14 days of receiving the application for the certificate of review,
the Commission shall issue its certificate of review. The certificate of
review shall include the following information:
(1) The Commission's finding with respect to the proposed alteration
and the factors set forth in § 324-8B. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) The Commission's suggestions as to how the proposed alterations
could be completed so as to minimize any adverse affect to the
historic property.
(3) Advice to the applicant as to whether any tax credits, grants or
loans are available to the applicant for purposes of completing the
proposed alterations and whether the proposed alterations could
be completed so as to make such tax credits, grants or loans
available to the applicant.
D. A certificate of review shall be advisory only and shall not prohibit in
any manner the alterations that may be made by the owner of the
historic property or restrict how the alterations shall be completed by
the owner of the historic property.
E. The issuance of a certificate of review shall not relieve the applicant
from obtaining other permits and approvals required by the City of
Reedsburg for the proposed alterations.
F. Notwithstanding § 324-8A, ordinary maintenance and repairs may be
undertaken without a certificate of review, provided that the work
involves repairs to existing features of an historic property or the
replacement of elements of an historic property with pieces identical in
appearance, and provided that the work does not change the exterior
appearance of the historic property.
A. In the event that the Commission determines that the site, improvement
or area was improperly designated as an historic property or that the
site, improvement or area no longer satisfies the criteria set forth in
§ 324-5, then the Commission shall publish a Class 2 notice under
Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes that the Commission will be
considering a rescission of the designation with respect to that site,
improvement or area. A notice thereof shall also be mailed to any
person or persons owning all or part of the site, improvement or area.
Following a public hearing, the Commission may recommend to the
Common Council that the historic property designation for that site,
improvement or area be rescinded. Such a recommendation shall be in
writing and supported with the Commission's rationale. Following the
procedure set forth in § 324-7, the Common Council shall approve,
§ 324-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-9
1:283
Chapter 332
IMPACT FEES
§ 332-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the authority of § 66.0617, Wis. Stats., the local impact fees
enabling legislation, the purpose of this chapter is to establish the
mechanism for the imposition of impact fees upon new development to
finance the capital costs of acquiring, establishing, upgrading, expanding,
and constructing public facilities which are necessary to accommodate land
development. This chapter is intended to assure that new development
bears an appropriate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to
provide public facilities within the City of Reedsburg and its service areas
as they are required to serve the needs arising out of land development.
§ 332-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — The permit required for new construction, additions
and improvements pursuant to Chapter 242, Building Construction, § 242-9,
of the Code of the City of Reedsburg. The term "building permit," as used
herein, shall not be deemed to include permits required for remodeling,
rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure or rebuilding
a damaged or destroyed structure, provided there is no increase in the
number of dwelling units resulting therefrom.
CAPITAL BUDGET — A separate budget dedicated to financing capital
improvements.
CAPITAL COSTS — The costs to construct, expand or improve public
facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering and
design costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except that
not more than 10% of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering and
design costs unless such costs relate directly to the public improvement
for which the impact fees were imposed actually exceed 10% of the capital
costs. "Capital costs" does not include other noncapital costs to construct,
expand or improve public facilities or the costs of equipment to construct,
expand or improve public facilities.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN — Shall be a part of the Comprehensive
Plan, which:
approve and modify or disapprove the Commission's recommendation
to rescind the historic property designation.
Contains an aggregation of sites into development subareas with
development potential that would create the need for new capital
improvements;
A.
§ 324-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 332-2
1:284
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM — The officially adopted schedule of
capital improvements setting forth the year or month in which they will
be undertaken, the time and cost of construction, and other necessary
features.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS — Public facilities that are treated as
capitalized expenses according to generally accepted accounting principles,
and does not include costs associated with the operation, administration,
maintenance, nor replacement of capital improvements, nor does it include
administrative facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official land use plan of the City of
Reedsburg.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
property, the use of any principal structure or land or any other activity that
requires a change in water meter size or the installation of a new water
meter and/or the issuance of a building permit.
DEVELOPMENT SUBAREAS — Geographically defined areas of the City
that have been designated in the Comprehensive Plan or impact fee needs
assessment as areas in which development potential may create the need
for capital improvements programs to be funded by impact fees.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designed as a residential
occupancy area by not more than one family or group for living and sleeping
purposes.
IMPACT FEE — Any charge, fee, or assessment levied pursuant to this
chapter when any portion of the revenues collected is intended to fund any
portion of the costs of capital improvements or any public facilities and shall
be assessed at the issuance of a building permit.
IMPACT FEE COEFFICIENT — The charge per dwelling unit calculated
by dividing total public facility costs by total number of dwelling units as
projected by the most current water system needs assessment.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The construction or modification of
improvements to real property that creates additional residential dwelling
units within the City or its service areas or that results in nonresidential
uses that create a need for new, expanded or improved public facilities
within the City or its service areas. Land development also includes
construction or modification of improvements to real property that creates
the need for an additional water meter or an upgrade in water meter size.
MULTIFAMILY — Any residential dwelling with more than two single-family
dwellings.
Includes standards for level of service for the capital facilities and
infrastructure to be fully or partially funded with impact fees; and
B.
Sets forth proposed subarea project lists, cost estimates, and funding
sources.
C.
§ 332-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-2
1:285
NEEDS ASSESSMENT — The assessment of needs required to identify
public facility costs for the purpose of calculating impact fees as defined by
§ 66.0617, Wis. Stats.
PUBLIC FACILITIES — For purposes of this chapter, as defined in § 66.0617,
Wis. Stats., "public facilities" means facilities for facilities for pumping,
storing, treating and distributing water and parks owned and maintained by
the City.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any development approved by the local
government for residential use.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT UNIT (REU) — A unit of measure for water
impact fees equivalent to one residential dwelling unit. For purposes of
this chapter, one residential equivalent is considered equal to the basic
residential water meter size of 5/8 inch or 3/4 inch.
SERVICE AREA — A geographic area delineated by the Common Council
within which the City provides or will provide facilities.
SERVICE STANDARD — A certain quantity or quality of public facilities
relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land or other appropriate
measure as specified by the Common Council.
SITE — The land on which development takes place.
SUBDIVISION — A plat, certified survey map, or other method used to
divide a parcel of property into two or more separate parcels or lots.
WATER UTILITY — The Water Utility of the Reedsburg Utility Commission
of the City of Reedsburg.
ZONING DISTRICTS — Those areas designated in Chapter 690, Zoning,
as being reserved for specific land uses, subject to development and use
regulations specified in Chapter 690.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The official adopted Zoning Map and text
regulating all development and land use in the City of Reedsburg.
§ 332-3. Impact fees for water utilities.
The impact fees for water utilities to be paid at the time of issuance of a
building permit are:
Meter Size Equivalency Impact Fee
5/8" and 3/4"
multifamily
0.75 $473
5/8" and 3/4" 1 $631
1" 2.5 $1,576
1 1/2" 5 $3,153
2" 8 $5,044
3" 15 $9,458
§ 332-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 332-3
1:286
Meter Size Equivalency Impact Fee
4" 25 $15,763
6" 50 $31,527
8" or larger 80 $50,443
§ 332-4. Exemptions for water utilities impact fees.
§ 332-5. Impact fees for park facilities.
§ 332-6. Payment of impact fees.
A. An impact fee will not be required in the following cases:
(1) Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no additional
or larger water meter connections are requested.
(2) The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or
structure of the same size and use where no additional or larger
water and/or sewer connections are requested and where the use is
not changed.
B. A change in water meter size shall not be exempted from payment of
the impact fee; however, a credit shall be given for the current impact
fee on the old meter size. For example, at the time of an application for
a change from a five-eighths-inch meter to a one-inch meter, the impact
fee would equal the current impact fee for a one-inch meter less the
current impact fee for a five-eighths-inch meter.
C. No impact fee shall be required, nor credited, for a change in water
meter size that results in a decrease in meter size.
D. Any claim for exemption must be made no later than the time of
application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be
deemed waived.
A. Impact fees for park facilities imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
due and payable at the time of issuance of a building permit for new
construction of a residential dwelling.
B. Impact fee for dwelling units shall be $800 for a single unit. For
seasonal employee housing development with more than 12 units, the
fee can be reduced to $400 pending the inclusion of recreation
facilities, and open space is required for these developments.
A. All required park impact fees shall be paid in full by separate check at
the time of issuance of a building permit. Park impact fee payments
shall be assumed to be the responsibility of the owner of record at the
time of building permit issuance.
§ 332-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-6
1:287
§ 332-7. Needs assessment.
The basis for the imposition of impact fees is the Park Facilities Needs
Assessment Report and its attachments, as outlined in the needs
assessment prepared by MSA in May 2019, and the Water Impact Fee
Report, prepared by MSA Professional Services, Inc. in May 2019 both of
which are on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer of the City of
Reedsburg. Park impact fees shall be used generally for parks, playgrounds,
and land for athletic fields. Water impact fees shall be used for water
towers, reservoirs, pump stations, wells and equipment, pump stations,
water mains and related public improvement of the Water Utility.
§ 332-8. Use of impact fees.
B. All required water impact fees shall be paid in full by separate check to
Reedsburg Utility Commission prior to issuance of a water meter. A
completed application for water service, and a copy of the building
permit shall be submitted with the payment.
A. Funds collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of
paying the proportionate costs of providing public facilities that may
become necessary due to land development. These costs may include
the costs of debt service on bonds or similar debt instruments when the
debt has been incurred for the purpose of proceeding with designated
public facilities projects prior to the collection of all anticipated impact
fees for that project, to reimburse the City or Utility for advances of
other funds or reserves, and such other purposes consistent with
§ 66.0617, Wis. Stats., which are recorded and approved by the
Common Council. Section 66.0617, Wis. Stats., was amended by Act
243 of 2017 to:
(1) Require that, at the time the municipality collects an impact fee, it
shall provide to the developer from which it received the fee an
accounting of how the fee will be spent; and
(2) Add to the list of items that cannot be included as impact fees:
amounts for an increase in service capacity greater than the
capacity necessary to serve the development for which the fee is
imposed; or expenses for operation or maintenance of a public
facility.
B. The City may issue bonds, revenue certificates, and other obligations of
indebtedness in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be
provided by law in furtherance of the provision of capital improvement
projects. Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue
certificates, or other obligations of indebtedness for such projects may
include impact fees and other City revenues as may be allowed by the
Council. Impact fees paid pursuant to this chapter, however, shall be
restricted to use solely and exclusively for financing directly or as a
pledge against bonds, revenue certificates, and other obligations of
indebtedness for the cost of capital improvements as specified herein.
§ 332-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 332-8
1:288
§ 332-9. Refunds of fees.
C. These impact fees shall be collected until the capital costs associated
with the projects specified in the Park Facilities Needs Assessment
Report or the Water Impact Fee Report, as amended from time to time,
have been incurred and satisfied unless such time period exceeds 15
years beyond projected commencement of projects or 20 years beyond
projected satisfaction of indebtedness of the specified projects for
which these impact fees are imposed.
A. With regard to impact fees collected after April 10, 2006, that are
collected by the City within eight years of the effective date of this
chapter, but are not used within 10 years after the effective date of this
chapter to pay capital costs for which they were imposed, shall be
refunded to the current owner of the property with respect to which the
impact fees were imposed along with any interest that has accumulated
thereon.
B. The ten-year time limit for using impact fees may be extended for three
years if the City adopts a resolution stating that, due to extenuating
circumstances or hardship in meeting the ten-year limit, it needs an
additional three years to use the impact fees that were collected. The
resolution shall include detailed written findings that specify the
extenuating circumstances or hardship that led to the need to adopt a
resolution under this subsection.
C. An impact fee that was collected before January 1, 2003, must be used
for the purpose for which it was imposed not later than December 31,
2012. Any such fee that is not used by the date shall be refunded to the
current property owner of the property with respect to which the
impact fee was imposed, along with any interest, which has
accumulated.
D. An impact fee that is collected after December 31, 2002, and before
April 11, 2006, must be used for the purpose for which it was imposed
not later than the first day of the 120th month beginning after the date
on which the fee was collected. Any such fee that is not used by that
date shall be refunded to the current owner of the property with respect
to which the impact fee was imposed, along with any interest that has
accumulated.
E. With regard to an impact fee that is collected after April 10, 2006, and
is collected more than eight years after the effective date of this
chapter, such impact fees shall be used within a reasonable period of
time after they are collected to pay the capital costs for which they were
imposed, or they shall be refunded to the current owner of the property
with respect to which the impact fees were imposed, along with any
interest that has accumulated.
F. The current owner of property on which an impact fee has been paid
may apply for a refund of such fee if the building permit for which the
§ 332-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-9
1:289
§ 332-10. Appeals.
The payment of an impact fee imposed under this section as a condition of a
building permit may be contested as to the amount, collection or use of the
impact fee:
impact fee has been paid has lapsed for noncommencement of
construction; or the project for which a building permit has been issued
has been altered, resulting in a decrease in the amount of the impact
fee due.
G. A petition for refund must be filed within one year of the event giving
rise to the right to claim a refund.
H. The petition for refund must be submitted to the City for a park
facilities impact fee refund and/or the Reedsburg Utility Commission
for a water utilities impact fee refund.
I. Within one month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the City
or the Utility Commission must provide the petitioner, in writing, with a
decision on the refund request, including the reasons for the decision. If
a refund is due the petitioner, the refund shall be paid at the time of
notifying the petitioner of the decision.
A. To the Utility Commission for an appeal of a water utility impact fee,
provided that the applicant files a written notice of appeal with the
Utility Manager's office within 15 days of the approval by the Building
Inspector of an application for a building permit upon which the impact
fee is imposed. Such notice of appeal shall be entitled "Notice of Appeal
of Impact Fee" and shall state the applicant's name, address, telephone
number, address (if available) and legal description of the land
development upon which the impact fee is imposed, and a statement of
the nature of and reasons for the appeal. The Utility Manager shall
schedule the appeal for consideration by the Utility Commission at the
next regular meeting of the Commission and shall notify the applicant
of the time, date and place of such meeting, in writing, by regular mail,
deposited in the mail no later than at least three days before the date of
such meeting. Upon review of such appeal, the Commission may adjust
the amount, collection or use of the impact fee upon just and reasonable
cause shown.
B. To the Council for an appeal of a park facilities impact fee, provided that
a notice of appeal is filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer's office within
15 days of the approval by the Building Inspector of an application for a
building permit upon which the impact fee has been imposed. Such
notice of appeal shall be entitled "Notice of Appeal of Impact Fee" and
shall state the applicant's name, address, telephone number, address (if
available) and legal description of the land development upon which the
impact fee is imposed, and a statement of the nature of and reasons for
the appeal. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall schedule the appeal for
consideration by the Council at the next regular meeting of the Council
§ 332-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 332-10
1:290
§ 332-11. Credits.
§ 332-12. Administration of impact fees.
and shall notify the applicant of the time, date and place of such
meeting, in writing, by regular mail, deposited in the mail no later than
at least three days before the date of such meeting. Upon review of
such appeal, the Council may adjust the amount, collection or use of the
impact fee upon just and reasonable cause shown.
A. A property owner may elect to construct a capital improvement (or
donate land in lieu thereof) listed in the needs assessment or capital
improvement plan. If the property owner elects to make such
improvement, the property owner must enter into an agreement with
the City prior to issuance of any building permit. The agreement must
establish the estimated cost of the improvement, the schedule for
initiation and completion of the improvement, a requirement that the
improvement be completed to City standards, and such other terms and
conditions as deemed necessary by the City. The City must review the
improvement plan, verify costs and time schedules, determine if the
improvement is an eligible improvement, and determine the amount of
the applicable credit for such improvement to be applied to the
otherwise applicable impact fee prior to issuance of any building
permit. In no event may the City provide a refund for a credit that is
greater than the applicable impact fee.
B. No credit shall be given for the construction of local on-site facilities
required by zoning, subdivision, or other City regulations.
A. Upon receipt of impact fees, the City Clerk-Treasurer or the Utility
Manager, as applicable, shall be responsible for placement of such
funds into separate accounts as hereinafter specified. All such funds
shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts in a bank authorized to
receive deposits of City or Utility funds, as applicable. Interest earned
by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be used
solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account.
B. The City Clerk-Treasurer or Utility Manager shall maintain and keep
accurate financial records for each such account that shall show the
source and disbursement of all revenues; that shall account for all
monies received; that shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from
each account shall be used for projects in the capital improvements
program for the particular development subarea or for Citywide capital
improvements, as specified in the program; and that shall provide an
annual report for each impact fee account, showing the source and
amount of all funds collected and the projects that were funded.
C. The City shall annually, in conjunction with the annual capital budget
and capital improvements plan adoption processes, review the
development potential of the subarea and the capital improvements
§ 332-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-12
1:291
§ 332-13. Effect of impact fee on zoning and subdivision
regulations.
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property,
density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision
of capital improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations
or other regulations of the City, which shall be operative and remain in full
force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
§ 332-14. Impact fee as additional and supplemental requirement.
The impact fee is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of,
any other requirements imposed by the City on the development of land or
the issuance of building permits. It is intended to be consistent with and to
further the objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, the capital
improvements plan, the outdoor recreation plan, and other City policies,
ordinances, and resolutions by which the City seeks to ensure the provision
of public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. In no event
shall a property owner be obligated to pay for capital improvements in
an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this chapter;
provided, however, that a property owner may be required to pay, pursuant
to City ordinances, regulations, or policies, for other capital improvements
in addition to the impact fee for capital improvements as specified herein.
Chapter 349
INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGES
plan and make such modifications as are deemed necessary as a result
of:
(1) Development occurring in the prior year;
(2) Capital improvements actually constructed;
(3) Changing facility needs;
(4) Inflation;
(5) Revised cost estimates for capital improvements;
(6) Changes in the availability of other funding sources applicable to
public facility projects; and
(7) Such other factors as may be relevant. Modifications to the
development potential, the capital improvements program, and the
impact fees shall be recommended for adoption prior to November
1 of each year and shall be effective on January 1.
§ 332-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 349-1
1:292
§ 349-1. Adoption of standards.
The provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., and all future deletions, additions
or amendments, exclusive of any provisions thereof relating to the penalty
to be imposed or the punishment for violation of said statutes, are hereby
adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference. A violation of any
such provision shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 349-2. Classes of licenses and permits. [Amended 1-12-2004;
10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 1818-15; 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1823-16; at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The City shall have the following licenses, and fees as set from time to time
by Common Council:
A. Class "A" licensees may sell beer to consumers in original packages or
containers for off-premises consumption only (§ 125.25, Wis. Stats.).
B. Class "B" licensees may sell beer to consumers for on-premises or offpremises
consumption [§ 125.26(1), Wis. Stats.].
C. Temporary Class "B" (picnic) beer licensees may sell beer and other
fermented malt beverages (e.g., wine coolers with a fermented malt
beverage base) to consumers at a picnic or similar gathering of limited
duration [§ 125.26(6), Wis. Stats.].
D. "Class A" licensees may sell intoxicating liquor to consumers only in
original packages or containers for off-premises consumption
[§ 125.51(2), Wis. Stats.].
E. "Class B" licensees may sell intoxicating liquor to consumers by the
glass for on-premises consumption. Sales may also be made for offpremises
consumption in quantities not exceeding four liters at any one
time. Wine, however, may be sold for consumption off-premises in the
original package or container in any quantity [§ 125.51(3)(b), Wis.
Stats.].
F. Additional "Class B" (clubs and fraternal organizations) licensees.
G. Reserve "Class B" liquor licenses are those licenses available under the
quota system existing before December 1, 1997, or available after
October 1, 1998, due to a fractional increase in population
[§ 125.51(4)(v), Wis. Stats.].
H. Temporary "Class B" (picnic) wine licensees may sell wine at a picnic,
meeting, or other similar gathering of limited duration. Such licenses
may be issued only to bona fide clubs, to county or local fair
associations or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges or societies
that have been in existence for at least six months and to posts of
veterans' organizations [§ 125.51(10), Wis. Stats.].
§ 349-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-2
1:293
§ 349-3. Operator's licenses. [Amended 7-23-2018 by Ord. No.
1877-18]
I. "Class C" wine licensees may sell wine by the glass or in an opened
original container for consumption on the premises where sold. "Class
C" wine licenses may be granted to an applicant only if:
(1) The applicant meets the qualifications set out in § 125.04(5), Wis.
Stats., for other retail licensees;
(2) The license is for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol
beverages accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts;
(3) The restaurant does not have a barroom; and
(4) A "Class B" liquor license cannot be granted to applicant because
the municipality has issued all of the "Class B" liquor licenses
available under its statutory quota [§ 125.51(3m), Wis. Stats.].
J. Provisional retail licenses may be issued to persons who have applied
for a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B," or "Class C" license and
authorize only the activities that the type of retail license applied for
authorizes. A provisional retail license expires 60 days after its issuance
or when the Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B," or "Class C"
license is issued to the holder, whichever is sooner (§ 125.185, Wis.
Stats).
K. "Class A" cider licensees may sell cider alcohol beverages that are
obtained from the fermentation of the juices of apples or pears and
contain between 0.5-7.0 alcohol by volume to consumers only in
original packages or containers for off-premises consumption
[§ 125.51(2)(e), Wis. Stats.].
A. Operator's license required and fees. Except as provided by law, any
person who serves alcohol beverages in an establishment with a Class
A, B or C license shall have an operator's license (bartender's license),
new and or renewal, issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The fee for an
operator's license shall be as set from time to time by Common Council
for two years or fraction thereof, except that any operator's license
issued for less than one year shall have a fee as set from time to time by
Common Council. The applicant shall also pay the current cost incurred
by the City to obtain a record check regarding the applicant. All fees are
due at application and are nonrefundable. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Provisional operator's license. The Clerk-Treasurer may issue a
provisional operator's license to a person qualified under Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats., for an operator's license, provided that such person has applied
for a regular operator's license and is enrolled in a training course
under § 125.17(6), Wis. Stats. The fee for a provisional operator's
license shall be as set from time to time by Common Council, and such
license shall expire 60 days after its issuance. A provisional license may
§ 349-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 349-3
1:294
§ 349-4. License applications. [Amended 7-23-2018 by Ord. No.
1877-18]
not be issued to any person who has been denied an operator's license
by the Common Council, and the Clerk-Treasurer may revoke the
provisional operator's license if the holder of the license made a false
statement on the application. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Temporary operator's licenses. Temporary operator's licenses may be
issued to persons employed or donating their services to a nonprofit
corporation, provided that a person is limited to two such licenses per
year, and the license is valid for only to 14 days. The fee for a temporary
operator's license shall be as set from time to time by Common Council.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
D. Application procedures. Applications for operator's licenses shall be
approved or denied by the City Clerk-Treasurer after review by and
consultation with City staff, including the Police Department. Decisions
shall be based upon the City's policy guidelines for alcohol beverage
licenses. Denials shall be in writing and shall state the basis for the
decision and the appeal process.
E. Appeals. An applicant denied an operator's license by the City Clerk-
Treasurer shall have the right to appeal the denial to the Common
Council. The appeal shall be in writing and given to the City Clerk-
Treasurer within 10 days of the denial. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall
promptly place the matter on the earliest available Council agenda. The
Ordinance Committee shall independently review the applicant's
request for an operator's license under this chapter.
F. License card. The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a wallet-sized card upon
approval of the application. When working on licensed premises as an
operator, the licensee must be able to show the card upon request of a
law enforcement officer.
G. Revocation of operator's license. Violation of any of the terms or
provisions of the state law or of this section relating to operator's
licenses by any person holding such operator's license shall be cause
for revocation of the license.
A. Any person or persons applying for the licenses set forth above shall
complete an application form provided by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The
fee shall be due when the license is delivered. The City Clerk-Treasurer
may refuse to accept any incomplete application. The fees shall be
nonrefundable.
B. Applications for all forms of licenses and renewals shall be submitted
and/or published as provided by law.
§ 349-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-4
1:295
§ 349-5. License investigation.
§ 349-6. Issuance and reissuance by Common Council.
C. Applicants must appear before the Ordinance Committee before the
application may be considered. The applicant will be informed whether
or not the Committee will make a positive recommendation and will not
be required to appear before the Common Council in the event of a
positive recommendation. Otherwise, applicants must also appear
before the Common Council at the meeting in which their license will be
considered.
D. It is the obligation of all applicants to determine the date of any
meetings at which they are required to appear pursuant to this chapter.
Failure to attend may serve as a basis for the denial of the application.
E. This section does not apply to operator's licenses.
A. Upon the filing of a properly completed application along with the
appropriate application fee, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall notify, where
applicable, the Chief of Police, Health Officer, Fire Inspector and
Building Inspector. These officials shall make such inspections as they
shall deem necessary to determine whether the applicant and, where
applicable, the premises sought to be licensed comply with City
ordinances and all state and federal laws. An investigation report shall
then be forwarded to the Ordinance Committee.
B. The applicant shall appear before the Ordinance Committee. It is the
applicant's obligation to determine the appropriate date for
appearance. Failure to appear for all nonrenewal licenses and for all
renewals when a specific request for attendance has been made shall
serve as a basis for denying the issuance of a license. In the event an
inaccurate or incomplete application is filed, the Committee may:
(1) Refuse to accept the application, in which case the application fee
shall be forfeited and the applicant shall be required to refile; or
(2) Ask for the filing of the appropriate information, in which case the
submission of that application to the Council may be delayed for a
period of not more than two months.
A. At such time as the Ordinance Committee has completed its review
obligations under § 349-5, it shall forward its recommendations to the
Council for consideration at its next regularly scheduled meeting. In the
event that the Council denies the application, the applicant may request
a refund of the application fee by filing a written request within five
days of the date of denial. It shall be the obligation of the applicant to
contact the City Clerk-Treasurer to determine whether or not the
license was granted.
B. In applying for a license, the applicant is consenting to periodic reviews
of all outstanding licenses. The Ordinance Committee may request
§ 349-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 349-6
1:296
§ 349-7. Restrictions on granting licenses.
In addition to the restrictions imposed upon the granting of licenses by the
statutes adopted by § 349-1 hereof, the following restrictions shall apply:
follow-up investigations from the individuals listed in § 349-5 and
supplementary information from the applicant. The Ordinance
Committee shall make recommendations to the Council in the instances
where it feels that any action should be taken with respect to the
suspension or revocation of a license as a result of the review.
A. Except for hotels and bona fide clubs, societies and lodges in existence
not less than six months prior to the date of application, retail "Class B"
licenses shall be issued for only that portion of a premises located at the
street level.
B. No license shall be granted for any premises or to any individual:
(1) Delinquent in payment of any taxes, assessments or other claims
owed to the City of Reedsburg.
(2) Delinquent in payment of a forfeiture resulting from a violation of
any ordinance of the City of Reedsburg.
(3) Delinquent in payment to the state of any state taxes owed.
C. No retail "Class B" license shall be issued unless the premises conforms
to the requirements of the state building code, the state plumbing code,
the rules and regulations of the state Department of Agriculture, Trade
and Consumer Protection applicable to restaurants and the ordinances
and regulations of the City. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. No license shall be granted to any corporation when more than 50% of
the voting stock interest, legal or beneficial, is held by any person not
eligible for a license under this section.
E. No retail Class "B" fermented malt beverage license shall be issued
except in the following cases:
(1) In conjunction with a Class "B" liquor license;
(2) To a convenience store;
(3) To a retail food store;
(4) To a service station;
(5) To a restaurant (subject to the limitations set forth below);
(6) To facilities similar to the uses set forth above subject to approval
by the Common Council.
§ 349-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-7
1:297
F. No more than two special events per year shall be permitted for any
licensed premises with temporary fencing. An "event" shall be defined
as any selling or dispensing of alcohol beverages in or to an outside
area in the City of Reedsburg for up to seven consecutive days. More
than two special events or an event that lasts more than seven days will
require a permanent fenced area approved by the Building Inspector
and the Common Council. Fencing shall be of such nature as to prevent
access from the outside and the passing of any beverage to the outside.
G. Temporary Class "B" picnic licenses issued pursuant to § 125.26(6),
Wis. Stats., shall be restricted as follows:
(1) They may be issued only to bona fide clubs and chambers of
commerce that have been in existence at least six months; state,
county or local fair associations that have been in existence at least
six months; churches, lodges or societies that have been in
existence at least six months; and recognized veterans'
organizations. Individuals, partnerships and business corporations
are not eligible for a picnic license. See §§ 125.26(6) and
125.51(10), Wis. Stats. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) Except as provided in Subsection G(6) below, the licensed premises
for the area encompassed by permit must be physically contained
by two concentric fence rows with at least eight feet of space
between the rows. Snow fencing is approved for this purpose. Any
other form of fencing must be approved by the Police Department.
(3) Underage persons are prohibited from entering the licensed
premises area for any reason unless accompanied by a parent,
spouse or guardian who has attained the legal drinking age. The
licensee or permittee is responsible for taking reasonable
measures to keep unauthorized, underage persons off the licensed
premises.
(4) No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in alcohol
beverages to or with a person who is intoxicated.
(5) A violation of these requirements or any other applicable state law
or City ordinance shall entitle the City to immediately revoke the
permit.
(6) The fencing requirement of Subsection G(2) above may be waived,
and beer may be sold, at the Nishan Park concession stand in
connection with adult baseball league play and adult baseball or
softball tournaments, provided that the Common Council approves
in advance and issues a permit for the dates and times of such
sales, and the permit issued shall be displayed at the concession
stand. There shall be a fee as set from time to time by Common
Council, payable at the time application is made. There shall be at
least one licensed server in the concession stand for each game.
§ 349-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 349-7
1:298
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
H. Grant a license conditional upon completion of construction. [Added
7-28-2008]
(1) Common Council may grant license conditional. Notwithstanding
the time limits set forth herein, whenever the proposed licensed
premises is a building to be newly constructed or an existing
building upon which major alteration, addition, renovation or other
similar work is required in order to bring the premises in
conformity with the representations made to the Common Council
as part of the application and consideration of the application, or a
petition is pending for annexation of the premises to the City, the
Common Council may grant a license conditional upon the
satisfactory completion of such construction, alteration, addition,
renovation or other work, or such annexation.
(2) Time allotment. The Common Council, in making such a conditional
grant of a license, may direct the City Clerk-Treasurer to withhold
the issuance of the license for such time, not to exceed four
months, as the Common Council deems a reasonable period for
completion of such work in conformity with all such
representations made to the Common Council and/or completion of
the annexation. Upon request of the applicant, this period may be
extended for an additional period not to exceed six months, and the
license may be renewed one time with issuance withheld, but no
such extension shall be granted unless the applicant has already
completed a substantial portion of the construction or renovation of
the premises with the original time set by the Common Council for
withholding of the issuance of the license pending completion of
work. The Common Council may further require the applicant to
notify the City Clerk-Treasurer upon completion of the work, after
which the Common Council shall cause such inspection of
completion of work, after which the Common Council shall cause
such inspection of the premises as it deems appropriate to
ascertain that the premises is in conformity with all material
representations made to the Common Council at the time of the
granting of the license. Upon satisfactory completion of the work,
the Common Council may direct the City Clerk-Treasurer to issue
the license.
(3) Failure to complete within time allotted. Any material failure to
conform with all such representations made to the Common
Council as to the proposed licensed premises within the time set for
completion of such work and any extensions of such time shall
render the decision to grant the license void, and shall be deemed a
denial of the application by the Common Council as of the
expiration of the time or extended time for completion of
construction.
§ 349-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-7
1:299
§ 349-8. Restaurants.
In the event that application is made for a license to a restaurant, the
applicant must demonstrate to the Common Council at the time of
application or renewal that 70% or more of the gross receipts of the
restaurant are derived from the business operated as a restaurant other
than the sale of fermented malt beverages; fermented malt beverages shall
be sold for consumption on the premises only by the pitcher, half pitcher,
or glass, and no commercial sign advertising the sale of fermented malt
beverages shall be displayed on the outside of the premises or inside of the
premises as in such matter to be visible from the outside of the premises.
§ 349-9. Retail license quotas.
(4) License fee nonrefundable. In any case where there is a conditional
grant of license, and the license is ordered withheld for a time
period or periods to allow for construction, and the applicant
subsequently fails to satisfy the conditions of the grant of the
license by satisfactory completion of such construction within the
allotted time, the entirety of the license fee shall be nonrefundable.
I. Failure to operate under license. If an applicant fails to operate under a
grant license for four months for reasons other than construction or
pending annexation, the Common Council, after hearing and
recommendation from the Ordinance Committee, may rescind such
license or grant such further period of nonoperation, not to exceed six
months, based on the then-existing circumstances, but said applicant
shall be operational within the extended period or the license will be
deemed rescinded at the end of the extension period. If rescinded, any
license fee paid shall be nonrefundable. [Added 7-28-2008]
A. Class "B" licenses (beer; on/off premises consumption). One Class "B"
license may be issued for each "Class B" intoxicating liquor license,
which the City may issue under Subsection B below. The City may issue
as many additional Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses to
restaurants meeting the requirements of § 349-8 as it deems proper.16
B. "Class B" Licenses (liquor; on premises). One retail "Class B" license
may be issued for each 500 inhabitants or fraction thereof in the City,
determined according to the last federal census or official State of
Wisconsin census thereof, provided existing licenses may be renewed.
All licenses previously issued under this section together with those
that are created and/or authorized by separate action of law shall be
included in determining whether any additional license(s) is available
for issuance. [Amended 7-28-2008]
C. Additional "Class B" licenses (clubs and fraternal organizations).
16.Editor's Note: Original Subsection A, which immediately preceded this subsection and
Subsection C, which immediately followed this subsection, of the former Municipal
Codebook were repealed 9-10-2012.
§ 349-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 349-9
1:300
§ 349-10. Conditions of licenses.
In addition to the conditions imposed by the state statutes adopted under
§ 349-1, the following restrictions shall apply to licenses issued hereunder:
(1) Notwithstanding the limitations created by § 349-9B, additional
retail "Class B" licenses may be issued to applicants who are
otherwise eligible for the issuance of temporary licenses as
provided by §§ 125.26(6) and 125.51(10), Wis. Stats. Issuance shall
be at the discretion of the Common Council and subject to the
limitation that the aggregate number of "Class B" licenses issued
within the City of Reedsburg shall not total more than one for each
500 inhabitants or fraction thereof in the City as determined by the
last federal census or official State of Wisconsin estimate.
(2) These licenses are nonrenewable in nature and must be applied for
on a yearly basis. Issuance in one year shall not be a basis for
issuance in a subsequent year. All license holders shall maintain a
log of times and dates when their facility is open for the service of
alcohol beverages and shall make those logs available to the City
during normal business hours and at the time that a new license is
requested. It is the intention of the City that the holders of these
licenses shall not be open for more than 40 events (an "event" shall
be defined as any twenty-four-hour-or-less period) per year.
D. "Class C" wine licenses. "Class C" wine licenses may be issued only to a
person qualified under § 125.04(5), Wis. Stats., for a restaurant in
which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50% of gross
receipts and which does not have a barroom if the City's quota under
§ 349-9B has been reached, thereby prohibiting the issuance of a "Class
B" license to that person. A "Class C" license may not be issued to a
foreign corporation or a person acting as an agent for or in the employ
of another.
A. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to the entry of the
Chief of Police or his designee, the Mayor or the Chairman of the
Ordinance Committee at all reasonable hours for the purpose of
inspection and search, and consents to the removal from said premises
of all things and articles there had in violation of City ordinances or
state laws, and consents to the introduction of such things and articles
in evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such offenses.
B. No club shall sell fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors
except to members and to guests invited by members.
C. No retail "Class A" or "Class B" licensees shall sell or offer to sell
fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor to any person on credit
except credit extended by a hotel to a resident quest or a club to a bona
fide member, and by grocers and druggists who maintain a credit
system in connection with other purchases as well. No licensee shall
sell fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor to any person on a
§ 349-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-10
1:301
§ 349-11. Carry-out hours.
§ 349-12. Opening and closing hours.
passbook or store order, or receive from any person any goods, wares,
merchandise or other articles in exchange for fermented malt
beverages or intoxicating liquor.
D. Each licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in any orderly
manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed
at any time or on any licensed premises.
E. There shall be no treating by a licensee at any time.
A. It shall be unlawful for anyone holding either a "Class B" fermented
malt beverage or intoxicating liquor license or a duly authorized
operator's permit to sell or permit to be sold any intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage in an original, unopened package, container
or bottle or any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage for
consumption away from the premises between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m. It shall also be a violation of this chapter to
remove any packaged goods as set forth above from the licensed
premises after 12:00 midnight. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. It shall be unlawful for anyone holding either a "Class A" fermented
malt beverage or intoxicating liquor license or a duly authorized
operator's permit to sell or permit to be sold any intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage in an original, unopened package, container
or bottle or any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage for
consumption away from the premises between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. [Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1844-17]
A. Hours for all licensed establishments shall be determined by state law
as set forth in §§ 125.32 and 125.68, Wis. Stats., as follows: [Amended
6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1844-17]
Off-Premises (Carryouts)
On-Premises
Consumption
"Class A"
beer
9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Not permitted
"Class B"
beer
12:00 midnight to 6:00
a.m.
Monday to Friday 2:00 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m.; Saturday to
Sunday 2:30 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
"Class A"
liquor
9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Not permitted
§ 349-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 349-12
1:302
§ 349-13. Sale to minor or possession off licensed premises.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person who sells or furnishes fermented malt beverages to any person
under the prevailing legal drinking age not accompanied by his parent,
guardian, or spouse, for consumption outside the building or permanent
structure in which a license to dispense malt beverages is possessed, or
any person under the prevailing legal drinking age not accompanied by
his parent, guardian, or spouse, who possesses fermented malt beverages
outside a building or permanent structure in which a license to dispense
malt beverages is possessed may be fined not less than $50 nor more than
$500 and, upon default in payment of said fine, may be imprisoned not
more than 90 days, and the court also shall restrict or suspend the motor
vehicle operating privilege as provided in § 343.30(6), Wis. Stats. Whenever
fermented malt beverages are dispensed for consumption outside a building
or permanent structure by a licensed dispenser, the premises in which a
person under the prevailing legal drinking age may possess such beverages
shall include all areas within 10 feet of the point at which such beverages
are dispensed. It is the legislative intent hereof to require that persons
under the prevailing legal drinking age be permitted to consume fermented
malt beverages only under the supervision of parent, guardian or spouse. As
used in this section, "spouse" means a husband or wife who is the prevailing
legal drinking age or over.
§ 349-14. Consumption on public streets and parks.
Off-Premises (Carryouts)
On-Premises
Consumption
"Class B"
liquor
12:00 midnight to 6:00
a.m.
Monday to Friday 2:00 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m.; Saturday to
Sunday 2:30 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
"Class C"
wine
Not permitted Monday to Friday 2:00 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m.; Saturday to
Sunday 2:30 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
B. Opening and closing hours for "Class A" establishments are as set forth
in § 349-11 as it pertains to the sale of carry-out products for "Class A"
establishments.
C. No intoxicating liquor shall be consumed upon any licensed premises
after said closing hours, and said premises shall be promptly vacated at
such closing hours by all persons except the owner and owner's regular
employees.
A. No person shall sell or serve, or offer to sell or serve, any fermented
malt beverages or intoxicating liquor upon any public street.
§ 349-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-14
1:303
§ 349-15. Grants for certain reserve "Class B" liquor licensees.
§ 349-16. Underage persons permitted on Class "B" and "Class B"
premises during certain times. [Added 6-12-2017 by Ord. No.
1845-17]
B. No person shall consume or carry an open bottle, can or glass of any
fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor upon any public street
in the City.
C. No person shall drink any intoxicating liquor or malt beverage in any
building or place open to the public except a licensed tavern or bar or
dining room in conjunction therewith or a private club, except as
provided herein.
D. No person shall drink wine, malt beverages or intoxicating liquor in a
motor vehicle or have or permit any bottle or can of same which has
been opened or upon which the label has been broken to be in any
motor vehicle.
E. No person shall throw any malt beverage, wine or intoxicating liquor
cans or bottles from any motor vehicle or deposit them in any public
place in the City, except in receptacles in public parks provided for the
disposal of waste.
F. No person shall consume or carry an open bottle, can or glass of
fermented malt beverage, wine or intoxicating liquor at the City
swimming pool.
A. Findings and purpose. The Common Council finds that businesses such
as restaurants, hotels and taverns make important contributions to the
City's economy. These establishments serve important public purposes,
including increasing the City's property tax base, providing
employment and promoting tourism. Excessive license fees deter new
businesses and are contrary to the above-stated public purposes.
Section 125.51(3)(e)(2), Wis. Stats., requires municipalities to establish
a minimum fee of $10,000 for each reserve "Class B" liquor license
issued. Since the new fee far exceeds the actual cost of licensing the
activity, additional revenue will be available to the City. It is the purpose
of this chapter to utilize revenue generated by § 125.51(3)(e)2, Wis.
Stats., to assist new reserve "Class B" licensees to achieve the
important public purposes identified herein.
B. Following the issuance of an original "Class B" liquor license and upon
application, the Common Council may provide a grant to the licensee in
an amount not to exceed $9,400. Prior to awarding any grant, the
Common Council shall make such findings and establish such
conditions to ensure that any funds awarded hereunder further the
important public purposes identified herein. [Amended 9-12-2005]
A. For purposes of this section:
§ 349-14 REEDSBURG CODE § 349-16
1:304
UNDERAGE PERSON — A person who is at least 10 years of age but
less than 21 years of age.
B. In addition to the exceptions contained in Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.,
underage persons may:
(1) Enter or remain on Class "B" or "Class B" licensed premises
separate from any room where alcohol beverages are sold or
served if no alcohol beverages are furnished or consumed by any
person in the room where the underage person is present;
(2) Enter or remain on Class "B" or "Class B" licensed premises on a
date specified by the licensee or permittee during times when no
alcohol beverages are consumed, sold or given away. During those
times, the licensee, the agent named in the license if the licensee is
a corporation or a person who has an operator's license shall be on
the premises unless all alcohol beverages are stored in a locked
portion of the premises.
C. An underage person may enter and remain on the premises, pursuant to
Subsection B(1)of this section, only if the City Police Department has
issued a written authorization permitting underage persons to be
present under the above subsections on the date specified in the
authorization.
D. Before issuing the authorization, the Chief of Police or an officer
designated by the Chief of Police shall make a determination that the
presence of underage persons on the premises will not endanger their
health, welfare or safety or that of other members of the community.
Among the factors to be considered by the police when issuing an
authorization under Subsection B(1) of this section are:
(1) Location of the room to areas where alcohol beverages are served
on the premises;
(2) Security personnel or security measures to be taken by the owner
to segregate underage persons from places where alcohol
beverages are served on the premises;
(3) Location of restroom facilities to be used by the underaged
individuals;
(4) Location and storage of all alcohol beverages;
(5) Number of employees and personnel on duty on behalf of the
licensee;
(6) Any other factor deemed relevant by the Chief of Police.
E. Among the factors to consider when issuing an authorization under
Subsection B(2) of this section are:
§ 349-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-16
1:305
§ 349-17. Improper exhibitions.
(1) Location and storage of all alcohol beverages. All alcohol beverages
shall be locked in a cabinet for which a combination or key is
needed for entry or otherwise locked securely in an area separated
by a fence structure or partition for which a key or combination is
needed for entry;
(2) Security measures taken by the licensee to ensure alcohol
beverages are not accessible by underage individuals;
(3) Any other factors deemed relevant by the Chief of Police.
F. The licensee or permittee shall obtain a separate authorization for each
date on which underage persons will be present on the premises as
provided in this chapter, regardless of under which subsection the
licensee is applying for authorization. The request for written
authorization shall be made at least five days prior to that date. The
Chief of Police or his or her designated officer shall specify on each
authorization terms and conditions necessary to fulfill the requirements
of this chapter. It shall be required of each licensed establishment
which obtains permission for underage persons to enter upon its
premises under this chapter that all sales of and consumption of alcohol
beverages shall be stopped at least 30 minutes prior to the
commencement of the time period when underage persons are first
allowed on the premises under this section, nor shall sales of or
consumption of alcohol beverages recommence for at least 30 minutes
after the permitted allowance for underage persons to enter the
licensed premises has expired.
G. Any decision of the Chief of Police or his or her designated officer
denying a request for authorization under this chapter may be appealed
to the Common Council upon the filing of a written appeal by the
applicant with the City Clerk-Treasurer. The appeal shall be heard by
the Ordinance Committee.
H. A licensee or permittee who directly or indirectly permits an underage
person to enter or be on licensed premises in violation of this section is
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100, plus costs. Fines are per
the current bond schedule. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Nude dancing in licensed establishments prohibited. It is unlawful for
any person to perform or engage in, or for any licensee or manager or
agent of the licensee to permit any person, employee, entertainer or
patron to perform or engage in any live act, demonstration, dance of
exhibition on the premises of a licensed establishment which:
(1) Shows his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering; or
§ 349-16 REEDSBURG CODE § 349-17
1:306
§ 349-18. Revocation and suspension of licenses.
(2) Shows any portion of the female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or
(3) Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
B. Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the following
licensed establishments: theaters, performing arts centers, civic
centers, and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music, or
dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular
basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and where the
establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the
advertising or promotion of, employees engaging in nude erotic
dancing.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment licensed by the
Common Council of the City of Reedsburg to sell alcohol beverages
pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
LICENSEE — The holder of a retail "Class A," "Class B" or "Class
C" licenses granted by the Common Council of the City of Reedsburg
pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
D. Penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to forfeiture as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3.
A. Proceedings to suspend, revoke or nonrenew a license issued pursuant
to this chapter shall be conducted in a manner consistent with § 125.12,
Wis. Stats.
B. A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended, revoked,
or nonrenewed if it is determined that the person holding the license:
(1) Has violated this chapter or municipal regulations adopted under
Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
(2) Keeps or maintains a disorderly or riotous, indecent or improper
house.
(3) Has sold or given away alcohol beverages to known habitual
drunkards.
(4) Does not possess the qualifications required under this chapter to
hold the license.
(5) Has been convicted of manufacturing, distributing or delivering a
controlled substance or controlled substance analog under
§ 961.41(1), Wis. Stats.; of possessing, with intent to manufacture,
§ 349-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-18
1:307
distribute or deliver, a controlled substance or controlled substance
analog under § 961.41(1m), Wis. Stats.; or of possessing with intent
to manufacture, distribute or deliver, or of manufacturing,
distributing or delivering, a controlled substance or controlled
substance analog under a substantially similar federal law or a
substantially similar law of another state.
(6) Knowingly allows another person who is on the premises for which
the license under this chapter is issued to possess, with intent to
manufacture, distribute or deliver, a controlled substance or
controlled substance analog.
(7) Received the benefit from an act prohibited under § 125.33(11),
Wis. Stats.
C. Demerit points.
(1) In addition to causes for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal set
forth in § 349-18B, a license may be suspended, revoked or
nonrenewed if the person holding the license accumulates 100 or
more demerit points as specified in Subsection C(2) below within a
twelve-month period. In determining the accumulated demerit
points against the person holding the license within a twelve-month
period, the City shall use the date each violation was committed as
the basis for the determination.
(2) If the following number of demerit points are accumulated by a
licensee within a twelve-month period, the following actions shall
be taken by the Ordinance Committee or the Common Council:
Points Action
100 Meeting with and warning from the Ordinance
Committee
126 to 199 Review by Ordinance Committee and possible
suspension of 3 to 14 days by the Common
Council
200 or more Mandatory revocation by the Common Council
D. Upon conviction for a violation of the following, retail licensees shall be
assessed the following demerit points:
(1) "Selling to an underage person" shall be defined as any person that
has an alcohol beverage in his possession in violation of state
drinking laws found in any licensed establishment. Exceptions to
enforcement of this section shall be any underage person found in
possession of a false ID or any person identified as underage by
said establishment before any arrests have been made. Violation:
25 points.
(2) Underage person loitering on premises without legal adult.
Violation: 25 points.
§ 349-18 REEDSBURG CODE § 349-18
1:308
(3) False statement on license application. Violation: 100 points.
(4) Impede search of licensed premises. Violation: 100 points.
(5) No licensed bartender on premises. Violation: 25 points.
(6) Licensed premises in noncompliance with sanitary/building codes
with thirty-day notice to comply. Violations that are not complied
with within 30 days shall be as follows: sanitary: 25 points per
single violation; building code: 10 points per violation.
(7) Sell or dispense after hours. Violation: 25 points.
(8) Place to place deliveries. Violation: 25 points.
(9) Sell or serve on a public street without permit. Violation: 25 points.
(10) Violation of improper exhibition (§ 349-17). Violation: 50 points.
(11) Public nuisance, defined as any violation of Chapter 434, Peace and
Good Order, § 434-5B and I; Chapter 366, Licensing, Article I; or
Chapter 402, Nuisances, §§ 402-4 and 402-5, that apply to
establishments. Violation: 15 points.
(12) Open after closing hour. Violation of § 349-12: 25 points.
E. Upon conviction for a violation of the following, operators shall be
assessed the following demerit points:
(1) Selling to an underage person shall be defined and exempted as
Subsection D(1) of this section. Violation: 25 points.
(2) False statement on application. Violation: 100 points.
(3) Sell or dispense after hours. Violation: 25 points.
(4) Place to place deliveries. Violation: 25 points.
(5) Sell or serve on a public street. Violation: 25 points.
(6) Assault on a police officer. Violation: 200 points.
F. Repossession of license or permit. Whenever any license or permit
under this section shall be revoked or suspended, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall notify the licensee of such suspension or revocation and shall
notify the Chief of Police, who shall take physical possession of the
license or permit wherever it may be found and file it in the Clerk-
Treasurer's office.
G. Effect of revocation of licenses. No license shall be issued for any
premises if a license covering such premises has been revoked within
six months prior to application. No license shall be issued to any person
who has had a license issued pursuant to this section revoked within 12
months prior to application.
§ 349-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-18
1:309
Chapter 366
LICENSING
§ 349-18 REEDSBURG CODE § 349-18
1:310
ARTICLE I
Cigarette and Tobacco Products Retailer License
[Adopted 11-22-2010 (Sec. 12.03 of the former Municipal
Codebook); amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 366-1. License required.
No person shall sell cigarettes and tobacco products in the City without first
obtaining an annual license from the City Clerk-Treasurer (§ 134.65, Wis.
Stats.) and paying a fee as set from time to time by Common Council.
§ 366-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-1
1:311

ARTICLE II
Tattoo Establishments
[Adopted 9-24-2007 (Sec. 12.08 of the former Municipal Codebook)]
§ 366-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TATTOO — As a verb, means inserting pigment under the surface of the skin
of an individual by pricking a needle or other instrument.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT — The premises where a tattooist applies a
tattoo to another person.
TATTOOIST — A person who tattoos another person at that person's
request.
§ 366-3. License required.
No person shall operate a tattoo establishment within the City without first
having obtained a license therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 366-4. Application; fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be
accompanied by a license fee as set by Common Council on the current Fee
Schedule. Said license shall be for one year, or a portion thereof, and shall
be renewable, upon application and payment of the fee, on or before July 1
or each year.
§ 366-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-4
1:313

ARTICLE III
Weights and Measures Regulation
[Adopted as Sec. 12.13 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 366-5. Adoption of standards.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the statutory
provisions of Ch. 98, Weights and Measures, Wis. Stats., and Ch. ATCP
92, Weights and Measures, Wis. Adm. Code, are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by any statute or code incorporated
herein by reference is required or prohibited by this article. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein
or Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions incorporated herein are
intended to be made a part of this article. This article is adopted pursuant
to the provisions of Ch. 98, Wis. Stats.
§ 366-6. Appointment of inspectors.
In order to assure compliance with this article, the City hereby grants the
authority and duties of sealers and inspectors required by this article to
the State of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection.
§ 366-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL WEIGHTING OR MEASURING DEVICES — Devices used or
employed in establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement
of quantities, things, produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in
computing any basic charge or payment for services rendered on the basis
of weight or measure.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROGRAM — The program that includes
administration and enforcement of this article, Ch. 98, Wis. Stats., and
applicable Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions, and any related
actions.
§ 366-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-7
1:315

ARTICLE IV
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted as Secs. 12.16 and 12.17 of the former Municipal
Codebook]
§ 366-8. Violations and penalties; revocation of license. [Amended
9-24-2007; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with any of the
provisions in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, of the Code of the City of
Reedsburg. The license of the firm, person or corporation so convicted is
thereby automatically revoked, and no license shall again be issued to the
same licensee for a period of no less than 30 days, nor more than six months
after revocation of said license, and that not until he shall have complied
fully with the provisions of this chapter and have made application therefor
and paid the fee as required by this chapter.
§ 366-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-8
1:317
Chapter 374
LITTERING
§ 374-1. Littering prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit any litter upon any public street or place or
private lot within the City, or dump or place any garbage, refuse, or debris
on the bank of or within any river, creek, stream, or drainage ditch within
the City.
§ 374-2. Dumping prohibited.
No person shall throw any glass, cans, rubbish, waste, or filth upon the
streets, alleys, highways, public parks, or other property of the City or upon
any private property not owned by him, or upon the surface of any body of
water within the City of Reedsburg.
Chapter 382
MINORS
§ 366-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 374-2
1:318
ARTICLE I
Curfew
[Adopted 12-5-2013 (Sec. 9.05(10) of the former Municipal
Codebook)]
§ 382-1. Prohibited hours.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be or remain in or upon any
of the public streets, alleys, or places of the City between the hours of
10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday
until 5:00 a.m. the following day, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on
Friday and Saturday until 5:00 a.m. the following day, unless such person is
accompanied by his/her parent, guardian or other individual having custody
of such person.
§ 382-2. Travel to and from work.
This article shall not apply to any person under the age of 18 years of age
who is required to use the streets, alleys, or public places of the City during
the hours named for the purpose of going to or returning from his/her place
of employment, but no more than reasonable time shall be allowed for going
to and returning from such employment.
§ 382-3. Defenses.
It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the minor was:
§ 382-4. Enforcement.
Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
article unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred
and that, based on any response or other circumstances, no defense in
§ 382-3 is present.
A. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
B. Engaged in legal activity at the direction, permission, or authority of
the minor's parent or guardian;
C. In or upon a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
D. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
E. Involved in an emergency.
§ 382-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-5
1:319
§ 382-5. Applicability.
Any person under the age of 18 years who repeatedly violates this article
shall be subject to referral to Juvenile Court Intake under Chapter 938 of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 382-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to violate
the provisions of this article. Upon a violation of this article by such
person, such person shall forfeit and pay not less than $5 nor more than
$50 for each offense or fines as set forth on the current bond schedule,
together with the cost of prosecution. The Police Department shall
notify the parent, guardian or individual having custody over the person
violating this article, if known, of the minor's violation of this article.
Notice may be made either in person, by telephone or by letter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other individual having
custody of any person under the age of 18 years to allow or permit such
person to violate the provisions of this article. If a parent, guardian or
other individual having custody of a child has been previously notified
of a minor's violation of this article, upon subsequent offense received
by a person under the age of 18 years, the parent, guardian or other
individual having custody shall be in violation of this article of the Code
and shall forfeit and pay not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each
offense or fines as set forth on the current bond schedule, together with
the cost of prosecution, and in lieu of payment thereof shall be confined
to the county jail not to exceed five days.
§ 382-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 382-6
1:320
ARTICLE II
Truancy
[Adopted as Sec. 9.06 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 382-7. Authority. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Section 118.163(2), Wis. Stats., authorizes the City of Reedsburg to adopt
a municipal truancy ordinance based on Juvenile Code §§ 938.02(8b),
938.13(6), 938.17(2)(a), (d), (g), and 938.342, Wis. Stats.
§ 382-8. Definitions. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE EXCUSE — Has the meaning as defined in § 118.15, Wis.
Stats.
HABITUAL TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an
acceptable excuse for part or all of five or more days on which school is held
during a school semester.
§ 382-9. Municipal citation authorized.
The City of Reedsburg, by this article, does prohibit any student within its
jurisdiction from being an habitual truant, as that term is defined in this
article. The Reedsburg Police Department is authorized to issue a municipal
citation to any such student found within its jurisdiction who is determined
to be habitually truant under the terms of this article.
A. Prior to the issuance of any citation, the law enforcement personnel
shall determine whether the school officials have done the following:
(1) Met with or attempted to meet with the child's parent or guardian
to discuss the child's truancy.
(2) Provided an opportunity for educational counseling to the child and
considered curriculum modifications.
(3) Evaluated the child to determine whether learning problems are a
cause of the truancy and, if so, taken steps to overcome the
learning problems.
(4) Conducted an evaluation to determine whether social problems are
the cause of the child's truancy and, if so, taken appropriate action
or made appropriate referrals.
B. Any citation issued shall be returnable in the Circuit Court of Sauk
County in the same manner as all ordinance citations are returnable.
The citation is to state on its face that this is a "must appear" citation,
and no forfeiture amount is to be written on the face of the citation.
§ 382-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-10
1:321
§ 382-10. Remedies.
Upon finding the child habitually truant, the following dispositions are
available to the Court:
§ 382-11. Contribution to truancy.
A. Suspend the child's operating privileges as defined in § 340.01(40), Wis.
Stats., for not less than 30 and not more than 90 days. The Court may
take possession of any suspended license. If the Court takes possession
of a license, it shall destroy the license. The Court shall forward to the
Department of Transportation of the State of Wisconsin a notice stating
the reason for and duration of the suspension. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Order the child to remain at home except for the hours in which the
child is attending religious worship or a school program, including
travel time required to get from the school program or place of worship.
The order may permit a child to leave the home if the child is
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
C. Order the child to attend an educational program as set forth in
§ 938.34(7n), Wis. Stats.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, no person 18 years of age or older
may, by an act or omission, knowingly encourage or contribute to the
truancy, as defined in Section 118.16(1)(c), Wisconsin Statutes, of a
child.
B. Subsection A does not apply to a person who has under his or her
control a child who has been sanctioned under § 49.26(1)(h), Wis. Stats.
C. An act or omission contributes to the truancy of a child, whether or not
the child is adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the
natural and probable consequences of the act or omission would be to
cause the child to be truant.
D. An action under this article may be commenced by citation pursuant to
Chapter 30 of this Code.
§ 382-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 382-11
1:322
ARTICLE III
Alcohol and Tobacco Offenses
[Adopted as Secs. 9.05(3) and (5) and 9.03(6) and (7) of the former
Municipal Codebook]
§ 382-12. Juvenile drinking offenses.
Furnishing alcohol beverages to minors. No person shall sell, furnish, vend,
or any way deal or traffic in, or give any intoxicating liquor or fermented
malt beverage in any quantity whatsoever to any person under the age of
21.
§ 382-13. Purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco products
by persons under 18 prohibited. [Amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No.
1868-18]
§ 382-14. Purchase or possession of tobacco products. [Amended
3-25-2013]
Purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by persons under
the age of 18 is prohibited as provided in § 254.92, Wis. Stats. It shall be
unlawful for anyone who is under the age of 18 to possess, procure or
A. Definitions. In this section, the definitions in § 254.911, Wis. Stats.,
(2015-16 Wis. Stats) are adopted and fully incorporated herein.
B. No person under 18 years of age may falsely represent his or her age
for purpose of receiving any cigarette, nicotine product, or tobacco
product.
C. No person under 18 years of age may purchase, attempt to purchase, or
possess any cigarette, nicotine product, or tobacco product except as
follows:
(1) A person under 18 years of age may purchase or possess cigarettes,
nicotine products, or tobacco products for the sole purpose of
resale in the course of employment during his or her working hours
if employed by a retailer.
(2) A person under 18 years of age, but not under 15 years of age, may
purchase, attempt to purchase or possess cigarettes, nicotine
products, or tobacco products in the course of his or her
participation in an investigation under § 254.916, Wis. Stats., that
is conducted in accordance with § 254.916(3), Wis. Stats.
D. No person may purchase cigarettes, tobacco products, or nicotine
products on behalf of, or to provide to, any person who is under 18
years of age.
E. A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette, nicotine product, or
tobacco product that has been sold to and is in the possession of a
person under 18 years of age.
§ 382-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-14
1:323
consume any cigarette, tobacco products, or nicotine products, as defined
by § 139.75(12), Wis. Stats.
§ 382-15. Sale of tobacco products. [Amended 3-25-2013]
As provided in § 134.66(2)(am), Wis. Stats., no retailer, direct marketer,
manufacturer, distributor, jobber, subjobber, no agent, employee or
independent contractor of a retailer, direct marketer, manufacturer,
distributor, jobber or subjobber and no agent or employee of any
independent contractor may provide, for nominal or no consideration,
cigarettes, tobacco products or nicotine products to any person except
in a place where no person younger than 18 years of age is present or
permitted to enter unless the person who is younger than 18 years of age is
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or by his or her spouse who
has attained the age of 18 years.
§ 382-14 REEDSBURG CODE § 382-15
1:324
Chapter 390
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 390-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning appears from the
context:
DEPENDENT UNIT — A mobile home which does not have bathroom or
shower and toilet facilities.
MOBILE HOME — Including "manufactured home," as defined by State
Statutes or Administrative Code, means a vehicle designed to be towed as a
single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and equipped
and used, or intended to be used, primarily for human habitation, with walls
of rigid, uncollapsible construction. Mobile home includes the mobile home
structure, its plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems,
and all appliances and all other equipment carrying a manufacturer's
warranty.[Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 1816-15]
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot or plots of ground upon which three
or more manufactured homes that are occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes are located. It does not include a farm where the occupants of the
manufactured homes are the father, mother, son, daughter, brother or sister
of the farm owner or operator or where the occupants of the manufactured
homes work on the farm.[Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 1816-15]
NONDEPENDENT UNIT — A mobile home that has bath or shower and
toilet facilities.
PERSON — Shall be construed to include an individual, partnership, firm,
company, corporation, whether tenant, owner, lessee, licensee, or its agent,
heir, or assign.
SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for
placement of one mobile home.[Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
1816-15]
UNIT — A mobile home unit.
§ 390-2. Location outside parks.
A. No person shall park any mobile home on any street, alley, highway or
other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person within
the City, except in a licensed mobile home park.
B. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any
street, alley or highway for not longer than one hour subject to any
other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by
the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or
highway.
§ 382-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-2
1:325
§ 390-3. Application and issuance of mobile home park license.
C. No person shall park or occupy any mobile home on any premises which
is situated outside an approved mobile home park. The parking of only
one unoccupied mobile home in an accessory private garage building,
or in a rear yard, is permitted, providing no living quarters shall be
maintained or any business practiced in said mobile home while such
mobile home is so parked or stored.
A. Mobile homes shall not be used as a permanent place of abode or as a
permanent dwelling, or for indefinite periods of time, provided any
nondependent mobile home properly connected with the public water
supply and sanitary sewer system may be permitted in any licensed
mobile home park if such mobile home shall be constructed and located
in compliance with all requirements of the building, plumbing, health,
sanitary, electrical and zoning ordinances.
B. An annual license is required. The application for a mobile home park
license or the renewal thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk-
Treasurer and shall be accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by
Common Council for each space in the existing or proposed park, and a
surety bond in the sum of $5,000. This bond shall guarantee the
collection by the licensee of the monthly parking permit fee provided
for in § 390-12 and the payment of such fees to the City Clerk-Treasurer,
the payment by the licensee of any fine or forfeiture, including legal
costs imposed upon or levied against said licensee for a violation of the
ordinances of the City pursuant to which such license is granted, and
shall also be for the use and benefit and may be prosecuted and
recovery had thereon by any person who may be injured or damaged by
reason of the license violating the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
C. The application for a license or a renewal thereof shall be made on
forms furnished by the City Clerk-Treasurer and shall include the name
and address of the owner in fee of the tract (if the fee is vested in some
person other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by that
person that the applicant is authorized by him to construct or maintain
the mobile home park and make the application), and such a legal
description of the premises upon which the park is or will be located as
will readily identify and definitely locate the premises. The application
shall be accompanied by two copies of the park plan, showing the
following, either existing or as proposed:
(1) The extent and are used for park purposes;
(2) Roadways and driveway;
(3) Location of units for homes;
§ 390-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 390-3
1:326
§ 390-4. Inspection and enforcement.
No mobile home park license shall be issued until the City Clerk-Treasurer
shall notify the Chief of Police, Health Officer, Chief of Fire Department,
and Building Inspector or their authorized agents of such application, and
these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and
the premises to determine whether the applicant and the premises on
which mobile homes will be located comply with the regulations, ordinances
and laws applicable thereto. These officials shall furnish to the Council, in
writing, the information derived from such investigation and a statement
as to whether the applicant and premises meet the requirements of the
department for which the office is certifying. No license shall be renewed
without a reinspection of the premises. For the purpose of making
inspections and securing enforcement, such officials or their authorized
agents may enter on any premises on which a mobile home is located,
or about to be located, and to inspect the same and all accommodations
connected therewith at any reasonable time.
§ 390-5. Location of mobile home parks.
§ 390-6. Park plan.
(4) Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets,
washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of
units;
(5) Method and plan of sewage disposal;
(6) Method and plan of garbage removal;
(7) Plan for water supply; and
(8) Plan for electrical lighting units.
A. No mobile home or mobile home park shall be located in any fire
district.
B. No occupied mobile home within the City shall be located between the
reorganized setback line for the zoning district in which such mobile
home is located and the street or highway, nor less than 10 feet from
any building or other mobile home or from the boundary line of the
premises on which located.
A. Every mobile home and mobile home park shall be located on a welldrained
area, and the premises shall be properly graded so as to
prevent the accumulation of stormwater or other waters. No mobile
home or mobile home park shall be located in any area that is situated
so that drainage from any barnyard, outdoor toilet or other source of
filth can be deposited in its location.
B. Spaces in new parks or additions to present parks shall be clearly
defined and shall consist of a minimum of 1,000 square feet and a width
§ 390-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-6
1:327
§ 390-7. Water supply.
§ 390-8. Service building accommodations.
of not less than 20 feet. The camp shall be so arranged that all spaces
shall face or abut on a driveway of not less than 20 feet in width,
giving easy access from all units to a public street, except that those
10 trailers located on the north side of Lucky Street between Grove
Street and Dewey Avenue shall be allowed to have exit onto Lucky
Street. Such driveway shall be graveled or paved and maintained in
good condition, having natural drainage, be well-lighted at night, and
shall not be obstructed.
C. No dependent unit shall be located within the City.
D. Every space shall be furnished with an electric service outlet. Such
outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse of
not less than 30 amperes' capacity, and a heavy-duty receptacle.
Electrical outlets shall be weatherproof, and no power lines shall be less
than 15 feet above ground.
E. No unit shall be parked in a park outside of a designated space.
A. An adequate supply of pure water furnished through a pipe distribution
system connected directly with the public water main, with supply
faucets located not more than 200 feet from any mobile home, shall be
furnished for drinking and domestic purposes in all parks.
B. Individual water service connections provided for direct use of an
independent unit shall be so constructed that they will not be damaged
by the parking of such units. Such systems shall be adequate to provide
20 pounds of pressure per square inch and capable of furnishing a
minimum of 125 gallons per day per space.
C. No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking
water faucets be placed in any toilet room.
A. Every mobile home park shall have erected thereon suitable buildings
for laundry facilities as required by this chapter. Such buildings shall be
of permanent construction and adequately lighted, screened and
ventilated.
B. Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double tray unit
and one conventional type washing machine, or one automatic washing
machine, with one electric outlet, for each 8 units; sufficient drying
facilities shall be available.
C. Slop sinks for disposal of liquid wastes originating at the units shall be
provided in a separate room of the service building in the ratio of one
slop sink for each 16 dependent units.
§ 390-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 390-8
1:328
§ 390-9. Waste and garbage disposal.
§ 390-10. Management.
D. Floors of laundry facilities shall be of concrete, tile, or similar material
impervious to water and easily cleaned and pitched to a flood drain.
E. The above accommodations shall be based on the total park capacity
according to accepted plans.
A. All liquid waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets, lavatories, etc.
shall be discharged into a sewer system extended from and connected
with the public sewer system.
B. Every space shall be provided with sewer connections which shall
comply with the state plumbing code. The sewer connection shall be
provided with suitable fittings so that watertight connections can be
made. Such connections shall be so constructed so that they can be
closed when not connected and trapped in such a manner as to be
maintained in an odor-free condition.
C. All sanitary facilities in any unit which are not connected with a public
sewer system by approved pipe connections shall be sealed and their
use is hereby declared unlawful.
D. Each faucet shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste and
excess water.
E. Every unit shall be provided with a substantial flytight, watertight,
metal garbage depository from which the contents shall be removed
and disposed of in sanitary manner by the park custodian at least twice
weekly between May 1 and October 15, and otherwise weekly.
A. In every mobile home park, there shall be located the office of the
attendant or person in charge. A copy of the license and of this chapter
shall be posted therein, and the park register shall be set in said office
at all times.
B. The attendant or person in charge, together with the licensee, shall:
(1) Keep a register of all guests, to be open at all times in regards to
inspection by state and federal officers and the License Committee,
which shall show for all guests:
(a) Names and addresses.
(b) Number of children of school age.
(c) States of legal residence.
(d) Dates of entrance and departure.
(e) License numbers of all mobile homes and towing or other
vehicles.
§ 390-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-10
1:329
§ 390-11. Applicability of plumbing, electrical and building
standards.
All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any park licensed
under this chapter shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the City
and the requirements of the state plumbing, electrical and building codes
and the regulation of the State Department of Safety and Professional
Services. Licenses and permits granted under this chapter grant no right
to erect or repair any structure, to do any plumbing work, or to do any
electrical work.
§ 390-12. Monthly park fee.
There is hereby imposed on each owner or operator of a mobile home park
licensed herein, a monthly permit fee as determined in accordance with
§ 66.0435, Wis. Stats., on each occupied, nonexempt mobile home which
shall have been parked in such park for a period of two weeks or longer
during the month. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the
licensee to collect the proper amount from each mobile home and to pay to
the City Clerk-Treasurer such parking permit fees on or before the 10th of
the month following the month for which such fees are due, in accordance
with the terms of this chapter and such regulations as the Clerk-Treasurer
may reasonably promulgate.
(f) States issuing such licenses.
(g) Purpose of stay in park.
(h) Place of last location and length of stay.
(i) Place of employment or each occupant.
(2) Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times.
(3) Ensure that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any
violation of this chapter or any other violations of law which may
come to his attention.
(4) Report to the health officer all cases of persons or animals infected
or suspected of being infected with any communicable disease.
(5) Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Chief, hand
fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each 8 units.
(6) Collect the monthly parking permit fee provided for in § 390-12. A
book shall be kept showing the names of the persons paying said
service charges and the amount paid.
(7) Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises.
§ 390-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 390-13
1:330
§ 390-13. Revocation and suspension of license.
The Council may revoke any license or permit issued pursuant to the terms
of this chapter in accordance with § 66.0435(2)(d), Wis. Stats.
§ 390-14. Compliance with other provisions.
In compliance with Chapter SPS 326, Wis. Adm. Code, the following
requirements in addition to all those set forth above shall be applicable to
the operation of mobile home parks:
Chapter 402
NUISANCES
§ 402-1. Public nuisances prohibited.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the City.
§ 402-2. Definitions.
A "public nuisance" is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property
which shall continue for such length of time as to:
A. On a yearly basis, the City Health Inspector shall perform a sanitary
survey/inspection of each facility and shall supply a copy of that report
to the Department of Safety and Professional Services.
B. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a copy of this chapter along with
the name of the City Health Inspector to the Department of Safety and
Professional Services and shall be responsible for notifying the
Department of any changes in that information. The Clerk shall further
annually provide the Department of Safety and Professional Services
with a list of all mobile home parks within the City of Reedsburg during
the month of April.
A. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public;
B. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
C. Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
D. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct, or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway,
navigable body of water or other public way or the use of public
property.
§ 390-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-3
1:331
§ 402-3. Public nuisances affecting health.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration
shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the
definition of § 402-2:
A. Adulterated food. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome
food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
B. Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended
for human consumption or foods which are not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours of death.
C. Breeding places for vermin, etc. Accumulations of decayed animal or
vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing
material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies,
mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
D. Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other
insects can multiply.
E. Privy vaults and garbage cans. Privy vaults and garbage cans which are
not flytight.
F. Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds, rank growth of vegetation, or the
accumulation of unsightly growth and foliage. The Weed Commissioner
shall determine when such unsightly growth and foliage of any nature is
detrimental to the appearance, neatness, or cleanliness of a
neighborhood and shall notify the owner of said property, in writing,
that the accumulation of such unsightly growth and foliage is in
violation of this chapter and give said owner 10 days within which to cut
said accumulation of unsightly growth and foliage, as the case may be.
If at the expiration of said 10 days said owner has not complied with
said order to cut such growth, then the Weed Commissioner can direct
the proper authorities within the government of the City of Reedsburg
to cut such unsightly growth and foliage and notify the property owner
of the same and add the cost of said cutting of weeds to the tax roll if
the same is not paid for in cash.
G. Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream,
lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial
wastes or other substances.
H. Noxious odors, etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the
City emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious
or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive
to the physical senses or ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort,
injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of
persons within the City.
§ 402-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 402-3
1:332
I. Street pollution. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter,
alley, sidewalk or public place within the City.
J. Box elder trees. Any box elder tree infected with the box elder bug.
K. Abandoned, wrecked or inoperative motor vehicles. [Added 7-23-2018
by Ord. No. 1879-18]
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ABANDONMENT — Whenever any or all of the following conditions
exist, a vehicle shall be deemed to have been abandoned within the
meaning of this chapter:
JUNKED VEHICLES — Any vehicle as described above which is
inoperative in its then existing condition.
STANDING — Any vehicle which is not moved at least 30 feet away
from its original space in the areas and time periods described in
this chapter shall be considered to have been standing.
VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled, including a motor
vehicle as defined in the Wisconsin Statutes, and also means every
device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported and every type of equipment on wheels, including farm
machinery.
Whenever any vehicle has been allowed to remain standing
on any public place or on-street parking area for more than
72 hours. This chapter shall not prohibit the enforcement of
Chapter 615, Vehicles and Traffic, § 615-10B, concerning
alternate side parking. (Chapter 615, Vehicles and Traffic,
§ 615-12 shall take precedence over this section in all snow
emergency cases.)
(a)
When any vehicle has been allowed to remain standing upon
any private property, except when stored in a private garage,
in a public garage or a premises attached thereto, or upon
any premises which shall have been licensed or approved by
the Common Council as a junkyard or auto-wrecking yard, for
more than 14 consecutive days or where such vehicle shall
have had its wheels removed or have been raised off the
ground for more than four consecutive days.
(b)
Whenever any vehicle, whether operative or inoperative, shall
have been allowed to stand or remain on any municipal parking
lot or metered area within the City in violation of the parking
regulations thereof for more than a period of 72 hours.
(c)
(2) Abandonment prohibited. No person shall park, store, leave, or
permit the parking, storing, or leaving of any motor vehicle of any
kind that is in an abandoned, wrecked, inoperative, unlicensed, or
§ 402-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-3
1:333
dismantled condition upon any private property within the City.
This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a
building on private property, to any vehicle held in connection
with a lawful business within the City or its extraterritorial area,
such as a junkyard, salvage yard, or auto repair business, or to
temporary repair work that is performed within 24 hours of a
vehicle becoming unexpectedly unroadworthy.
(a) Notice shall be sent to the property owner or vehicle owner
with an order that the owner shall, within 30 days, make the
vehicle operable and roadworthy and license any vehicle that
may not be licensed or, in the alternative, place such vehicle in
an enclosed structure or remove the vehicle from the property.
(b) The notice shall further advise the owner that if the nuisance is
not corrected, the vehicle is subject to be towed, stored, and, if
not redeemed, disposed of at owner's expense following a
hearing before the Ordinance Committee.
(c) A written notice shall be provided to that owner either
personally or by registered mail. All hearings shall be
scheduled within a reasonable time after receipt of the written
request.
(d) Failure to appear at the hearing may be grounds for an
immediate towing under the terms of this chapter. If, at the
conclusion of the hearing, the Committee finds that there is
probable cause to believe that the vehicle is in violation
pursuant to the definitions contained in this chapter, a citation
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3 of this Code
shall be issued and the vehicle shall be impounded. In the
event that the vehicle is impounded, the owner shall remain
liable for all towing charges, and these charges shall be
assessed over and above the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-3, if the person is found to be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
(3) Emergency removal. The Chief of Police or any member of the City
Police Department is hereby authorized to remove or to have
removed any vehicle whose location or existence jeopardizes public
safety by either creating an unsafe condition or by significantly
hindering the efficient movement of traffic. Except for preseizure
notification as set forth below, the owner of said vehicle shall be
entitled to all of the rights otherwise set forth in this chapter.
(4) Impounding of abandoned or discarded motor vehicles. The Chief
of Police, or any member of the City Police Department, is hereby
authorized to remove or to have removed any wrecked, inoperative,
junked, dismantled or partially dismantled motor vehicle left at any
place within the City of Reedsburg which reasonably appears to be
in violation of this section or to be lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such
§ 402-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 402-3
1:334
motor vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or
disposed of in accordance with Subsection K(8) of this section.
(5) Notice and right to preliminary hearing.
(a) In all nonemergency cases where, by reasonable diligence, the
Chief of Police or any member of the City Police Department is
able to determine the owner of any abandoned vehicle, a
written notice shall be provided to that owner either personally
or by registered mail. The notice shall provide that the vehicle
will be towed pursuant to the terms of this chapter if a written
request for a hearing is not received within 72 hours of receipt
of the notice. The request shall be directed to the Chief of
Police and shall be served on him or any member of the Police
Department, either personally or by registered mail within 72
hours. All hearings shall be scheduled within a reasonable time
after receipt of the written request and shall be administered
by the City Attorney or one of his or her assistants at such time
and place as is designated by that individual. Failure to appear
at the hearing shall be grounds for an immediate towing under
the terms of this chapter. If, at the conclusion of the hearing,
the hearing officer finds that there is probable cause to believe
that the vehicle has been abandoned pursuant to the
definitions contained in this chapter, a citation under
Subsection K(2) shall be issued and the vehicle shall be
impounded, pending final hearing on the above citation. In the
event that the vehicle is impounded, the owner shall remain
liable for all towing charges as set forth below and these
charges shall be assessed over and above the penalties set
forth in Subsection K(9) if the person is found to be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
(b) The above written request for a hearing shall be either
personally served on the Chief of Police or any representative
of the Police Department or made by certified mail.
(6) If, after employing reasonable diligence, the Chief of Police cannot
determine the owner of the vehicle and the vehicle does not create
a hazard, the vehicle shall be impounded as set forth below and the
Chief of Police shall cause publication of a notice of such
impounding as a Class 2 notice in the official City newspaper. The
notice shall briefly describe the motor vehicle, the location from
which it was removed and set forth the owner's rights to a hearing
as set forth above.
(7) Reclamation. At any time prior to the sale of an impounded motor
vehicle, any person establishing his ownership or right of
possession of the same may pay the Police Department for the
storage and towing thereof along with such other expenses
incidental to the care and maintenance of the same and any other
§ 402-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-3
1:335
expenses incurred in relation thereto. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(8) Sale of impounded motor vehicles.
(a) After any motor vehicle shall have been stored for more than
30 days and the required notices have been given or published
and, where applicable, a hearing has been held in a court of
law with respect to the alleged violation of this section, the
Chief of Police shall sell the same at public auction. Notice of
such sale shall be published in the official City newspaper as a
Class 2 notice. The sales notice may include one or more
vehicles. At such sale, the highest bid in cash for any motor
vehicle shall be accepted, unless the same is, in the judgment
of the Chief of Police, inadequate. In the event that all bids are
rejected or no bid at all is received, the Chief of Police may, in
his discretion, either readvertise the sale or adjourn the same
from time to time to a definite date each time, or sell such
motor vehicle at a private sale, or junk the same.
(b) After deducting the reasonable and necessary expenses
incident to the care and sale of any motor vehicle, the balance
of the proceeds shall be paid to the City Clerk-Treasurer and
credited to the general City fund. The sale of the motor vehicle
under the provisions of this section shall forever bar all prior
claims thereto and any interest therein except as hereafter
provided.
(c) At any time within two years after the sale of a motor vehicle as
provided herein, any person claiming ownership of such motor
vehicle or a financial interest therein may present a claim to
the Common Council of the City of Reedsburg setting forth
such facts as are necessary to establish such ownership or
interest. If the Common Council is satisfied as to the merit of
such claim, it may allow the same, but in no case shall the
amount allowed exceed the sum paid to the City Clerk-
Treasurer as a result of the sale of such vehicle nor the amount
of the interest of the claimant therein.
(9) Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this or any
order, rule or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, of the
Code of the City of Reedsburg.
L. Debris, junk: order to remove and penalties. [Added 7-23-2018 by
Ord. No. 1879-18]
(1) Whenever City Staff finds that conditions on any premises within
the City create a fire or health hazard or shall find that, by virtue of
any accumulation of unsightly materials, junk or debris of any
nature on any premises or for any other reason, any premises are
§ 402-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 402-3
1:336
§ 402-4. Public nuisances offending morals and decency.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and
decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other
nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition
in § 402-2:
detrimental to the appearance, neatness of cleanliness of a
neighborhood so as to tend to depreciate property values therein
or create a nuisance or offend the aesthetic character of the
immediate neighborhood or produce blight or deterioration by
reason of such conditions, City staff may order the owner of said
premises to correct any such condition or to remove therefrom any
such unsafe, hazardous or unsightly articles, material or debris.
Examples of junk, refuse, litter, garbage, and scrap or waste matter
shall include, but are not limited to, appliances, furniture, tires,
wood, machinery parts, boats recreational vehicles, or other
unsightly debris that is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled,
discarded, or inoperative.
(a) The order shall specify a time not to exceed 30 days within
which the owner and/or occupant shall comply therewith.
(b) The order shall further advise the owner that if the nuisance is
not corrected, the debris/junk is subject to be removed and, if
not redeemed, disposed of at owner's expense following a
hearing before the Ordinance Committee.
(c) A written notice shall be provided to that owner either
personally or by registered mail. All hearings shall be
scheduled within a reasonable time after receipt of the written
request.
(d) Failure to appear at the hearing may be grounds for an
immediate towing under the terms of this chapter. If, at the
conclusion of the hearing, the Committee finds that there is
probable cause to believe that the junk/debris is in violation
pursuant to the definitions contained in this chapter, a citation
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, of the Code of
the City of Reedsburg shall be issued and the junk/debris shall
be removed. In the event that the junk/debris is removed, the
owner shall remain liable for all removal charges and these
charges shall be assessed over and above the penalties set
forth in § 1-3 if the person is found to be guilty of a violation of
this chapter.
A. Disorderly houses: all disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill
fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to
for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual, intercourse or
gambling.
§ 402-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-4
1:337
§ 402-5. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting
public peace or safety coming within the definition in § 402-2:
B. Gambling devices: all gambling devices and slot machines.
C. Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer: all places where intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed,
bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as
provided for by the ordinances of the City.
D. Continuous violation of City ordinances: any place or premises within
the City where City ordinances or state laws relating to public health,
safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly
and intentionally violated.
E. Illegal drinking: any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of
drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of
the laws of the State of Wisconsin or ordinances of the City.
A. Signs, billboards, etc. All signs and billboards, awnings and other
similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or
places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to
endanger the public safety.
B. Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation
of the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating to materials and
manner of construction of buildings and structures within the City.
C. Unauthorized traffic signs. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or
devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or
railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official
traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of their
color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interfere with the
effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
D. Obstruction of intersections. All trees, hedges, billboards or other
obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets,
alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when
approaching an intersection of pedestrian crosswalk.
E. Tree limbs. All limbs of trees will be trimmed to a seven-foot height.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
F. Dangerous trees. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are
the cause of substantial annoyance to the general public. A tree whose
roots penetrate the public sewer or cause a heaving of the sidewalk
shall be included within this subsection.
§ 402-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 402-5
1:338
§ 402-6. Abatement of public nuisances.
G. Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by laws of
the State of Wisconsin and ordinances of the City.
H. Dilapidated buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or
out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit
for human use.
I. Wires over streets. All wires over streets, alleys, or public grounds
which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface thereof.
J. Obstructions of streets and excavations. All obstructions of streets,
alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the
same, except as permitted by the ordinance of the City or which,
although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the
purpose thereof has been accomplished, or do not conform to the
permit.
K. Unlawful assembly. Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property
abutting on a public street, alley, or sidewalk or of a public street, alley
or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing
traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks.
L. Keeping of bees. The keeping of more than two hives of bees, the
keeping of bees within 100 feet of any adjoining lot line and/or the
keeping of bees for a commercial purpose.
A. Enforcement. The Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Building Inspector, the Zoning Administrator and Health Officer shall
enforce those provisions of this chapter that come within the
jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall make periodic inspections
and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not
violated. No action shall be taken under this section to abate a public
nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected or caused to be
inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and have
satisfied them that a nuisance does in fact exist. [Amended
3-24-2008]
B. Summary abatement. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a
public nuisance exists within the City and that there is great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals, or
decency, the Mayor may direct the proper officer to cause the same to
be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person
causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
C. Abatement after notice. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a
public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such
nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals, or decency, he shall serve notice on
the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same
§ 402-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-6
1:339
§ 402-7. Cost of abatement.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance, or maintenance of a public nuisance,
the cost of abating a public nuisance by the City shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
§ 402-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-10-2009]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, §§ 402-1 through
402-7, or permit or cause a public nuisance shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, of the Code of the City of
Reedsburg.
Chapter 415
PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 415-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to regulate and control the use of streets and
public property to ensure that the health, safety and general welfare of
the public and the good order of the City is protected and maintained. The
City's authority to regulate streets and public property is contained in the
Wisconsin Statutes, including, but not limited to, § 349.185, Wis. Stats.
§ 415-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
HIGHWAYS and STREETS — Has the meaning set forth in § 340.01, Wis.
Stats., and also includes alleys (as defined in § 340.01, Wis. Stats.) and
areas owned by the City of Reedsburg which are used primarily for
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
NEIGHBORHOOD EVENT — Includes any planned gathering to take place
in a residential location such as a residential street or cul-de-sac. Examples
include neighborhood or residential block parties and estate sales or
auctions.
within 10 days. If such nuisance is not removed within such 10 days,
the proper officer shall cause the nuisances to be removed as provided
in Subsection B.
D. Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the City or its
officials in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
§ 402-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 415-2
1:340
PERSON — Any natural individual, sole proprietorship, group, entity,
organization, partnership, association, corporation, or limited liability
company.
PROCESSIONS, PARADES, RUNS, WALKS, MARATHONS, BICYCLE
RACES, BLOCK PARTIES and SIMILAR ACTIVITIES — Those terms have
their usual and customary usage.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any planned event on a highway or street in the City
of Reedsburg or on property owned by the City of Reedsburg, including,
but not limited to, processions, parades, runs, walks, marathons, bicycle
races, block parties, transient or temporary public entertainment, festivals
or celebrations, estate sales or auctions, political gatherings or events, and
events requiring the issuance of a temporary Class "B" alcohol license. A
special event includes a "neighborhood event."
TRANSIENT OR TEMPORARY PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT — One to which
the public may gain admission by payment of an admission charge. A
transient or temporary public entertainment includes shows, circuses,
exhibitions, carnivals, or other traveling entertainment venues.
§ 415-3. Permit required.
No person may hold a special event on a highway or street in the City of
Reedsburg or on property owned by the City of Reedsburg without first
obtaining a special event permit from the City.
§ 415-4. Application.
A person seeking to hold a special event shall file an application with the
City Clerk-Treasurer on the form provided by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The
application shall be filed at least 45 days before the special event. No
application shall be considered that is filed 15 days or less from the date of
the special event. The application shall contain the following information:
A. The Chief of Police has the authority to issue a special event permit for
a neighborhood event. Said permits shall be exempt from the fee as
required in § 415-10 and may be exempt from insurance as required in
§ 415-12 herein. Issuance of a special event permit for a neighborhood
event or other special event defined herein shall not require obtaining
separate street use permit.
B. All other special event permits shall be subject to review and approval
by the City Administrator upon review by the Chief of Police, City Clerk-
Treasurer, Director of Public Works, Fire Chief and Director of Parks
and Recreation (departmental review), subject to § 415-6 below.
C. The City of Reedsburg reserves the authority, in its sole discretion, to
refer any special event permit application to the Ordinance Committee
or the Common Council for review and approval. The Ordinance
Committee decision is subject to appeal to the Common Council
pursuant to § 415-9.
§ 415-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-4
1:341
§ 415-5. Exemptions.
A special event permit is not required for assembling or movement of a
funeral procession or military convoy. A special event, including a parade,
sponsored by an agency of the federal, state or local government, acting in
its governmental capacity within the scope of its authority, may be required
to obtain a special event permit; however, the agency may be exempt from
the permit fee and insurance requirements contained in this chapter. A
permit is not required if the person/entity is involved in a long-term lease of
City property, i.e., Lions/Jaycees Building or RACA Building, or short-term
rental of the Park Shelter/RACA Building.
§ 415-6. Application review.
If the City Clerk-Treasurer determines that the special event permit
application is complete, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall forward the
application to the City Administrator, who in turn may refer the application
to the Chief of Police, Director of Public Works, Fire Chief and Director of
Parks and Recreation for review (departmental review). If the departmental
review determines that members of the Fire, Parks and Recreation, Police
or Public Works Departments must assist with setup, operation, cleanup or
be available to staff the special event, the applicant shall pay a deposit as
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant or
applicants.
B. If the special event is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization or company, the name, address and telephone number of
the organization's or company's headquarters and of individual(s)
authorized to act on behalf of the organization or company.
C. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who
will be responsible for operating the special event.
D. The proposed use, described in detail, for which the special event
permit is requested.
E. The date(s) and duration of time during which the special event is to
occur.
F. An accurate description of the portion(s) of the street(s) or property to
be used.
G. The applicant shall indicate if the special event requires complete,
partial, or no closure of any streets.
H. A map of the special event, including the street(s)/property to be used,
the route of the event, and the placement of any tents, facilities, or
equipment, if required by staff review.
I. The approximate number of persons who will attend the special event.
J. Any other information that the City deems necessary or appropriate.
§ 415-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 415-6
1:342
established in the Fee Schedule. The City Administrator may require the
applicant to provide additional information in support of the application if
the departmental review deems the additional information necessary for
review purposes.
§ 415-7. Representation at meeting.
The departmental review of the application may require a meeting or
meeting(s) with applicant representative(s). If the special event permit
application is to be reviewed, initially or on appeal, by the Ordinance
Committee or the Common Council, the applicant shall attend the meeting
or meetings at which the application is considered by either of these bodies.
The applicant may be asked to provide additional information at the meeting
or meetings.
§ 415-8. Action on application.
The City Administrator and the individuals of the departmental review, the
Ordinance Committee, or the Common Council shall consider the following
factors when deciding whether to grant a special event permit:
A. How vehicular traffic may be affected by the special event, including
the effect, if any, of construction projects in and around the City.
B. When the special event is scheduled to be held and the duration of the
event, particularly if the event is scheduled between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
C. Whether sufficient supervision will be provided to reasonably assure
orderly conduct by the attendees.
D. Whether the location, facility or City has adequate resources to
accommodate the event.
E. Whether the special event is primarily for private or commercial
economic gain, unless the event is an estate sale or auction.
F. Whether the special event will negatively affect the health, safety or
general welfare of the public, including, but not limited to, the
movement of police, fire or emergency vehicles within the City.
G. Whether the operation of the special event violates any federal or state
law or City ordinance. The City Administrator, Ordinance Committee, or
the Common Council may deny a special event permit application if, in
its discretion, it is determined that one or more of the factors identified
above warrant denial of the application. Further, the City Administrator,
the Ordinance Committee, or the Common Council may place
conditions on the approval of a special event permit application. If a
special event permit is granted, the permittee shall comply with all
conditions placed on the permit, if any, and with all applicable federal
and state laws and City ordinances and regulations.
§ 415-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-9
1:343
§ 415-9. Appeal of permit denials.
If a special event permit application is denied by the City Administrator,
the applicant may appeal the denial to the Ordinance Committee by filing
a request with the City Clerk-Treasurer within five business days of the
receipt of the application denial. The Ordinance Committee shall consider
the appeal and make a recommendation to the Common Council to sustain
or overturn the decision to deny the permit, or send the application back to
the City Administrator with direction for further review of the application.
In each instance, the Common Council shall consider the recommendation
of the Ordinance Committee within 15 days of the Committee
recommendation if its decision is appealed to the Common Council. If a
special event permit application is denied by the Common Council, there is
no further appeal.
§ 415-10. Permit fee.
Each application for special event permit shall be accompanied by a fee
per the City Fee Schedule. Applications that are filed less than 45 days
before the special event are subject to a double application fee, which
shall be paid before the application is considered. Further, an application
for a special event that is not a neighborhood event shall be subject to a
special event fee, pursuant to the City Fee Schedule or fees specified in a
written agreement between the applicant and the City. The deposit shall
be returned to the applicant upon completion of the special event, less
any costs the City incurs in the actual assistance during setup, operation,
cleanup and/or staffing required by the City. Additionally, costs to restore
or repair damage to facilities and property owned by the City as a result
of the special event shall be deducted from the deposit. Any remaining
balance shall be returned to the applicant within 10 days of the completion
of the special event, along with an itemized listing of any deductions. If the
amount of the deposit is insufficient to cover such City-incurred expenses,
the City shall invoice the applicant for the remaining balance. The fees
referenced in the preceding sentence are intended to cover costs the City
incurs relating to the special event.
§ 415-11. Neighborhood events.
Each application for a special event permit for a neighborhood event shall
include a petition designating the proposed area of the street to be used and
the time for such use. The petition shall be signed by adult residents from
not less than 75% of the households on the portion of the street designated
for the proposed use. The petition shall be verified and shall be submitted
in substantially the following form:
§ 415-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 415-11
1:344
PETITION FOR SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT
We, the undersigned residents of the ____________ hundred block of
____________ Street in the City of Reedsburg, hereby consent to the
____________ recreational or business use of this street between the hours
of ____________ and ____________ on ____________, the
____________/____________/____________ day of ____________, 20____________,
for the purpose of ____________. We also hereby consent to the City of
Reedsburg granting a special event permit for use of the portion of the
street identified above for the use identified, and do hereby agree to abide
by any conditions that the City of Reedsburg places on the special event
permit. We further understand that the permit will not be granted for
longer than 12 hours and agree to remove from the street before the end
of the special event all equipment, vehicles, and other personal property
placed or driven thereon during the special event. We designate
____________ as the responsible person or persons who shall apply for a
special event permit.
§ 415-12. Insurance.
An applicant for a special event permit may be required to furnish the
City Clerk-Treasurer with a certificate of insurance written by a company
licensed in the State of Wisconsin, approved by the City Clerk-Treasurer,
and covering any and all liability or obligations that may result from the
special event, including any and all activities and operations by the
applicant and the applicant's employees, agents, or contractors, including
workers' compensation coverage in accordance with Ch. 102, Wis. Stats.
The certificate shall be written in comprehensive form and shall protect the
applicant and the City against all claims arising out of the special event,
including, but not limited to, any act or omission of the applicant and the
applicant's employees, agents, or contractors. The policy of insurance shall
provide minimum combined single limits for bodily injury and property
damage of $1,000,000 or such other insurance limits as deemed adequate
by the City. The certificate of insurance (and any required endorsements)
shall name the City of Reedsburg as an additional insured and must be
submitted to the City Clerk-Treasurer at least five days before the special
event is to occur. The City highly recommends every event provide tenants'
and users' liability insurance protection (TULIP) for the duration of its
special event and/or parade. These policies can be purchased from any
reputable insurance broker.
§ 415-13. Indemnification.
The applicant shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City of
Reedsburg and its officers, officials, agents, and employees against all loss
or expense (including liability costs and reasonable attorney's fees) by
reason of any claim or suit, or of liability imposed by law upon the City or
its officers, officials, agents or employees, for damages because of injury,
including death at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any person or
persons, or on account of damages to property, including loss of use thereof,
§ 415-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-13
1:345
arising from, in connection with, caused by or resulting from the special
event.
§ 415-14. Cleanup requirements.
The applicant shall return the site to the condition that existed before the
special event occurred within 24 hours of the completion of the event. The
City may require the applicant to provide a deposit in an amount to be
determined by the City to ensure that the site is adequately restored. If this
event involves the use of police "No Parking” signs, those signs are to be
removed and returned immediately after the event has ended.
§ 415-15. Refundable deposit.
As previously discussed in § 415-10, if the special event/parade would
require the use of City equipment, such as, but not limited to, barricades,
traffic cones, traffic vests, signage, etc., the City shall require the organizer
to provide a refundable deposit at the time of the request. That deposit shall
be refunded when all City equipment is returned to the Police Department
or other applicable City department in working order within 24 hours. The
City may charge actual costs above the deposit amount to replace or repair
equipment that is returned in disrepair or not returned at all.
§ 415-16. Termination of permit and special event.
A special event may be immediately terminated and the special event permit
revoked while the event is in progress if the Chief of Police or his or her
designee determines that the health, safety or general welfare of the public,
including participants at the event, is endangered by activities generated
as a result of the event, or if the special event has violated any conditions
placed on the event in the permit, or if the special event has violated any
City ordinances.
§ 415-17. Emergency revocation.
The Chief of Police or his or her designee may revoke a special event permit
that has already been issued if the Chief of Police or Fire Chief or his or
her designee determine that revocation is justified by an actual or potential
emergency due to weather, fire, riot, other catastrophe or likelihood of a
breach of the peace, or by a major change in the conditions forming the
basis for the issuance of the permit.
§ 415-18. Reedsburg Chamber of Commerce.
The Common Council recognizes the quasi-governmental nature of the
Reedsburg Chamber of Commerce and requires one special events and
parades permit annually (calendar year) from the Chamber where the
Chamber is the primary predominant sponsor of the special events and
Parade. The Chamber representative shall complete a permit application for
each individual event or one permit per series of similar events (i.e., one
permit for Concerts in the Park).
§ 415-13 REEDSBURG CODE § 415-19
1:346
§ 415-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 415-16 of this Code. Additionally, failure to comply
with any provisions of this chapter may result in the withholding of approval
on any subsequent permit applications for this or other permits required by
the City.
Chapter 423
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
§ 423-1. Grass; trees; flowers.
No person shall dig up, mutilate or injure any grass, trees, shrubbery or
flowers in the public parks of the City.
§ 423-2. Park property. [Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 1859-18]
No person shall in any way deface, mutilate, destroy or injure any building,
bench, statuary, playground equipment, art display or fountain situated in
the said parks and playgrounds.
§ 423-3. Alcohol in parks.
Possession and consumption of alcohol is permitted in the City parks during
normal hours the parks are open. If there is disorderly conduct associated
with the possession and consumption of alcohol beverages in the City parks,
the behavior will be sanctioned pursuant to the City's disorderly conduct
ordinances.
§ 423-4. Hours. [Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 1859-18]
It shall be unlawful for any person without a permit or purpose to remain
in a City park between the hours of sundown and sunup as defined by
the National Weather Service, Dane County Airport, Truax Field, Madison,
Wisconsin.
§ 423-5. Glass containers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to be present in a City park while in
possession of a glass container the original purpose of which was to enable
the distribution of alcohol or nonalcohol beverages.
§ 423-6. Loitering.
No person shall frequent or loiter about in the said parks between 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This subsection does not prohibit passing through the
park on walks during such hours but does prohibit the loitering therein.
§ 415-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-7
1:347
§ 423-7. Food deliveries. [Added 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 1859-18]
Food delivery in public facilities and public parks may be supervised or
unsupervised. When required by state law, a health permit shall be
obtained.
Chapter 434
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 434-1. General provisions.
A. Supervised food delivery. "Supervised food delivery" is the cooking,
preparing and distributing of food or beverage with or without charge
upon or in City public facilities and public parks. Supervised food
delivery shall follow adopted safe-handling food practices.
B. Unsupervised (self-service) food for delivery. Preprepared food
intended for human consumption delivered and left unsupervised and
on display at a park or playground sale or otherwise shall be
nonperishable in hermetically sealed packages. Personal hygiene items
also on display shall be contained so as to prevent undue exposure by
mishandling or other miscellaneous contamination.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions of words and
phrases contained in Chs. 961, 939 to 948 and § 990.001, Wis. Stats.,
are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof with the same
force and effect as if fully set forth herein.
B. Incorporation of certain statutory offenses.
(1) Provisions included. The sections and subsections of the Wisconsin
Statutes describing, defining, and prohibiting conduct and cross
references contained therein, which are enumerated from time to
time in this chapter, are hereby adopted and by reference made a
part of this chapter with the same force and effect as if fully set
forth herein, exclusive of any provision relating to penalties. Any
act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute
incorporated by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter.
(2) Interpretation. In those enumerated sections and subsections of
Wisconsin Statutes:
(a) Whenever the word "crime" is used, it shall be taken to mean
"offense."
(b) Whenever the phrase "criminal intent" is used, it shall be taken
to mean "intent."
C. Attempt.
§ 423-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 434-1
1:348
§ 434-2. Offenses against bodily security.
(1) Whoever attempts to commit an offense under this section may be
fined not to exceed 1/2 the maximum penalty for the completed
offense.
(2) An attempt to commit an offense requires that the actor have an
intent to perform acts and attain a result which, if accomplished,
would constitute such offense and that he does acts toward the
commission of the offense which demonstrate, under all the
circumstances, that he formed that intent and would commit the
offense except for the intervention of another person or some other
extraneous factor.
D. Parties to offense.
(1) Whoever is concerned in the commission of an offense is a principal
and may be charged with and convicted of the commission of the
offense although he did not directly commit it and although the
person who directly committed it has not been convicted or has
been convicted of some other offense based on the same act.
(2) A person is concerned in the commission of the offense if that
person:
(a) Directly commits the offense; or
(b) Intentionally aids and abets the commission of it; or
(c) Is a part to a conspiracy with another to commit it or advises,
hires, counsels, or otherwise procures another to commit it.
A. State laws adopted.
(1) Battery (§ 940.19).
(2) Physical abuse of a child (§ 948.03). [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) Battery: Special Circumstances (§ 940.20).
(4) Injury by negligent use of dangerous weapon (§ 940.24).
(5) False imprisonment (§ 940.30).
(6) Battery; substantial battery; aggravated battery (§ 940.19).
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(7) Battery to an unborn child; substantial battery to an unborn child;
aggravated battery to an unborn child (§ 940.195). [Added at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 434-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-2
1:349
§ 434-3. Offenses against public safety and welfare.
§ 434-4. Offenses against public and private property.
(8) Physical abuse of a child (§ 948.03). [Added at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. State law adopted. [Amended 10-23-2006]
(1) Negligent operation of a vehicle (§ 941.01).
(2) Negligent handling of burning materials (§ 941.10).
(3) Unsafe burning of buildings (§ 941.11).
(4) Interfering with firefighting (§ 941.12).
(5) False alarms (§ 941.13).
(6) Reckless use of weapons [§ 941.20(1) (2)].
(7) Possession of pistol by minor (§ 948.60).
(8) Carrying a concealed weapon (§ 941.23).
(9) Endangering safety by conduct regardless of life (§ 941.30).
(10) Placing foreign objects in edibles (§ 941.325).
(11) Hazing (§ 948.51).
(12) Emergency telephone call (§ 941.35).
(13) Safe use and transportation of firearms and bows (§ 167.31).
[Amended 6-22-2009]
A. State laws adopted.
(1) (Criminal) damage to property (§ 943.01).
(2) Arson of property other than building (§ 943.03).
(3) Arson with intent to defraud (§ 943.04).
(4) Placing of combustible material an attempt (§ 943.05).
(5) Molotov cocktails (§ 943.06).
(6) Burglary (§ 943.10).
(7) Entry into locked vehicle (§ 943.11).
(8) Possession of burglarious tools (§ 943.12).
(9) (Criminal) trespass to land (§ 943.13).
(10) (Criminal) trespass to dwellings (§ 943.14).
§ 434-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 434-4
1:350
(11) Theft (§ 943.20).
(12) Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper, recreational attraction,
taxicab operator, or gas station (§ 943.21).
(13) Operating vehicle without owner's consent (§ 943.23).
(14) Issue of worthless check (§ 943.24).
(15) Removing or damaging encumbered real property (§ 943.26).
(16) Robbery (§ 943.32).
(17) Receiving stolen property (§ 943.34).
(18) Receiving property from children (§ 948.63).
(19) Alteration of property identification marks (§ 943.37).
(20) Forgery (§ 943.38).
(21) Financial transaction card crimes (§ 943.41).
(22) Theft of telecommunications services (§ 943.45).
(23) Retail theft; theft of services (§ 43.50).
(24) Harassment of police and fire animals (§ 951.095). [Added
1-22-2007]
B. Destruction of property prohibited. No person shall willfully,
maliciously, or wantonly deface, injure or destroy any public property or
any private property. Likewise, a parent or legal guardian of any minor
who shall fail to exercise reasonable care so as to prevent such minor
from intentionally damaging public or private property or from
conducting himself in such a manner as may reasonably be calculated
to result in damage to any of such property shall be deemed to have
violated this chapter, and such parent or guardian shall be personally
liable to the owner for such damage, subject to the limitations imposed
thereon by § 895.035, Wis. Stats.
C. Unlawful trespass on private property.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon the property or
buildings belonging to another person without the permission of
the lawful owner or occupant.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal belonging
to him, or under his control, to trespass upon the property
belonging to another person without the permission of the lawful
owner or occupant.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or remain in any
parking lot that is maintained by a business for use by its customers
if that parking lot is posted by signs informing the public of the
§ 434-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-4
1:351
§ 434-5. Offenses against public peace, good order and other public
interest.
restrictions imposed and if that person does not have permission of
the owner or lawful occupant.
D. Loitering prohibited. No person whose actions give rise to suspicion of
wrongdoing shall, within the City, sit, stand, loiter, or loaf about any
building, place, or premises held out to or open for use by the public, or
wander about the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places either by
day or night. No person shall loiter about any park, parkway, school
grounds or other public grounds between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
E. Deposit of trash or refuse in privately owned containers prohibited. No
person shall deposit or allow to be deposited any glass, cans, rubbish,
waste or refuse into private trash receptacles or containers without
consent of either the owner or lessor of the container.
A. State laws adopted.
(1) Disorderly conduct (§ 947.01).
(2) Bomb scares (§ 947.015).
(3) Unlawful assemblies and their suppression (§ 947.06).
(4) False swearing (§ 946.32).
(5) Contributing to the delinquency of children (§ 948.40).
(6) Refusing to aid officer (§ 946.40).
(7) Resisting or obstructing officer (§ 946.41).
(8) Escape (§ 946.42).
(9) Impersonating peace officers, firefighters or other emergency
personnel (§ 946.70).
(10) Unlawful use of license for carrying weapons (§ 946.71).
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(11) Tampering with public records and notices (§ 946.72).
(12) Lewd and lascivious behavior (§ 944.20).
(13) Prostitution (§ 944.30).
(14) Patronizing prostitutes (§ 944.31).
(15) Pandering (§ 944.33).
(16) Gambling (§ 945.02).
§ 434-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 434-5
1:352
(17) Permitting premises to be used for commercial gambling
(§ 945.04).
(18) Commercial gambling (§ 945.03).
(19) Unlawful use of telephone (§ 947.012). [Added 11-27-2006]
(20) Harassment (§ 947.013). [Added 11-27-2006]
(21) Disobedient Witness (§ 885.11). [Added 8-13-2007]
(22) Unlawful use of computerized communication systems
(§ 947.0125). [Added 5-23-2011]
(23) Fourth Degree Sexual Assault [§ 940.225(3m)]. [Added
5-25-2013]
(24) Representations Depicting Nudity (§ 942.09). [Added 2-27-2017
by Ord. No. 1839-17]
B. Prohibition of noises disturbing the public peace. No person and no
person, firm or corporation occupying or having charge of any building
or premises or any part thereof shall, within the City of Reedsburg:
(1) Make or assist in making any noise tending to unreasonably disturb
the peace and quiet of persons in the vicinity thereof, unless the
making and continuing of the same cannot be prevented or is
necessary for the protection or preservation of property, or for the
health, safety, life or limb of some person.
C. Possession of false identification. No person shall knowingly possess
identification that has been altered so as to not be true and accurate,
nor shall any person present for identification purposes a document
that is not true and accurate identification of said person.
D. Possession of controlled substances/paraphernalia. [Added
10-23-2006]
(1) Uniform Controlled Substance, Definitions [§ 961.41(3g)(am)].
(2) Possess or attempt to possess any other non-narcotic controlled
substance/controlled substance analog not listed below
[§ 961.41(3g)(b)].
(3) Possession/Use Marijuana [§ 961.41(3g)(e)].
(4) Possession/Use Cocaine [§ 961.41(3g)(c)].
(5) Possession/Use LSD [(§ 961.41(3g)(d)].
(6) Possession/Use of Drug Paraphernalia [§ 961.573(1) and (2)].
(7) Manufacture/Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia [§ 961.574(1) and
(2)].
§ 434-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-5
1:353
(8) Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor [§ 961.575(1) and (2)].
(9) Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia (§ 961.576).
(10) Synthetic cannabinoids [§ 961.41(3g)(em)]. [Amended
2-25-2013]
E. Drinking in motor vehicles on the highway. No person shall possess an
open container of fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor in a
moving vehicle on a public street or highway within the City of
Reedsburg.
F. Assisting escape of prisoner. No person shall intentionally aid any
prisoner or person to escape from the lawful custody of a policeman or
peace officer of the City.
G. Public obscene language and sexual conduct prohibited. No person
shall, in any public place, use any obscene language or sexual conduct
within the City of Reedsburg. Definitions:
LANGUAGE — Words or sounds or gestures, or any combination
thereof.
OBSCENE — Language or sexual conduct which, taken as a whole:
(1) Appeals to prurient interest in sex; and
(2) Portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way; and
(3) Does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
H. Disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle. No person shall within the City
of Reedsburg, whether on public or private property, engage in
annoying, boisterous, reckless, unreasonably loud and otherwise
disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle under circumstances in which
the conduct tends to cause or provoke a disturbance. [Amended
3-26-2007]
I. Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited. No person shall make or cause
to be made loud, disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noises such as
may tend to annoy or disturb another in or about any public street,
alley, park, or private residence. It shall be a violation of this section for
any person to use a motor vehicle horn or warning device prohibited
under § 347.38, Wis. Stats.
J. Obstructing streets and sidewalks prohibited. No person shall stand,
sit, loaf, or loiter or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street,
sidewalk, bridge or public ground within the City in such a manner as to
obstruct or prevent the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to and from any
place of business, amusement, church, public hall, or meeting place.
K. Unauthorized presence on school property prohibited.
§ 434-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 434-5
1:354
(1) It shall be unlawful for any student who is under suspension,
expulsion, exemption, or other discipline excluding him from
attending school under the jurisdiction of the Reedsburg Board of
Education, or for any person not a student presently enrolled to
attend school under the Reedsburg Board of Education or not an
employee of said Reedsburg Board of Education or not a parent or
guardian of a student so enrolled, or not an otherwise authorized
person to be present within any school building or upon any school
grounds under the jurisdiction of said school board without having
first secured authorization to be there from the principal or other
person in charge of said school building or school grounds, except
while in direct route to secure said authorization. "Authorized
person" shall include any person who is present at any school
building or school grounds for any purpose previously authorized
by the Board of Education or as designee.
(2) Any person shall, upon the request of the principal or other person
in charge of any school building or upon any school grounds under
the jurisdiction of said Board of Education or upon request of any
police officer, display any written authorization to be present which
he may have in his possession or otherwise to explain his presence
or his status as such student, employee, parent or guardian, or
authorized person referred to in Subsection K(1) hereof.
(3) All entrances to the school building referred to in Subsection K(1)
hereof shall be posted with a notice stating "Entry into School
Building by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited." All school grounds
referred to in Subsection K(1) hereof shall be posted with a notice
stating: "Entry upon School Grounds by Unauthorized Persons
Prohibited."
L. Open cisterns, well, basements or other dangerous excavations
prohibited. No person shall have or permit, on any premises owned or
occupied by him, any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, unused
basements, excavations or other dangerous openings. All such places
shall be filled, securely covered or fenced in such manner as to prevent
injury to any person and any cover shall be of a design, size and weight
that the same cannot be removed by small children.
M. Abandoned or unattended iceboxes, etc., prohibited. No person shall
leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other
structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or
other structure under his control in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking
device which may not be released from the inside without first
removing said door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from said
icebox, refrigerator or container unless such container is displayed for
sale on the premises of the owner or his agent and is securely locked or
fastened.
§ 434-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-5
1:355
§ 434-6. General penalty provision. [Added 9-24-2007]
For a violation of a section of this chapter for which a specific penalty is not
provided, the forfeiture shall be not less than $5 nor more than $500 for
each offense, together with the costs of prosecution.
§ 434-7. Bond schedules.
A certified copy of bond schedules for the offenses set forth in this chapter
shall be adopted and approved with the text as part of this chapter and shall
bear upon its face the attestation of the Clerk-Treasurer and the Chief of
Police and shall be available to the public in the office of the Chief of Police.
Changes thereafter to the bond schedule shall not be effective until entered
and attested on the certified copy. Changes in the bond schedule shall be
made by the Chief of Police with the approval of the Council. All approved
changes shall be incorporated into the bond schedule and shall be available
for public inspection.
N. Posting bills prohibited. No person shall post any bill, notice or
advertising on any utility pole within the City.
O. Go-carts to be equipped with mufflers. All go-carts operated in the City
shall be equipped with a muffler with at least two baffles. Any go-cart
operated in violation of this section shall be confiscated by the police
and kept until made to comply with this section.
P. Urination in public. Public urination in anything other than a
designated toilet facility shall be unlawful.
Q. Harboring or assisting minor runaways prohibited.
(1) No person shall allow, permit or board any minor child at (or in) his/
her residence, property or place of business where the person
knows, or should have known, the child to be a runaway from his or
her parents, guardian or legal custodian.
(2) No person shall assist a minor child in running away from his
parents, guardian or legal custodian where the person knows, or
should have known, the child to be running away, by providing him/
her with transportation, monetary assistance, or any other
assistance in locating a place to which the minor child can abscond
or where the minor child may stay without his/her parents'
permission.
(3) Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
required to forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $200, or fines as
established on the current bond schedule, together with the costs
of prosecution. Every day during which a violation occurs shall be
considered a separate offense for penalty purposes. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
§ 434-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 434-7
1:356
Chapter 441
PLUMBING STANDARDS
§ 441-1. Definitions.
"Plumbing," for the purpose of this chapter is hereby defined as follows:
§ 441-2. Adoption of standards. [Amended 10-24-2008]
The City shall adopt by ordinance the provisions and regulations of the
following state and national codes: Chs. SPS 305, 381 to 387, and Chs. NR
151, 810, 811 and 812, Wis. Adm. Code; Ch. 145, Wis. Stats.; the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA),17 Chapters 1 to 10, and American National
Standards Institutes Document A117.1.
§ 441-3. Inspection and supervision.
A. All piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with
the water supply and drainage systems within a building and to a point
from three to five feet outside the building.
B. The construction and connection of any drain or waste pipe carrying
domestic sewage from a point within three to five feet outside of the
foundation walls of any building with the sewer service lateral at the
curb or other disposal terminal, including private domestic sewage
treatment and disposal systems and alteration of any such system,
drain or waste pipe, except minor repairs to faucets, valves, pipes,
appliances and removing stoppages.
C. The water service piping from a point within three to five feet outside of
the foundation walls of any building to the mains in the street, alley or
other terminal and the connecting of domestic hot water storage tanks,
water softeners, and water heaters with the water supply system.
D. The water pressure system other than municipal systems as provided in
Ch. 145, Wis. Stats.
E. A plumbing and drainage system so designated and vent piping so
installed as to keep the air within the system in free circulation and
movement and to prevent, with a margin of safety, unequal air
pressures of such force as might blow, siphon or affect trap seals, or
retard the discharge from plumbing fixtures, or permit sewer air to
escape into the building.
A. There is hereby created the position of Plumbing Inspector, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. He
shall perform such duties as are provided for in § 145.05(1), Wis. Stats.,
and shall make annual reports to the Council.
17.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 434-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-3
1:357
§ 441-4. Authority of Plumbing Inspector.
§ 441-5. Application and permits.
§ 441-6. Cross-connection control.
B. He shall be under the direct supervision of the Mayor and shall enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter.
C. He shall prepare suitable forms for applications, permits and other
reports.
A. Right of entry. The Plumbing Inspector may enter all buildings in the
City in the performance of his duties between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
daily, and any person who shall willfully and knowingly resist or
obstruct the Plumbing Inspector in the performance of his duties shall
be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
B. Withholding approval. The Plumbing Inspector may withhold approval
of an application for a plumbing permit to any person who has not
complied with a lawful order of the Plumbing Inspector. The person
refused such a permit may appeal within 10 days to the Council.
C. Inspections and tests. The plumber in charge shall notify the Plumbing
Inspector whenever any work is ready for inspection (i.e., soil, vent,
underground drain, final inspection). All plumbing work shall be left
exposed until such time as the inspector has completed his examination
and inspection. When in the opinion of the inspector a test in addition to
requisites of Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code, is necessary, he may require
a water or air test on any part of the entire installation.
A. No new plumbing shall be installed in the City without first filing an
application and receiving a permit. This shall also apply to any building
located outside the limits of the City before such building may be
connected to the sewer system or water system of the City. Each
application must be approved by the Plumbing Inspector before a
permit to install plumbing may be issued.
B. A permit shall be applied for and received before excavating in any
street, alley or other public way for any purpose. A charge shall be
made for each opening, and said sum shall be paid when the permit is
applied for street openings shall be made pursuant to Ch. 537, Streets
and Sidewalks, Art. III, of this Code.
C. The fees for permits shall be submitted as set forth in the current City
Fee Schedule on file in the City’s offices or available on the City’s
website. [Amended 4-20-2006; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. A "cross-connection" shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which
contains potable water from the City of Reedsburg water system, and
§ 441-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 441-6
1:358
the other water from a private source, water of unknown or
questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may
be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending
on the pressure differential between the two systems.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any crossconnection.
No interconnection shall be established whereby potable
water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than
the regular public water supply of the City of Reedsburg may enter the
supply or distribution system of said municipality, unless such private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and
use of such supply shall have been approved by the Reedsburg Water
Utility and by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in
accordance with § NR 811.07, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. It shall be the duty of the Reedsburg Water Utility to cause inspections
to be made of all properties served by the public water system where
cross-connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The
frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health
hazards involved shall be as established by the City of Reedsburg.
D. Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Reedsburg
Water Utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable
time to examine any property served by a connection to the public
water system of the City of Reedsburg for cross-connections. If entry is
refused, such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant
under § 66.0119, Wis. Stats. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant
of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any
pertinent information regarding the piping or systems on such property.
E. The Reedsburg Water Utility is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in
violation of this chapter exists and to take such other precautionary
measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination
of the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only
after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Chapter 68,
Wis. Stats., except as provided in Subsection F. Water service to such
property shall not be restored until the cross-connection(s) has been
eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
F. If it is determined by the Reedsburg Water Utility that a crossconnection
or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare
and requires immediate action and a written finding to that effect if
filed with the Clerk of the City of Reedsburg and delivered to the
customer's premises, service may be immediately discontinued. The
customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis.
Stats., within 10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
G. The City of Reedsburg adopts by reference the State Plumbing Code of
Wisconsin, being Ch. SPS 382, Wis. Adm. Code. This chapter shall not
§ 441-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-6
1:359
§ 441-7. Backwater valves. [Amended 10-24-2008]
Backwater valves with cleanouts shall be installed in all new one- and twofamily
residences as well as all multifamily structures:
§ 441-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-8-2010]
It shall be a violation to commence work prior to obtaining a permit
therefor, and doing so shall result in the permit fees being double the
normal amount, in addition to the provisions of Chapter 1, General
Provisions, § 1-3, of this Code. If in any action a permit was issued, it shall
not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty
on the part of the Building Inspector constitute a defense.
Chapter 452
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
supersede either the State Plumbing Code or any other applicable
ordinance of the City of Reedsburg and is supplementary to them.
A. The valve shall be installed within five feet of entering the structure.
B. The valve shall be supplied with an inspection opening in the top of the
valve.
C. The valve shall be installed with the inspection opening flush with the
finished basement or crawl space floor and may serve as the required
cleanout into the sanitary sewer.
D. Backwater valves may be retrofitted into existing installations and shall
meet all code requirements.
§ 441-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 441-8
1:360
ARTICLE I
Commercial and Industrial Property
[Adopted 2-8-2010 (Sec. 10.03A of the former Municipal
Codebook)]
§ 452-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to recognize and protect the private and
public benefits resulting from safe, sanitary and attractive nonresidential
buildings, structures, yards and vacant areas. Attractive and wellmaintained
properties enhance neighborhoods and the City and protect
physical and monetary property values.
§ 452-2. Building standards.
It shall be the duty of any person(s) owning or controlling a building or
premises, including vacant buildings and lots, to improve and maintain
all property under his/their control to comply with the following minimum
requirements.
A. All exterior doors and windows shall be kept in sound working condition
free of broken glass and shall be secured by latch, lock or other means
so as to prevent easy entry into such structure by children, vagrants, or
unauthorized persons.
B. All exterior doors shall be equipped with a workable lock or locking
device and shall be kept securely locked during the period of time said
building is vacant.
C. All exterior walls and roofs shall be kept in good repair and free of
holes, cracks, defective materials and structural deterioration so as to
keep such building from becoming a breeding place for rodents,
roaches and disease-carrying insects.
D. The exterior of said building and the premises thereon shall be kept
free of any accumulation of flammable or combustible rubbish or waste
materials of sufficient quantity to constitute a danger to said building or
any other building or premises in the event that such waste materials
become ignited.
E. The exterior of the premises shall be kept free of any accumulation of
trash, garbage, rubbish or any waste material of such quantity as to
constitute an unsanitary condition.
F. Any existing fence shall be maintained in good repair with gates locked
when the property is vacant.
G. Block, brick or other siding shall be maintained in good repair with no
holes or loose or missing pieces.
§ 452-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-2
1:361
§ 452-3. Parking lots.
Weeds shall be mowed or removed and all cracks, potholes or other breaks
in the parking lot surface shall be promptly filled and repaired by the
proprietor. The proprietor shall provide for snow removal services for public
right-of-way and parking lots to provide reasonable access to the property
by public emergency services.
§ 452-4. Trash removal.
The proprietor shall provide for the removal of all waste, trash, rubbish or
refuse of all kinds from the commercial or industrial property at regular
intervals. Between collections, the refuse shall be stored in covered
containers.
§ 452-5. Loose trash, rubbish or debris.
The proprietor shall be responsible for seeing to it that the premises of the
commercial or industrial building, including the parking lot, are kept free of
junk, trash, rubbish, debris or refuse of any kind.
H. An exterior surface treated with paint or other preservative shall be
maintained so as to prevent chipping, cracking or other deterioration of
the exterior surface or the surface treatment.
I. Exterior surfaces shall be clean and free from accumulation of dirt,
grime, or graffiti, and all other appropriate measures shall be taken to
properly maintain the buildings.
J. Where areas within a multi-use building are owned by separate entities,
the obligations of this article shall fall only upon those persons
responsible for the maintenance of the particular area that are not
being maintained in accordance with this article.
K. Properties shall be landscaped, mowed and trimmed so as to maintain a
height of grass no greater than six inches unless allowed in another
section of this Code.
§ 452-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 452-5
1:362
ARTICLE II
Chronic Nuisance Premises
[Adopted 8-10-2009 (Sec. 10.10 of the former Municipal Codebook)]
§ 452-6. Findings.
The Common Council finds that certain premises within the City receive
and require more than the general, acceptable level of police services. Such
premises place an undue and inappropriate burden on City of Reedsburg
taxpayers and constitute public nuisances. The Common Council therefore
authorizes the Chief of Police to charge the owners of such premises the
costs associated with abating the violations at premises where nuisance
activities chronically occur and to provide for forfeitures for the failure of
property owners to abate such nuisance activities.
§ 452-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Reedsburg Police Department or his
or her designee.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PREMISES — Premises that meet any of the
following criteria:
ENFORCEMENT ACTION — Any of the following: The physical arrest of a
person(s), the issuance of a citation(s) for a law violation and/or referral of
charges by the Police Department to the City Attorney or District Attorney
for prosecution for nuisance activities.
NUISANCE ACTIVITY —
The premises has had three or more nuisance activities resulting in
enforcement action on separate occasions within 30 days; or
A.
The premises has had six or more nuisance activities resulting in
enforcement action on separate occasions within a twelve-month period
of time.
B.
Any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct occurring on or
within 200 feet of a premises whenever engaged in by premises owners,
operators, occupants or a person or persons associated with a
premises:
(1) An act of harassment, as defined in § 947.013, Wis. Stats.
(2) Disorderly conduct, as defined in § 947.01, Wis. Stats.
(3) Crimes of violence, as defined in Ch. 940, Wis. Stats.
(4) Lewd and lascivious behavior, as defined in § 944.20, Wis. Stats.
(5) Prostitution, as defined in § 944.30, Wis. Stats.
A.
§ 452-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-7
1:363
(6) Keeping a place of prostitution, as defined in § 944.34, Wis. Stats.
(7) Soliciting prostitution, as defined in § 944.32, Wis. Stats.
(8) Patronizing prostitutes, as defined in § 944.31, Wis. Stats.
(9) Pandering, as defined in § 944.33, Wis. Stats.
(10)Theft, as defined in § 943.20, Wis. Stats.
(11)Receiving stolen property, as defined in § 943.34 Wis. Stats.
(12)Arson, as defined in § 943.02, Wis. Stats.
Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or
related offenses, as defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats., and § 434-5D of
the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
(13)
(14)Gambling, as defined in § 945.02, Wis. Stats.
Animal violations, as defined in Chapter 210 of the Reedsburg
Municipal Code.
(15)
(16)Trespassing, as defined in §§ 943.13 and 943.14, Wis. Stats.
The production or creation of excessive noise, as defined in § 434-5I
and § 210-14A Code of the City of Reedsburg.
(17)
Loitering, as defined in § 434-4D of the Code of the City of
Reedsburg.
(18)
Littering, as defined in Chapter 374 of the Code of the City of
Reedsburg.
(19)
Crimes involving illegal possession or use of firearms, as defined in
Ch. 941 and § 948.60, Wis. Stats., and § 282-1 of the Code of the
City of Reedsburg.
(20)
(21) Indecent exposure, as defined in § 944.20(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
Possessing open intoxicants in public, as defined in § 434-5E and
§ 349-14B of the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
(22)
Selling or giving away tobacco products to persons under the age
of 18 as defined in §§ 382-14 and 382-15 Code of the City of
Reedsburg.
(23)
Illegal sale, discharge and use of fireworks as defined in Chapters
231 and 297 of the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
(24)
Truancy and contributing to truancy, as defined in Ch. 382, Art. II,
of the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
(25)
The operation of structures for the purpose of prostitution or
gambling as defined in § 434-5A(13) through (19) of the Code of the
City of Reedsburg.18
(26)
§ 452-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 452-7
1:364
PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH A PREMISES — The premises owner,
operator, manager, officer, director, resident, occupant, guest, visitor,
customer, patron or employee or agent of any of the above individuals, or
one who waits to enter or attempts entry to the premises.
PREMISES — An individual or multifamily dwelling unit; any property used
for residential purposes, whether or not owner-occupied; an individual
business or commercial property; and associated common areas.
§ 452-8. Chronic nuisance premises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner, operator, tenant, occupant, or
person associated with a premises to allow the establishment of, keep, or
maintain a chronic nuisance premises as described herein.
§ 452-9. Notice of chronic nuisance.
Whenever the Chief of Police determines that:
§ 452-10. Procedure.
Underage consumption, possession or procurement of alcohol, as
defined in Ch. 125, Wis. Stats. and Ch. 382, Art. III, of the Code of
the City of Reedsburg.
(27)
Conducting a disorderly, riotous or indecent licensed premises, as
defined in § 434-5A, Code of the City of Reedsburg.
(28)
Illegal sale of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages, as
defined in Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., and Ch. 349 of the Code of the City
of Reedsburg.
(29)
Any conspiracy to commit, as defined in § 939.31, Wis. Stats., or
attempt to commit, as defined in § 939.32, Wis. Stats., any of the
activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated above.
(30)
Any act of aiding and abetting, as defined in § 939.05, Wis. Stats.,
any of the activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated above.
(31)
A. Three or more nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action have
occurred on separate occasions at the premises within 30 days, or
B. Six or more nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action have
occurred on separate occasions at the premises within a twelve-month
period of time, the Chief of Police shall notify the premises owner, in
writing, that the premises is a chronic nuisance premises. Nuisance
activities which were reported by the owner or manager of the premises
shall not be counted in determining whether a premises is a chronic
nuisance premises.
18.Editor's Note: Original subsection A(27), loitering by minors, which immediately followed,
of the former Municipal Codebook was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 452-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-10
1:365
A. Upon determining that a premises meets the definition of a chronic
nuisance premises, the Chief of Police shall provide written notice to
the owner of the premises, which shall contain the following
information:
(1) The street address or legal description sufficient to identify the
premises;
(2) A description of the nuisance activities that have occurred at the
premises, including the dates that the nuisance activities are
alleged to have occurred;
(3) A statement indicating that the cost of future enforcement may be
assessed as a special charge against the premises pursuant to
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats.;
(4) A statement that the owner shall respond to the Chief of Police
within 10 days to propose a written course of action to abate the
nuisance activities or to appeal the determination, and that failure
to submit a plan to abate such nuisance activities within 10 days
shall subject the owner to a forfeiture of not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000;
(5) A statement that the owner of the premises may be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 for each and
every day the owner maintains, keeps or allows the chronic
nuisance premises to exist; and
(6) A notice as to the appeal rights of the owner.
B. The above notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered to the owner
if delivered by any one of the following methods:
(1) By personally delivering the notice to the premises owner;
(2) By sending it registered mail or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of the premises' last known address;
(3) If the premises owner cannot be located, the notice shall be
deemed to be properly delivered if a copy of it is left at the owner's
usual place of abode in the presence of some competent member of
the family at least 14 years of age, or a competent adult currently
residing there and who shall be informed of the contents of the
notice; or
(4) By publication as a Class 1 notice, together with mailing the notice
to the owner's last known residential or business address.
C. Upon receipt of the notice, the premises owner shall respond within 10
days to the Chief of Police with a written course of action outlining the
abatement actions the premises owner proposes to take in response to
the notice. The Chief of Police may accept, reject or work with owner to
modify the proposal. The proposal shall be deemed acceptable if it can
§ 452-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 452-10
1:366
§ 452-11. Cost recovery.
§ 452-12. Penalties.
In addition to the recovery of costs, expenses and fees as provided in
§ 452-11A and B, the following penalties may be jointly and severally sought
and/or employed by the City and may be ordered and/or imposed for
violations herein:
§ 452-13. Appeal.
Appeal of the determination of the Chief of Police declaring a property to be
a chronic nuisance premises or appeal of the imposition of special charges
against the premises shall be submitted, in writing, to the Ordinance
Committee within 10 days of receipt of notice of the determination or
imposition of special charges. In the event such appeal is timely filed, all
reasonably be expected to abate the nuisance activities within 60 days
of submission of the proposal.
A. Whenever the Chief of Police determines that additional nuisance
activity has occurred on the premises for which a notice has been
served pursuant to § 452-10B above, that this nuisance activity has
occurred not less than 15 days after the notice has been served, and
that the owner has not complied with the requirements of § 452-10C,
the Chief of Police shall then cause all costs, fees and expenses to be
charged against the owner of the premises and, if unpaid, levied and
collected by the City as a special charge against the premises pursuant
to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
B. Calculation. In calculating the fees and expenses that may be levied and
collected by the City as a special charge under Subsection A above, the
Chief may consider but is not limited to the actual labor costs, including
overtime, materials, vehicle expenses and related administrative time
for enforcement action upon and/or pertaining to the premises, in
calculating the total costs, fees and expenses.
A. A premises owner who fails to respond to the Chief of Police within 10
days with a written course of action to abate the nuisance activities,
pursuant to § 452-10C, shall forfeit and pay to the City a forfeiture of
not less than $250 and not more than $1,000, plus court costs and fees.
B. Any person who shall allow the establishment of, keep, or maintain a
chronic nuisance premises after notice by the Chief of Police that the
premises were designated a chronic nuisance premises shall forfeit and
pay to the City not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 for each
separate incident of nuisance activity.
C. The foregoing penalties and remedies are not in lieu of any other legal
or equitable remedies available pursuant to other City ordinances, state
statutes, or state administrative codes.
§ 452-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-13
1:367
parties shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and to rebut
or offer countervailing evidence at a hearing after reasonable notice. The
review procedures provided by Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., shall not apply to
appeals under this article.
§ 452-14. When nuisance deemed abated.
The public nuisance created by a chronic nuisance premises shall be
deemed abated when no enforcement action to address nuisance activities
occurs for a period of six months from the date stated on the notice
declaring the premises a chronic nuisance premises.
§ 452-13 REEDSBURG CODE § 452-14
1:368
ARTICLE III
Removal of Junk and Debris
[Adopted as Sec. 11.13 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 452-15. Fire or health hazard and aesthetic offense.
Whenever the Council shall find that conditions on any premises within
the City create a fire or health hazard or shall find that, by virtue of
any accumulation of unsightly materials, junk or debris of any nature on
any premises or for any other reason, any premises are detrimental to
the appearance, neatness or cleanliness of a neighborhood so as to tend
to depreciate property values therein or create a nuisance or offend the
aesthetic character of the immediate neighborhood or produce blight or
deterioration by reason of such conditions, the Common Council may order
the owner of said premises to correct any such condition or to remove
therefrom any such unsafe, hazardous or unsightly articles, material or
debris.
§ 452-16. Order to remedy.
A. The order shall specify a time not to exceed 30 days within which the
owner and/or occupant shall comply therewith.
B. The order shall be served on the owner and/or occupant of the premises
in the manner provided for service of a summons in the Circuit Court
and, if the said owner and/or occupant is not found, by certified mail
with return receipt requested and posting of notice on a conspicuous
part of the premises.
§ 452-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-16
1:369

ARTICLE IV
Street Numbers Required
[Adopted as Sec. 14.27 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 452-17. Requirement; specifications.
The owner of any building within the City of Reedsburg shall prominently
display the street number(s) for each separate business facility and/or living
space in such a manner that it shall be visible and legible to emergency
vehicles from the street. Street numbers shall be displayed using numerals
no less than three inches in height and shall be affixed to the building in the
vicinity of the main entrance. Residential dwellings may display the street
numbers in the vicinity of the garage door if the main entrance door is
not visible from the street; street numbers displayed in this manner shall
be able to be illuminated. All numbers that are not directly or indirectly
illuminated must be made of a reflective medium so that they can clearly be
identified by use of a flashlight from the adjoining street.
§ 452-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-17
1:371
Chapter 478
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 478-1. Findings.
§ 478-2. Purpose.
A. In the exercise of governmental functions, the City has priority over all
other uses of the public rights-of-way. The City desires to anticipate and
minimize the number of obstructions and excavations taking place to
regulate the placement of facilities in the rights-of-way to ensure that
the rights-of-way remain available for public services and are safe for
public use, and to ensure that facilities are timely maintained,
supported, protected or relocated to accommodate reconstruction or
repairs. The taxpayers of the City bear the financial burden for the
upkeep, maintenance and reconstruction of the rights-of-way, and a
primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of its rights-ofway
is the frequent use and excavation by persons who locate facilities
therein.
B. The City finds increased use of the public rights-of-way and increased
costs to the taxpayers of the City and that these costs are likely to
continue into the foreseeable future.
C. The City finds that delays by occupants of the rights-of-way in
maintaining, supporting, protecting or relocating facilities, if they affect
public construction projects, have the potential to significantly increase
public works projects costs borne by the taxpayers.
D. The City finds that occupancy and excavation of its rights-of-way causes
costs to be borne by the City and its taxpayers, including, but not
limited to:
(1) Administrative costs associated with public rights-of-way projects,
such as registration, permitting, inspection and supervision,
supplies and materials.
(2) Management costs associated with ongoing management activities
necessitated by pubic rights-of-way users.
(3) Repair or restoration costs to the roadway associated with the
actual excavation into the public right-of-way.
(4) "Degradation costs," defined as depreciation caused to the roadway
in terms of decreased useful life, due to excavations into the public
rights-of-way.
A. Based on the foregoing facts, the City enacts this chapter relating to
administration of and permits to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the
public rights-of-way. This chapter imposes reasonable regulations on
the placement and maintenance of equipment currently within its
§ 452-17 REEDSBURG CODE § 478-2
1:372
§ 478-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person requesting permission to excavate, obstruct and/
or occupy a right-of-way.
CITY — The City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin, a Wisconsin municipal
corporation.
DEGRADATION — The decrease in the useful life of the paved portion of the
right-of-way, excluding the sidewalk right-of-way, caused by an excavation
of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way
earlier than would be required if the excavation did not occur.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the City.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:
EXCAVATE — To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
FACILITIES — All equipment owned, operated, leased or subleased in
connection with the operation of a service or utility service, and shall
include but is not limited to poles, wires, pipes, cables, underground
conduits, ducts, manholes, vaults, fiber optic cables, lines and other
structures and appurtenances.
IN — When used in conjunction with "right-of-way," means over, above,
within, on or under a right-of-way.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE — A local person or persons, or designee of such
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
section.
OBSTRUCT — To place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and
open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended
to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to provide the City a legal framework
within which to regulate and manage the public rights-of-way and to
provide for the recovery of the costs incurred in doing so. This chapter
provides for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City as
they use the right-of-way of the City, as well as to ensure the structural
integrity of the public rights-of-way.
Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a significant
loss of property; or
A.
Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service
to a customer.
B.
§ 478-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-3
1:373
OCCUPY — To dwell or reside above, on, in, or below the boundaries of the
public rights-of-way.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a permit to use, occupy, excavate or
obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the City.
PERSON — Corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership and individuals and their
lessors, transferees and receivers.
PUBLIC UTILITY — As defined in Wis. Stats. § 196.01(5).
REGISTRANT — Any person who has registered with the City to have its
facilities located in any right-of-way.
REPAIR — To perform construction work necessary to make the right-ofway
usable for travel according to Department specifications, or to restore
equipment to an operable condition.
RESTORE or RESTORATION — The process by which an excavated rightof-
way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is
reconstructed, per Department specifications.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface and space above and below an improved
or unimproved public roadway, highway, street, bicycle lane and public
sidewalk in which the City has an interest, including other dedicated rightsof-
way for travel purposes.
§ 478-4. Administration.
The Director of Public Works or designee is responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way and the related permits and ordinances.
§ 478-5. Registration for rights-of-way occupancy.
§ 478-6. Registration information.
The information provided to the Department at the time of application shall
include, without limitation:
A. Each person who has, or seeks to have, facilities located in any right-ofway
shall register with the Department and pay the fee set forth in the
City Fee Schedule. Registration will consist of providing application
information and paying a registration fee.
B. No person may construct, install, maintain, repair, remove, relocate or
perform any other work on, or use any equipment or any part thereof in
any right-of-way unless that person is registered with the Department.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of
a City ordinance regulating constructing sidewalks or driveways or
other similar activities. Persons performing such activities shall not be
required to obtain any permits under this chapter.
§ 478-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 478-6
1:374
A. Each registrant's name, Diggers Hotline registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and
facsimile numbers.
B. The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and
facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding
how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be
provided at the time of registration.
C. Reason for and a clear description of the proposed work, use, structure,
or obstruction, and the exact location of said work, use, structure or
obstruction.
D. The requested dates and hours of work or placement of obstruction.
E. Other local, state or federal approvals, if necessary.
F. A certificate of insurance.
G. If the registrant is a corporation, an LLC or LLP, a copy of any
certificate required to be filed under Wisconsin Statutes as recorded
and certified by the Department of Financial Institutions.
H. A copy of the registrant's certificate of authority from the Wisconsin
Public Service Commission or other applicable state or federal agency,
if the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said
Commission or other state or federal agency.
I. Sufficient evidence of the following health, welfare, and safety
concerns:
(1) City infrastructure shall remain fully operational and it shall not be
disturbed or altered unless permitted by the City;
(2) Drainage shall not be affected in the location; and
(3) The placement of any structure or obstruction shall not present a
safety concern, with the construction site being sufficiently lit (if
applicable) or fenced and guarded (if applicable).
J. Execution of an indemnification agreement in a form prescribed by the
Department.
K. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at
all times by providing to the Department information as to changes
within 15 working days following the date on which the registrant has
knowledge of any change.
§ 478-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-7
1:375
§ 478-7. Registration fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Department shall charge an annual registration fee, as specified in the
City Fee Schedule, to recover the costs incurred by the City for processing
and updating registration information.
§ 478-8. Review of application for right-of-way user registration.
A. Applicant shall have a nonexclusive use of the premises.
B. Granting the request shall not contribute to public expense.
C. Applicant's use of the premises shall be in compliance with all local,
state, or federal laws, and applicant shall obtain all permits required by
local, state, or federal authorities required for the use of the premises.
D. Applicant shall not install any utility lines, equipment and/or facilities
on private property without written consent of the owner and shall
verify parcel boundaries. Easement/access agreements shall be
obtained for any City parcels not part of public rights-of-way.
E. A right-of-way user registration shall not be construed as a waiver of
the applicant's obligation to comply with other or more restrictive City
ordinances.
F. City infrastructure shall not be disturbed or altered unless otherwise
permitted, and shall remain visible, accessible and operational. Any
City infrastructure damaged shall be immediately reported to the
Department of Public Works, be repaired to City standards and time
frame, and inspected and approved by the Public Works Department at
the expense of the applicant.
G. Any construction, reconstruction, improvements or restoration of the
public right-of-way after disturbance shall be consistent with City
standards, and all public rights-of-way shall be restored to their original
condition upon completion of the work, activities or installation, unless
otherwise permitted.
H. Drainage shall not be adversely affected due to the installation of any
utility lines, structures, equipment or facilities.
I. Placement of obstructions during installation and all work and activities
shall:
(1) Not present a public safety concern;
(2) Be sufficiently lit at night (if required by permit) so as to be in full
view of the public from all directions;
(3) Be fenced or guarded (if required by permit) in a manner which
ensures public safety; and
§ 478-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 478-8
1:376
§ 478-9. Permit to occupy/excavate in right-of-way required.
§ 478-10. Occupy/excavation permit fee.
(4) Be consistent with any limitations and conditions set forth in the
approval.
J. The applicant shall indemnify and hold the City harmless for any loss/
liability, claims, or damage to any person or property arising from:
(1) Applicant's installation, maintenance and/or operation under the
approved registration;
(2) Vandalism;
(3) Interruption in any service from any cause; and
(4) Fire, water, rain, snow, steam, sewerage, gas or odors from any
source.
A. Occupancy/excavation permit required. Except as otherwise provided
in this section or other provisions of the Code of the City of Reedsburg,
no person shall occupy or excavate any right-of-way without first having
obtained a permit from the Department. A copy of any permit issued
under this section shall be made available at all times by the permittee
at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the
Department upon request.
B. Occupy/excavation permit application. Application for a permit shall be
made to the Department. Permit applications shall contain, and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of
the following provisions:
(1) Registration with the Department as required by this section.
(2) Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location
and area of the proposed project and the location of all existing and
proposed facilities that are part of applicant's proposed project.
(3) Payment of all money due to the City for applicable permit fees,
unpaid fees or costs due for prior excavations; or any loss, damage,
or expense suffered by the City because of the applicant's prior
excavations of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by
the City.
A. An occupy/excavation permit fee shall be established by the
Department in an amount sufficient to recover the costs incurred by the
City. This fee shall recover administrative and inspection costs, as well
as degradation costs, should the permittee choose to repair rather than
restore the right-of-way. Payment of said fees shall be collected prior to
issuance of the permit. However, the Director of Public Works may, with
the advice and consent of the Common Council, establish a fee
§ 478-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-10
1:377
§ 478-11. Right-of-way repair/restoration.
collection process from governmental agencies and private utilities in
order to expedite the permitting system and recognize that certain
excavations are deemed emergencies.
B. Waiving of fees. Fees shall not be waived unless the work involved is a
direct result of the Public Works Director's demand that a structure
owned by a utility be removed or relocated or unless waived by the
Common Council on appeal.
C. Fee schedule. Fees shall be as established from time to time by the
Common Council and are included in the City's current Fee Schedule.
There shall be minimum fees for each excavation or for constructing
any building, pole or other structure; or if Plan Commission and/or
Public Works Committee review is required under the Code of the City
of Reedsburg. An annual permit may also be requested. An annual
permit would cover minor or routine work done in the ROW and does
not include work requiring Commission and/or Committee review.
Excavation permits for utility work in new subdivisions and within the
limits of public works projects, where the work is undertaken prior to
the installation of pavement, shall only be charged the minimum fee.
The fee for a permit issued after commencing work, except in cases of
emergency as determined by the Engineer, shall be double the fees set
forth herein, This permit fee shall be in addition to any forfeiture
provided elsewhere in this chapter. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. For those permit applications which provide for a substantial
undertaking of excavation within the public right-of-way attended by
disruption of the general public and traffic, the Director of Public Works
is authorized to assess the actual cost of the City employee's time
engaged in the review and inspection of the anticipated work multiplied
by a factor determined by the respective department to represent the
City's cost for statutory expense, benefits, insurance, sick leave,
holidays, vacation and similar benefits, overhead and supervision, said
factor not to exceed 2.0, plus the cost of mileage reimbursed to City
employees which is attributed to the work, plus all consultant fees
associated with the work at the invoiced amount, plus 10% for
administration.
E. City exemption. The City and its contractors shall not pay degradation
fees for excavations due to general government functions.
F. Permit fees paid for a permit that the Department has revoked are not
refundable.
A. The permittee shall be required to repair the public right-of-way to
Department specifications, subject to inspection and acceptance by the
Department, and to pay a degradation fee unless the permittee elects to
restore the right-of-way. In addition to repairing its own work, the
§ 478-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 478-11
1:378
§ 478-12. Inspection.
permittee must repair the general area of the work and the surrounding
areas, including the paving and its foundations, to the specifications of
the Department. The Department shall inspect the, area of the work
and accept the work when it determines that proper repair has been
made per specifications of the Department.
B. Guarantees. The permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for
36 months following its completion. During this period it shall, upon
notification from the. Department, correct all work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the Department. Said work
shall be completed within 10 calendar days of the receipt of the notice
from the Department, not including days during which work cannot be
done because of circumstances constituting force majeure.
C. Failure to repair/restore. If the permittee fails to repair/restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the
Department, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all work
required by the Department, the Department, at its option, may do such
work. In that event, the permittee shall pay to the City, within 30 days of
billing, the cost of repairing/restoring the right-of-way.
D. Degradation. The general formula for computing the degradation fee
shall be the cost per square yard for street overlay and seal coat
multiplied by the appropriate depreciation rate for that street
multiplied by the area of the patch. The area of the patch shall be
calculated by adding one foot to each side of the actual street cut. The
degradation fee schedule is available upon request from the Director of
Public Works.
E. Restoration in lieu of repair and degradation. The permittee may elect
to restore the excavation and surrounding pavement in lieu of repair
and a degradation fee. The restoration shall be in accordance with the
Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and the plans
and specifications of the Department.
A. Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
begun and completed, the permittee shall notify the Department.
B. Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work site available to the
Department and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of work.
C. Authority of Department. At the time of inspection, the City may order
the immediate cessation of any work which poses a threat to the life,
health safety or well-being of the public. The City may issue an order to
the registrant or permittee for any work that does not conform to the
applicable City standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state
that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the
permit. Within 10 days after issuance of the order, the registrant or
§ 478-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-12
1:379
§ 478-13. Ongoing management fees.
The cost of trimming trees around facilities is an ongoing cost to the City.
The specific cost will be determined and a fee to offset those costs may be
assessed in the future.
§ 478-14. Compliance with other provisions.
Obtaining a permit to excavate and/or occupy the right-of-way does not
relieve the permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by any other City, county,
state, or federal rules, laws or regulations. A permittee shall comply with
all requirements of local, state and federal laws. A permittee shall perform
all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and
regulations and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant
to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
§ 478-15. Revocations, suspensions, refusals to issue or extend
permits.
permittee shall present proof to the Department that the violation
has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the
required time, the Department may revoke the permit.
A. The Department may refuse to issue a permit or may revoke, suspend or
refuse to extend an existing permit if it finds any of the following
grounds:
(1) The applicant or permittee is required to be registered and has not
done so;
(2) Issuance of a permit for the requested date would interfere with an
exhibition, celebration, festival or other event;
(3) Misrepresentation of any fact by the applicant or permittee;
(4) Failure of the applicant or permittee to maintain required bonds
and/or insurance;
(5) Failure of the applicant or permittee to complete work in a timely
manner;
(6) The proposed activity is contrary to the public health, safety or
welfare;
(7) The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit is sought
is available;
(8) The competing demands for the particular space in the right-ofway;
(9) The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other
rights-of-way for the facilities of the permittee or applicant;
§ 478-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 478-15
1:380
§ 478-16. Work done without permit.
§ 478-17. Location of facilities.
(10) The applicability of ordinances or other regulations of the right-ofway
that affect location of facilities in the right-of-way.
B. Discretionary issuance. The Department may issue a permit where
issuance is necessary to prevent substantial economic hardship to a
customer of the permittee or applicant, or to allow such customer to
materially improve its utility service, or to allow the permittee or
applicant to comply with state or federal law or City ordinance or an
order of a court or administrative agency.
C. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Department
revoking, suspending, refusing to issue or refusing to extend a permit
may file a request for review with the City Board. A request for review
shall be filed within 10 days of the decision being appealed. Following a
hearing, the City Board may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of
the Department.
A. Emergency situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the City
by verbal notice on an emergency phone number provided by the City of
any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency.
The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to
respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the
necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and otherwise
fully comply with the requirements of this chapter.
B. If the City becomes aware of any emergency regarding a registrant's
facilities, the Department may attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by
the emergency. The City may take whatever action it deems necessary
to protect the public safety as a result of the emergency, the cost of
which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
C. Nonemergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, excavates a right-ofway
must subsequently obtain a permit and shall, in addition to any
penalties prescribed by ordinance, pay double the normal fee for said
permit, pay double all the other fees required by this chapter or other
chapters of the Code of the City of Reedsburg, deposit with the
Department the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-ofway
and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
A. Undergrounding. Unless in conflict with state or federal law, except
when existing aboveground facilities are used, the installation of new
facilities and replacement of old facilities shall be done underground or
§ 478-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-17
1:381
§ 478-18. Relocation of facilities.
§ 478-19. Interference with other facilities during municipal
construction.
§ 478-20. Abandoned facilities.
contained within buildings or other structures in conformity with
applicable codes.
B. Limitation of space. The Department may prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way if there
is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of persons to
occupy and use the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the
Department shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all
existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but may prohibit or limit
the placement of new or additional facilities when required to protect
the public, health, safety or welfare.
A. A registrant must, promptly and at its own expense, permanently
remove and relocate its facilities in the right-of-way whenever the City,
acting in its governmental capacity, requests such removal and
relocation. If requested, the registrant shall restore the right-of-way.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required to
remove or relocate its facilities from any right-of-way which has been
vacated in favor of a nongovernmental entity unless and until the
reasonable costs thereof are first paid to the person therefor.
A. When the City performs work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary
to maintain, support, shore or move the registrant's facilities, the City
shall notify the local representative. The registrant shall meet with the
City's representative within 24 hours and coordinate the protection,
maintenance, supporting and/or shoring of the registrant's facilities.
The registrant shall accomplish the needed work within 72 hours unless
the City agrees to a longer period.
B. In the event that the registrant does not proceed to maintain, support,
shore, or move its facilities, the City may arrange to do the work and bill
the registrant, said bill to be paid within 30 days.
A. Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue its operations in the City must either:
(1) Provide information satisfactory to the Department that the
registrant's obligations for its facilities under this section have
been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or
(2) Submit to the Department a proposal and instruments for
dedication of its facilities to the City. If a registrant proceeds under
this clause, the Village may, at its option:
§ 478-17 REEDSBURG CODE § 478-20
1:382
§ 478-21. Reservation of regulatory and police powers.
The City, by the granting of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy
the right-of-way, or by registering a person under this chapter, does not
surrender or in any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers
and rights which it has now or may be hereafter granted to the City under
the Constitution and statutes of the State of Wisconsin to regulate the use
of the right-of-way by the permittee; and the permittee by its acceptance
of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the right-of-way or of
registration under this chapter agrees that all lawful powers and rights,
regulatory powers, or police power, or otherwise as are the same may be
from time to time vested in or reserved to the City, shall be in full force and
effect and subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt
and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the
public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general law, and
ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to such powers.
§ 478-22. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
(a) Accept the dedication for all or a portion of the facilities; or
(b) Require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove the
facilities in the right-of-way at ground or above ground level; or
require the registrant to post a bond or provide payment
sufficient to reimburse the City for reasonable anticipated
costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. However, the
registrant who has unusable and abandoned facilities in any
right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way within two
years, unless the Department waives this requirement.
B. Abandoned facilities. Facilities of a registrant who fails to comply with
this section and which for two years remains unused shall be deemed to
be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. In
addition to any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, the City
may, at its option:
(1) Abate the nuisance;
(2) Take possession of the facilities; or
(3) Require removal of the facilities by the registrant, or the
registrant's successor in interest.
C. Public utilities. This section shall not apply to a public utility, as defined
by § 196.01(5), Wis. Stats, that is required to follow the provisions of
§ 196.81, Wis. Stats.
§ 478-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-23
1:383
§ 478-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more
than $500. Each day such violation or failure to comply continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
Chapter 485
SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 485-1. License required.
§ 485-2. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter.
ARTICLE — Any of the following articles except jewelry:
A. Except as provided in Subsections B and C below, no person shall carry
on or operate within the City of Reedsburg a business as a pawnbroker
or a business for the purchase or sale of secondhand articles or jewelry
without first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. A person, other than a pawnbroker or secondhand jewelry dealer, who
operates as a secondhand dealer only on premises or land owned by a
person having a secondhand article dealer mall or flea-market license
under § 485-5 need not obtain a secondhand article dealer's license.
C. A person possessing a valid secondhand article dealer license or a valid
secondhand jewelry dealer license issued by a county or another
municipality of the State of Wisconsin under § 134.71, Wis. Stats., or an
ordinance adopted pursuant thereto may operate a business in the City
of Reedsburg as a secondhand article dealer or a secondhand jewelry
dealer, respectively, without obtaining a license hereunder. This
subsection is not intended to exempt such person from otherwise
complying with the provisions of § 485-1 relating to secondhand
dealers.
A. Audio-visual equipment.
B. Bicycles.
C. China.
D. Computers, printers, software and computer supplies.
E. Computer toys and games.
F. Crystal.
G. Electronic equipment.
§ 478-23 REEDSBURG CODE § 485-2
1:384
JEWELRY — Any tangible personal property ordinarily wearable on the
person and consisting in whole or in part of any metal, mineral or gem
customarily regarded as precious or semiprecious.
PAWNBROKER — Any person who engages in the business of lending money
on the deposit or pledge of any article or jewelry, or purchasing any article
or jewelry with expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell it
back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price.
SECONDHAND — Owned by any person except a wholesaler, retailer or
secondhand article or jewelry dealer licensed under this section or § 134.71,
Wis. Stats., or an ordinance adopted pursuant thereto immediately prior to
the transaction at hand.
SECONDHAND ARTICLE DEALER — Any person who engages in the
business of purchasing, selling or exchanging secondhand articles except
when engaging in any of the following:
H. Fur coats and other fur clothing.
I. Ammunition and knives.
J. Microwave ovens.
K. Office equipment.
L. Pianos, organs, guitars and other musical instruments.
M. Silverware and flatware.
N. Small electrical appliances.
O. Telephones.
Audiotapes, compact discs, laser discs, records, videotapes, digital
video discs or other similar audio or audio-visual recording devices.
P.
Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale, an estate sale, a
gun, knife, gem or antique show, a convention or an auction.
A.
Any transaction entered into by a person while engaged in a business
as a pawnbroker or secondhand jewelry dealer for which the person is
licensed under § 134.71, Wis. Stats., or under any ordinance adopted
pursuant thereto.
B.
Any transaction entered into by a person while engaged in the business
of junk collector, junk dealer, auctioneer or scrap processor as
described in § 70.995(2), Wis. Stats.
C.
Any transaction while operating as a charitable organization or
conducting a sale and the proceeds of which are donated to a charitable
organization.
D.
Any transaction between a buyer of a new article and the person who
sold the article when new which involves any of the following:
E.
§ 485-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-2
1:385
SECONDHAND DEALER — A secondhand article dealer, a secondhand
jewelry dealer or a pawnbroker.
SECONDHAND JEWELRY DEALER — Any person who engages in the
business of any transaction consisting of purchasing, selling, receiving or
exchanging secondhand jewelry except for the following:
(1) The return of the article.
(2) The exchange of the article for a different, new article.
Any transaction as a purchaser of a secondhand article from a
charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to the
charitable organization.
F.
Any transaction as a seller of a secondhand article which the person
bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a
gift to the charitable organization.
G.
Any transaction entered into by a person while engaged in a business of
smelting, refining, assaying or manufacturing precious metals, gems or
valuable articles if the person has no retail operation open to the public.
H.
Any transaction between a buyer of a new article and a seller of new
articles who accepts an occasional secondhand article in trade.
I.
Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale, an estate sale, a
gun, knife, gem or antique show, a convention or an auction.
A.
B. Any transaction with a licensed secondhand jewelry dealer.
Any transaction while operating as a charitable organization or
conducting a sale and the proceeds of which are donated to a charitable
organization.
C.
Any transaction between a buyer of new jewelry and the person who
sold the jewelry when new which involves any of the following:
(1) The return of the jewelry.
(2) The exchange of the jewelry for different new jewelry.
D.
Any transaction as a purchaser of secondhand jewelry from a charitable
organization if the secondhand jewelry was a gift to the charitable
organization.
E.
Any transaction as a seller of the secondhand jewelry which the person
bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a
gift to the charitable organization.
F.
Any transaction entered into by a person while engaged in a business of
smelting, refining, assaying or manufacturing precious metals, gems or
valuable articles if the person has no retail operation open to the public.
G.
§ 485-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 485-2
1:386
§ 485-3. Application and fees.
Any transaction between a buyer of new jewelry and a seller of new
jewelry who accepts occasional secondhand jewelry in trade.
H.
A. Applications. Written applications for licenses under this section for
specific premises, together with the applicable license fees, shall be
filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer for presentation to the Common
Council at any regular or special meeting thereof. The Clerk-Treasurer
shall file a copy of such application with the Police Department
forthwith. Licenses issued under this section shall not be transferable.
(1) The application shall state the following:
(a) The applicant's name, place and date of birth and residence
address.
(b) The names and addresses of the business and of the owner of
the business premises.
(c) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted
within the preceding 10 years of a felony or within the
preceding five years of a misdemeanor, statutory violation
punishable by forfeiture or county or municipal ordinance
violation in which the circumstances of the felony,
misdemeanor or other offense substantially related to the
circumstances of the licensed activity and, if so, the nature and
date of the offense and the penalty assessed.
(d) Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation or
partnership; and
[1] If the applicant is a corporation, the state where
incorporated and the names and addresses of all officers
and directors.
[2] If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses
of all partners.
(e) The name of the manager or proprietor of the business.
(f) Any other information that the City Clerk-Treasurer may
reasonably require.
B. Fees. The fees for licenses under this section are as set by the Common
Council from time to time and included in the City's Fee Schedule, for
the following: [Amended 11-14-2011; at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) A secondhand article dealer.
§ 485-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-3
1:387
(2) Secondhand article dealers who operate a business for buying,
selling, exchanging or receiving into possession used or
secondhand parts of bicycles.
(3) Pawnbroker.
(4) Secondhand dealer mall or flea market license.
(5) Special event secondhand dealer mall or flea market license for a
period of no more than three consecutive days. The license shall set
forth the exact days on which such business or event may be
carried on.
C. Separate license. A separate license shall be obtained for each
individual premises from which the business is operated.
D. License renewal. Annual licenses shall expire on the 30th day of June
after the granting thereof. Renewal licenses shall be obtained on or
before June 30 of each year or be subject to a late filing fee of 15% of
the license fee or a minimum of $3, whichever is greater. Payment of the
late filing fee shall not relieve any person from any other penalties
prescribed in this chapter for failure to possess or obtain a license.
E. Investigation of license applicant. Before any license is issued under the
provisions of this section, an investigation of the character of the
applicant and its members, officers and employees shall be made by the
Police Department and a written report filed with the City Clerk-
Treasurer and made a part of the application. This investigation shall
include fingerprinting of the applicant and all employees who are
directly involved in the receipt of secondhand articles or jewelry from
customers as well as a determination by the Police Department whether
the applicant has been convicted within the preceding 10 years of a
felony or within the preceding five years of a misdemeanor, statutory
violation punishable by forfeiture or county or municipal ordinance
violation described under Subsection A(1)(c) herein and, if so, the
nature and date of the offense and the penalty assessed. Where the
applicant is a corporation or partnership, this provision shall apply to
all its officers and each general partner, respectively.
F. License issuance. The Common Council shall grant the license if all of
the following apply:
(1) The applicant, including an individual, a partner or an officer,
director or agent of any corporate applicant, has not been
convicted within the preceding 10 years of a felony or within the
preceding five years of a misdemeanor, statutory violation
punishable by forfeiture or county or municipal ordinance violation
in which the circumstances of the felony, misdemeanor or other
offense substantially relate to the circumstances of being a
secondhand article dealer, secondhand jewelry dealer or
pawnbroker.
§ 485-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 485-3
1:388
§ 485-4. Restrictions and requirements of secondhand dealers.
(2) With respect to an applicant, all or any part of whose secondhand
dealer business involves transactions as a pawnbroker, the
applicant provides to the City Clerk-Treasurer a bond of $500 or as
established by Common Council, with not less than two sureties, for
the observation of all municipal ordinances relating to secondhand
dealers and pawnbrokers. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) The appropriate license fee for each individual premises has been
paid.
(4) No license issued under this section may be transferred.
A. Identification. No secondhand article dealer, secondhand jewelry dealer
or pawnbroker may engage in a transaction of purchase, receipt or
exchange of any secondhand article or secondhand jewelry from a
customer without first securing adequate identification of the customer
by obtaining a physical description of the person and shall also include
the subject's driver's license number, social security number or
Wisconsin identification number. At the time of the transaction, the
dealer shall require the customer to present one of the following types
of identification:
(1) A county identification card.
(2) A state identification card.
(3) A valid Wisconsin motor vehicle operator's license.
(4) A valid motor vehicle operator's license, containing a picture,
issued by another state.
(5) A military identification card.
(6) A valid passport.
(7) An alien registration card.
(8) A senior citizen's identification card containing a photograph.
(9) Any identification document issued by a state or federal
government, whether or not containing a picture, if the
pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer
obtains a clear imprint of the customer's right index finger.
B. Records. It shall be the duty of every secondhand dealer to keep a
record of all articles and jewelry purchased by her/him, and it is
required that a detailed description be obtained of all property
purchased. Said description shall contain such information as to
identify said property correctly and shall include type of property, serial
§ 485-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-4
1:389
number, model number, color description and purchase price of said
property.
C. On-premises sales. Except as provided in Subsections D and E, for each
transaction of purchase, receipt or exchange of any secondhand article
or secondhand jewelry from a customer, a secondhand dealer shall
require the customer to complete and sign, in ink, a Reedsburg Police
Department form entitled "property transaction record." No entry on
such a form may be erased, mutilated or changed. The dealer shall,
further, forward a completed original copy of the form to the Reedsburg
Police Department within five working days of said transaction. The
correct address of residence of the seller shall also be included. The
original copy and one duplicate of such daily record shall be retained
for not less than one year from the date of the transaction and furnished
upon demand to the police. Records shall be kept of the signature of all
persons from whom any articles or jewelry are purchased by the
secondhand dealers hereunder, together with the license number of the
vehicle, when such articles are delivered by motor vehicle, except that
no license number shall be required for transactions consisting solely of
audio-visual recording devices. Such records shall be retained for not
less than one year after the date of the transaction and during that
period shall be made available to any law enforcement officer for
inspection at any reasonable time. Notwithstanding § 19.35(1), Wis.
Stats., a law enforcement agency receiving the original property
transaction record, audio/visual recording device transaction record,
inventory or declaration of ownership may disclose it only to another
law enforcement agency.
D. Audiotapes, compact discs, laser discs, records, videotapes and other
similar audio or audio-visual recording devices. The provisions of
Subsection A shall apply to each transaction of purchase, receipt or
exchange of one or a combination of audiotape(s), compact disc(s),
laser disc(s), record(s), videotape(s), digital video disc(s) or other
similar audio or audio-visual recording device for which the total paid
by the secondhand dealer is $20 or greater, or as may be amended by
Common Council. For each such transaction, a secondhand dealer shall
require the customer to complete and sign, in ink, a Reedsburg Police
Department form entitled "audio/visual recording device transaction
record." The form shall require, among other things, that each
individual article be listed by title and artist and any other feature
adequate to identify each specific article included in the $20 or more
transaction. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
E. Off-premises sales. For every secondhand article or jewelry purchased,
received or exchanged by a secondhand dealer from a customer off the
secondhand dealer's premises, the secondhand dealer shall keep a
written inventory. In this inventory, the secondhand dealer shall record
the name and address of each customer, the date, time and place of the
transaction, and a detailed description of the article or jewelry which is
§ 485-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 485-4
1:390
the subject of the transaction. The customer shall sign her or his name
on a declaration of ownership of the secondhand article or jewelry
identified in the inventory and shall state that she or he owns the
secondhand article or jewelry. The secondhand dealer shall retain an
original and duplicate of each entry and declaration of ownership
relating to the purchase, receipt or exchange of any secondhand article
or jewelry for not less than one year after the date of the transaction
and shall make duplicates of the inventory and declarations of
ownership available to the Reedsburg Police for inspection at any
reasonable time.
F. Transactions with minors. No purchase, receipt or exchange of any
secondhand article or jewelry shall be made from any person under the
age of 18 years, except that a secondhand article dealer may engage in
a transaction involving the purchase, receipt or exchange of computer
toys and games and audiotapes, compact discs, laser discs, records,
videotapes or other similar audio or audio-visual recording device from
a minor if the minor is accompanied by her/his parent or guardian at the
time of the transaction.
G. Holding period.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection G(5), any secondhand article or
jewelry purchased or received by a pawnbroker shall be kept on the
dealer's premises or other place for safekeeping for not less than
30 days after the date of purchase or receipt, unless the person
known by the pawnbroker to be the lawful owner of the secondhand
article or jewelry recovers it.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection G(5), any secondhand article
purchased or received by a secondhand dealer shall be kept on the
dealer's premises or other place for safekeeping for not less than
10 days after the date of purchase or receipt.
(3) Except as provided in Subsection G(5), any secondhand jewelry
purchased or received by a secondhand jewelry dealer shall be kept
on the dealer's premises or other place for safekeeping for not less
than 15 days after the date of purchase or receipt.
(4) During the period set forth in Subsection G(1), (2) and (3), the
secondhand article or jewelry shall be held separate and apart and
may not be altered in any manner. The pawnbroker, secondhand
dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall permit any law
enforcement officer to inspect the secondhand article or jewelry
during this period. Within 24 hours after a written request of a law
enforcement office during this period, a pawnbroker or other
secondhand dealer shall make available for inspection any
secondhand article or jewelry which is kept off the premises for
safekeeping. Any law enforcement officer who has reason to
believe any secondhand article or jewelry was not sold or
exchanged by the lawful owner may direct a secondhand dealer to
§ 485-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-4
1:391
§ 485-5. Secondhand article dealer mall or flea market.
hold that secondhand article or jewelry for a reasonable length
of time which the law enforcement officer considers necessary to
identify it.
(5) Subsection G(1) to (4) do not apply to the following:
(a) A secondhand article consigned to a pawnbroker or other
secondhand dealer.
(b) A coin of the United States or any gold or silver coin or gold or
silver bullion.
(c) An audiotape, compact disc, laser disc, digital videodisc,
record, videotape or other similar audio or audio-visual
recording device.
A. License. The owner of any premises or land upon which two or more
persons operate as secondhand article dealers may obtain a
secondhand article dealer mall or flea market license for the premises
or land if the following conditions are met:
(1) Each secondhand article dealer occupies a separate sales location
and identifies herself or himself to the public as a separate
secondhand dealer.
(2) The secondhand article dealer mall or flea market is operated
under one name and at one address and is under the control of the
secondhand article dealer mall or flea market license holder.
(3) Each secondhand article dealer delivers to the secondhand article
dealer mall or flea market license holder, at the close of business on
each day that the secondhand article dealer conducts business, a
record of his or her sales that includes the location at which each
sale was made. [Amended 11-14-2011]
(4) The secondhand article dealer license holder and each secondhand
article dealer operating upon the premises or land shall comply
with § 485-4G.
B. Procedure for revocation, suspension or nonrenewal. In addition to any
other penalty provided by this chapter, any secondhand article dealer
license, secondhand jewelry dealer license, pawnbroker license or
secondhand article mall or flea-market license may be revoked,
suspended or ordered not to be renewed for a stated period of time by
the Common Council, after notice and hearing, for any violation of this
chapter; for any violations of any other Reedsburg ordinances or state
statutes where the circumstances of the offense are substantially
related to the circumstances of being a secondhand dealer; for fraud,
misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a
license; or for any violation of §§ 943.34 (receiving stolen property),
§ 485-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 485-5
1:392
§ 485-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 493
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
948.62 (receiving stolen property from a child) or 948.63 (receiving
property from a child), Wis. Stats.
A. Upon conviction for a first offense under this chapter, a person shall
forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $1,000.
B. Upon conviction for a second or subsequent offense under this chapter,
a person shall forfeit not less than $500 nor more than $2,000.
§ 485-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-6
1:393

ARTICLE I
Wastewater Disposal Requirements
[Adopted as Secs. 13.01 and 13.02 of the former Municipal
Codebook]
§ 493-1. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMMONIA or AMMONIA-NITROGEN (NH3-N) — The quantity of elemental
nitrogen present, in which nitrogen is combined with hydrogen in the
molecular form as NH3, or in the ionized form as NH4+, expressed in
milligrams of N per liter. Quantitative determination of ammonia-nitrogen
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods,
and as approved in Ch. NR 219, Wis. Adm. Code.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams of O2 per liter.
Quantitative determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods, and as approved in Ch. NR 219,
Wis. Adm. Code.
BUILDING DRAIN — Horizontal piping within and/or under a building,
installed below the lowest fixture of the lowest floor level from which
fixtures can drain by gravity to the building sewer.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the City of Reedsburg,
or said person's appointed assistant, agent, or representative.
BUILDING SEWER — The part of a drain system beginning at the
immediate outside of the foundation wall of any building being served which
conveys its discharge to a public sewer, private interceptor main sewer,
private sewage system, or other point of disposal.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any standard specifying
quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties that may
be discharged to the wastewater facilities by industrial users in specific
industrial categories. The "applicable categorical pretreatment standard"
shall mean the most restrictive pretreatment limitations or prohibitive
standards for industrial wastewater that are enacted by a federal, state or
local governmental entity.
CITY — The City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin.
CLEAR (UNPOLLUTED) WATER — Water having no impurities, or where
impurities are below a minimum concentration considered harmful by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, and would not be benefited by
discharge to the wastewater treatment facilities provided. Sources of clear
water include inflow and infiltration.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — BOD, suspended solids, ammonia, and
phosphorus, plus additional pollutants identified in the Wisconsin Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit issued to the City's
§ 493-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-1
1:395
wastewater treatment plant, provided that such wastewater treatment plant
was designed to treat such pollutants and does remove such pollutants to a
substantial degree.
DEBT SERVICE — A liability for a project incurred in the provision of the
City's wastewater facilities, including general obligation bonds, revenue
bonds, promissory notes and special assessment bonds with both principal
and interest.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, grease or similar substance in a physical state
such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in
an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free
of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not
interfere with the sewerage system.
FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A combination of
individual samples taken during operating or discharge hours, whichever
is longer, where the individual samples are taken at frequent intervals not
exceeding 15 minutes, and are either:
GRAB SAMPLE — A single sample taken at one moment or a combination
of several smaller samples of equal volume taken in less than a two-minute
time period. Where the term is used in connection with monitoring
temperature or pH, it means a single measurement.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A watertight receptacle designed to intercept
and retain grease or fatty substances contained in kitchen and other food
wastes. "Grease interceptor" and "grease trap" mean the same thing.
HOLDING TANK — An approved watertight receptacle for the collection
and holding of sewage.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — The scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from
holding tanks, such as chemical toilets, campers, trailers, vacuum pump
trucks and other temporary holding facilities that collect wastewater from
a user. Holding tank waste does not include sludge or waste from a soil
absorption field, septic tank, privy or grease trap.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant that is not a compatible
pollutant. Incompatible pollutants include any wastewater or discharges
to the sewerage system that are likely to adversely affect or disrupt the
wastewater treatment processes, effluent quality, or sludge quality if
discharged to the sewerage system.
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE, INDUSTRIAL WASTE or INDUSTRIAL
WASTEWATER — All wastewater discharged by an industrial user.
Such that the volume of each is proportional to the rate of flow at the
time it is taken; or
A.
Of equal volume and taken at intervals such that there is a constant
volume of discharge during each interval.
B.
§ 493-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-1
1:396
INDUSTRIAL USER —
INFILTRATION — The water (other than wastewater) from the ground or
other sources that enters the sewage system through means such as, but
not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.
Infiltration does not include, and is distinguishable from, inflow.
INFLOW — The water (other than wastewater) that enters the sewage
system from, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area
drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole
covers, cross-connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch
basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or
drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguishable from, infiltration.
LATERAL — See "building sewer."
LICENSED DISPOSER — Any person servicing septic and holding tanks,
dosing chambers, grease interceptors, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage
trenches, privies, or portable restrooms who holds a valid Wisconsin
sanitary license.
Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the sewerage system that
discharges more than the equivalent of 1,000 gallons per day (gpd)
of sanitary waste, and which is identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, United States Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented as of October 1, 1978, under
one of the following divisions:
(1) Division A, Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing.
(2) Division B, Mining.
(3) Division D, Manufacturing.
Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas, and
Sanitary Services.
(4)
(5) Division I, Services.
A.
In determining the amount of a user's discharge, the City will exclude
domestic waste or discharges from sanitary conveniences. After
applying the sanitary waste exclusion, discharges in the above divisions
that have a volume exceeding 1,000 gpd, or the weight of biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD), suspended solids (SS), ammonia (NH3), or
phosphorus (P) exceeding the weight found in 1,000 gpd of normal
concentration wastewater are considered industrial users. Any
nongovernmental user of the sewerage system which discharges
wastewater that contains toxic or incompatible pollutants or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by
interaction with other waste, to contaminate the sludge of the
municipal sewer systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage
treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to animals, creates a
public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on
the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.
B.
§ 493-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-1
1:397
MAY — A term intended to mean permissive.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (MG/L) — A measure of the concentration of a
pollutant, expressed in the mass of pollutant (milligrams) per volume (liter)
of wastewater.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
NORMAL CONCENTRATION WASTEWATER — Wastewater in which the
average concentration has been established as follows:
NORMAL WASTEWATER — A combination of liquid and waterborne wastes
normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings,
apartments, hotels, office buildings, factories, and institutions, free from
industrial wastes, which does not contain incompatible pollutants and in
which BOD, phosphorus, ammonia, or suspended solids concentrations do
not exceed normal-concentration wastewater.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — Costs to operate and maintain
the sewerage system, including both the collection system and treatment
facilities. Operation and maintenance costs include, but are not limited to,
labor, utilities, supplies, equipment maintenance and other normal costs
necessary for the provision of sewerage service.
PERSON — Any and all individuals, firm, company, municipal or private
corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental
agency, or other entity.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter.
PHOSPHORUS (P) — The total phosphorus in wastewater that may be
present in any of three principal forms: orthophosphates, polyphosphates,
and organic phosphates, expressed in milligrams of P per liter. Quantitative
determination of total phosphorus shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods, and as approved in Ch. NR 219,
Wis. Adm. Code.
PORTABLE RESTROOM — Fixtures incorporating holding tank facilities,
designed to directly receive human excrement. Portable restrooms are selfcontained
units, may be designed for one or more person's use at a given
time and are readily transportable. Portable restroom wastewater shall be
disposed of as holding tank waste.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature or characteristics
A. BOD of 250 mg/L.
B. Suspended solids content of 200 mg/L.
C. Ammonia content of 29 mg/L.
D. Phosphorus content of 7.8 mg/L.
§ 493-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-1
1:398
of the pollutant properties of the wastewater of a user prior to or in lieu of
discharge to the sewerage system.
PRIVATE SEWERAGE SYSTEM — A system for treatment of wastewater
that is not owned or operated by the City.
PRIVY — A cavity in the ground or a portable aboveground device
constructed for toilet uses, which receives human excrement either to
be partially absorbed directly by the surrounding soil or stored for
decomposition and periodic removal.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and/or dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in the collection system, with no particle greater than
1/2 inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any sanitary sewer owned and controlled by a
municipality or public authority and in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights. For this chapter, public sewer refers to all
sanitary sewers owned and operated by the City.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — Expenditures for purchasing and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances necessary to maintain the
capacity and performance of the sewerage system during the service life for
which such works were designed and constructed.
REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE — A twenty-four-hour flow proportional
composite sample of the appropriate wastewater stream, where feasible.
Samples to be analyzed for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease,
sulfide, and volatile organics shall be grab samples. A user may use another
sampling method if it demonstrates and certifies to the City's satisfaction
that it is more representative than flow-proportional sampling.
SANITARY SEWER — See "sewage collection system."
SEPTAGE — The wastewater or contents of septic tanks, dosing chambers,
grease interceptors, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches and
privies.
SEPTIC TANK — A tank which receives and partially treats sewage through
processes of sedimentation, oxidation, flotation and bacterial action, so as
to separate solids from the liquid in the sewage, and discharges the liquid
to a soil absorption system.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater."
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — The common sanitary sewers within
the sewerage system that are primarily installed to receive wastewaters
directly from facilities which convey wastewater from individual structures
or from private property, and which include service connection fittings
designed for connection with those facilities. The sewage collection system
collects and carries the wastewater through a system that eventually
connects to a wastewater treatment plant. The facilities that convey
§ 493-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-1
1:399
wastewater from individual structures, or from private property to the
public sewer, are specifically excluded from the definition of sewage
collection system, except that pumping units and pressurized lines for
individual structures or groups of structures may be included as part of the
sewage collection system when such units are owned and maintained by the
sewerage system owner.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All wastewater facilities of the City, which includes
the wastewater treatment plant and collection system, but excludes
building drains and building sewers. The preferred term is "wastewater
facilities."
SHALL — A term intended to mean mandatory.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration or flow rate during normal operation.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and methods set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American
Public Health Association, American Waterworks Association, and the Water
Environment Federation, and is in compliance with 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants," all as amended
from time to time.
STORM SEWER — A sewer which carries stormwaters and surface
drainage, and/or unpolluted (clear) water, but excludes domestic and
industrial wastewater.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — Insoluble solids that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids
and are removable by laboratory filtering and referred to as "nonfilterable
residue," expressed in milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination of
total suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set
forth in Standard Methods, and as approved in Ch. NR 219, Wis. Adm. Code.
USER — Any person who discharges, or causes to be discharged, normal
wastewater or industrial discharges or any other wastewater into the
sewerage system.
USER CHARGE — A charge levied on the users of the wastewater facilities
for the cost of provision of facilities and service, including operation and
maintenance, replacement cost, debt service, and other related costs.
UTILITY — The Utility Commission of the City of Reedsburg.
WASTEWATER — The water-carried wastes created in and conducted away
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial establishments, and
public buildings or institutions as defined in § 101.01(12), Wis. Stats., with
such surface water or groundwater as may be present.
§ 493-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-1
1:400
WASTEWATER DEPARTMENT or DEPARTMENT — The City of Reedsburg
Public Works Department.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — All structures, conduits and pipes by which
wastewater is collected, treated and disposed of, except plumbing inside
and in connection with buildings served and building sewers, from the
building to the sewage collection system.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — An arrangement of equipment and
structures for treating wastewater, owned and operated by the City.
Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant," "wastewater
treatment facility," "wastewater treatment works," or "water pollution
control plant."
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
WPDES — The City's permit to discharge pollutants, obtained under the
Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) pursuant to
Chapter 283, Wis. Stats.
§ 493-2. General requirements.
A. Disposing of wastewater and pollutants on land. It shall be unlawful for
any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any manner
wastewater or other polluted waters, any human or animal excrement,
or other incompatible pollutant on public or private property within the
City or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City.
B. Discharge into waterways. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any
natural outlet within the City, or any area under the jurisdiction of said
City, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this chapter and with all applicable federal, state, or local statutes,
ordinances, and regulations.
C. Privies, septic tanks, etc. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
holding tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal
of sewage within the City limits.
D. Connection to utility. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes
situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way
in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public
sanitary sewer of the City is hereby required at his expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within 10 days after date of official notice to do so. A separate
and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building
intended for human habitation or occupancy. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 493-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-2
1:401
E. Maintenance of services. The property owner shall maintain building
sewer (service laterals) free from defective conditions, by and at the
expense of the owner or occupant of the property, except if they are
damaged as a result of negligence or carelessness on the part of the
City.
F. Contract basis for sewer service. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit
the City from providing wastewater services to persons outside the
corporate limits of the City under mutually agreeable conditions. Any
customers outside of the service area who request service by the City
shall agree to be subject to this chapter and charges as applied to
customers inside the City limits, plus any surcharges.
G. Protection from damage. No unauthorized person shall maliciously,
willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part
of the wastewater facilities. Any person(s) violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest under charge of criminal damage to
property or disorderly conduct.
§ 493-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-2
1:402
ARTICLE II
Connection to Public Sewer System
[Adopted as Sec. 13.03 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 493-3. Authorization required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Building Inspector.
§ 493-4. Building sewer permit applications.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and
commercial service, and for industrial wastes service. In either case, the
owner or the owner's agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Department. Industrial waste dischargers shall also pay a
special permit and inspection fee to the City at the time the application is
filed sufficient to cover City engineering review expenses.
§ 493-5. Contribution-in-aid-of construction (CAC) charge.
There is hereby levied and assessed upon each lot or parcel of land within
the City a contribution-in-aid-of-construction (CAC) charge as
recommended by the Public Works Department. All applicants for building
sewer permits, following adoption of this article, shall be assessed a CAC
charge. Current CAC charges shall be as approved by the Common Council
and from time to time amended by resolution:
A. A CAC charge for one- and two-family residences.
B. The CAC charge for multifamily (three units or larger) residences shall
be per living unit.
C. A CAC charge for nonresidential customer discharging less than 500
gallons per day on an average daily basis.
D. A CAC charge for nonresidential customers discharging more than 500
gallons per day, but less than 1,000 gallons per day, on an average daily
basis.
E. The Department shall establish the CAC charge for nonresidential
customers discharging more than an average of 1,000 gallons per day,
or discharging wastewater having any pollutant concentration greater
than normal concentration wastewater, on a case-by case basis.
F. The CAC charge shall be payable prior to issuance of the building sewer
permit. Should the wastewater volume or characteristics not be
sufficiently known at the time of application for the CAC charge
determination, an initial CAC payment shall be made based on
estimated volume and wastewater characteristics. An adjustment to the
§ 493-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-5
1:403
§ 493-6. Connection to utility sewers.
CAC charge shall be made on the first anniversary of sewer system
use based upon metered water sales and measured wastewater quality,
where applicable. Any CAC undercharge shall be immediately due and
payable to the City, whereas any CAC overcharge shall be refunded to
the user.
G. Special connection fees.
(1) A special connection fee (CAC charge) shall be payable for the
connection of buildings within the area served by gravity flow into
the Hay Creek Lift Station (No. 9). This special CAC charge shall be
as approved by the Common Council and from time to time
amended by resolution.
(a) Special CAC charge for buildings on lots less than one acre.
(b) Special CAC charge for buildings on lots more than one acre.
(2) Homes existing within the gravity flow area at the time of
enactment of this article shall pay the lesser charge regardless of
acreage.
A. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of Ch. SPS 382, Design, Construction, Installation,
Supervision, Maintenance and Inspection of Plumbing, Wis. Adm. Code,
and other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
B. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the owner's
expense.
C. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found to be in suitable condition and meet all
requirements of this chapter upon examination and testing by the
Building Inspector. Capping and marking of abandoned sanitary sewer
service shall be the responsibility of the owner. The Department shall
be notified of the location and marking of each abandoned sewer
service.
D. New connections from sources that include inflow and/or infiltration
are prohibited.
E. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
§ 493-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-6
1:404
§ 493-7. Powers and authority of inspections.
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City.
F. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Building
Inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Building Inspector or its duly authorized agent.
G. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
A. Every user shall permit the Building Inspector or its duly authorized
agent, at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter its premises or
building to examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the
drains and sewer connections operate; and it must at all times, frankly
and without concealment, answer all questions asked it relative to its
use, all in accordance with § 196.171, Wis. Stats., and this chapter.
B. The City or duly authorized employees or agents are authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes that have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater
collection system. The industry may withhold information considered
confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the
public of the information in question might result in an advantage to
competitors.
C. While performing the necessary inspection on private properties
referred to in Subsection A above, the City, or duly authorized
employees or agents of the City, shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises or established by the company, the company shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the City employees, and the City
shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by
City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing
out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions as required in this Code.
D. The City and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining
to the private property involved.
§ 493-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-8
1:405
§ 493-8. Special assessments.
The cost of any sewerage system work or improvement and the cost of
required fees may be levied at approved rates and collected by special
assessments upon property in accordance with the provisions of § 66.0703,
Wis. Stats.
§ 493-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-8
1:406
ARTICLE III
Use of Public Sewers
[Adopted as Sec. 13.04 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 493-9. General.
§ 493-10. Discharge information.
The City may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed
to determine compliance with this chapter. This information may include:
A. The applicant for wastewater service under an agreement pursuant to
this chapter shall agree to assume user charges, industrial waste
charges and capital surcharges, if applicable.
B. The applicant for wastewater service under an agreement pursuant to
this chapter shall agree to obtain from the City the proper building
permit by which the connection is allowed and the discharge permit, if
applicable, which indicates what discharge will be made to the
wastewater facilities.
C. No provision contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or
prohibit a separate or special contract or agreement between the City
and any industrial user, whereby industrial waste or material of unusual
strength, character, or composition may be accepted by the City for
treatment, subject to additional payment by the industrial user,
provided that such contract or agreement has the prior approval of the
City.
D. No provision contained in this chapter shall be construed to provide
lesser discharge standards than are presently or may hereafter be
imposed or required by any federal, state, or local regulating agency.
A. Wastewater discharge average and peak flow rate and/or volume over a
specified time period.
B. Chemical analyses of wastewaters. All measurements, tests, and
analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference
is made in this chapter shall be determined by a laboratory, approved
for the respective test parameter, in accordance with approved
methodologies and procedures as published in Ch. NR 219, Wis. Adm.
Code, and registered with the State of Wisconsin.
C. Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
D. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other
materials important to sewer use control.
E. A plot plan of sewers for the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
§ 493-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-10
1:407
§ 493-11. Prohibition of clear (unpolluted) water.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, noncontact
cooling water or clear water to any sanitary sewer. Roof leaders, swimming
pool drains, surface drains, groundwater drains, sump pumps, foundation
footing drains, and other clear water drains shall be connected wherever
possible with a storm sewer or to a natural outlet approved by the
Department and other regulatory agencies. They shall not be connected to a
building sewer that discharges into a sanitary sewer or private wastewater
treatment plant. All such connections existing at the time of passage of
this article shall thereafter be illegal. If stormwater or clear water is being
discharged into a sanitary sewer, the Department shall give the offending
person 30 days' notice to disconnect. Failure to disconnect after such notice
shall authorize the Department to cause disconnection and assessment of
the costs of such disconnection against the property involved. In alternative,
the Department may institute action for violation of this section.
§ 493-12. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewerage
system any of the following described waters or wastes:
F. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
G. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
A. Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or any other flammable or explosive
substance that may create a fire or explosion hazard in the wastewater
facilities.
B. Any discharge containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans, flora or fauna, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
The toxins prohibited shall include but not be limited to those published
under § NR 215.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but not limited
to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unshredded garbage, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, sanitary napkins, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
D. Any wastewater containing floatable oil.
§ 493-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-12
1:408
§ 493-13. Limitations on discharge characteristics.
The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be
limited in discharges to concentrations or quantities which will not harm
either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, will not result in violation of
the City's WPDES permit, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. The Department may set limitations
more stringent than those established below if, in its opinion, more severe
limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. The following
limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or
wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer shall not be violated without
prior approval of the Department:
E. Wastes that cause or are capable of causing, either alone or in
combination with other substances, air pollution as defined in
§ 285.01(3), Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time, and any
regulation and/or orders of any regulatory agency issued there under.
F. Discharges that prevent effective operation and maintenance of the
wastewater facilities.
G. Any waste that presents a detrimental environmental effect, a nuisance,
or any condition unacceptable to any public agency having regulatory
jurisdiction.
H. Any wastewater that contains organosulfur or organophosphate
pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers.
I. Any waste which, in combination with other discharges, causes:
(1) The wastewater treatment plant's effluent to exceed 0.1 mg/L total
phenols; or
(2) The wastewater treatment plant's effluent to exceed 0.002 mg/L
polychlorinated biphenols (PCBs); or
(3) The wastewater treatment plant's digested sludge to exceed a PCB
concentration of 10.0 milligrams/kilogram on a dry-weight basis.
J. Industrial discharges that exceed the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard, pursuant to Ch. NR 211, Wis. Adm. Code.
K. Wastes prohibited by § NR 211.10, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.), or any
wastewater having a temperature which may inhibit biological activity
in the wastewater treatment plant, thereby resulting in interference.
B. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.0, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to the wastewater facilities or personnel.
§ 493-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-13
1:409
§ 493-14. Alternatives to acceptance of wastewater.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers which contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated herein, and which in the judgment of the City
may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life
or constitute a public nuisance, the City may:
C. Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum
oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral-oil origin.
D. Wastewater containing more than 300 milligrams per liter of oils, fat,
grease, wax, or any other similar substances of animal or vegetable
origin.
E. Wastewater which contains in excess of (note: actual numbers not
reviewed):
2.0 mg/L cadmium 0.0005 mg/L mercury
3.6 mg/L hexavalent chromium 6.7 mg/L nickel
21.8 mg/L total chromium 1.0 mg/L selenium
17.6 mg/L copper 0.1 mg/L silver
1.2 mg/L cyanide 16.5 mg/L zinc
1.5 mg/L lead 1.0 mg/L aluminum
F. Radioactive wastes which, alone or with other wastes, results in
releases greater than those specified by current United States Bureau
of Standards handbooks, or which violate rules or regulations of any
applicable regulatory agency.
G. Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug, as
defined herein.
H. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters.
I. Any water or wastes which, either singly or by interaction with other
water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases,
form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system,
create a public nuisance or hazard to life, are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for their maintenance or repair, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
§ 493-13 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-14
1:410
§ 493-15. Garbage grinders.
Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar
places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens
for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers,
where the garbage has been properly shredded.
§ 493-16. Accidental discharge of prohibited wastewater.
Any nonresidential user who accidentally discharges into the sewerage
system wastes or wastewater prohibited under these regulations shall
immediately report such discharge to the Department. Such report shall
describe the location, time, volume and type of waste or wastewater
discharged. Within 15 days of such discharge, a detailed written statement
describing the cause of the discharge and measures taken to prevent future
occurrences shall be submitted to the Department. Such reporting shall
not relieve the person causing the accidental discharge from any penalties
imposed by these regulations.
A. Reject the wastes; the City reserves the right to reject admission to the
system of any waste harmful to the treatment or collection facilities or
to the receiving stream;
B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
C. Require control over the quantities and/or rates of discharge; and/or
D. Require payment to cover the additional cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing user charges under the provisions of
this article.
§ 493-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-16
1:411

ARTICLE IV
Industrial Discharges
[Adopted as Sec. 13.05 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 493-17. Industrial request to discharge for new users.
Any new industrial user wishing to connect to the public sewerage system
within the City shall be required to complete an industrial request to
discharge before applying for a plumbing permit. The City will determine
whether or not the proposed industrial user must provide further
information to the City. If no further information is needed, the prospective
industrial user may apply for a plumbing permit.
§ 493-18. Industrial request to alter characteristics of discharge.
Any existing industrial user that desires to increase the amount, or change
the nature, of the waste discharged to the City sewer system shall submit
an industrial request to discharge to the City. The request will be evaluated
to determine if further information is required.
§ 493-19. Baseline monitoring report.
Upon request of the City, each industrial user may be required to submit
to the City a baseline monitoring report. The report shall contain data on
the characteristics of the wastewater discharged from the industrial user,
such as projected flows, concentrations of compatible pollutants, oils and
grease, and any toxic substances as defined by this chapter. The purpose
of the baseline monitoring report is to determine whether the wastewater
discharged by an industrial user is compatible with the City's wastewater
facilities or should be regulated through the use of a permit.
§ 493-20. Permit to discharge industrial waste.
A. Based upon the information supplied in the baseline monitoring report,
the City shall determine if the industrial discharge is subject to
categorical pretreatment standards or if the industrial discharge
contains substantial amounts and/or concentrations of substances
regulated or limited by this chapter. In the event the industrial
discharge does contain substances regulated by this chapter or is
subject to categorical pretreatment standards, the City shall so notify
the industrial user and said user shall not discharge industrial wastes
into the City's wastewater facilities, except pursuant to a permit issued
by the City.
B. Upon receiving notification by the City pursuant to Subsection A hereof,
the industrial user shall make written application to the City for
issuance of a permit to discharge. The City may issue a permit to the
industrial user, which may include, but not be limited to:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the industrial user,
and the identity of an authorized representative to act on its behalf.
§ 493-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-20
1:413
(2) A description of the industrial user's permitted connection or
connections to the public sewer system and its location.
(3) The average and/or maximum limit of various wastewater
constituents that may be discharged by such user.
(4) Any limit on the maximum rate of industrial discharge or the time
of the discharge.
(5) A requirement for a monitoring manhole or some other means to
collect a representative sample of the industrial user's discharge.
(6) A description of both the frequency of self-monitoring that is
required and of the method of sample collection.
(7) A discussion of reports that must be submitted to the City.
(8) A compliance schedule for construction of pretreatment facilities, if
required.
(9) The requirements for records retention.
(10) The notification procedure to be followed if the industrial user
intends to change the characteristics of its wastewater discharge.
(11) A statement concerning the City's right to inspect the industry's
facilities.
(12) The agreement of the holders of the permit to indemnify the City
from and against any and all liability for injury or damage arising
out of or related to the activities of the holder in discharging
industrial wastes.
(13) A statement of the applicable pretreatment standards that the user
must abide by.
(14) A statement that a violation of pretreatment requirements as
specified may be subject to various penalties as listed in this
chapter.
C. Upon issuance of such permit, the industrial user shall faithfully comply
with all provisions thereof and as contained in this chapter, as amended
from time to time.
D. Any permit issued under this article shall be effective for a period not to
exceed five years from the date thereof. Any user holding a permit shall
apply for a permit renewal at least 180 days prior to the expiration date
of the user's existing permit.
E. Permits issued under this article are personal as to the user/holder
thereof and may not be subsequently assigned or transferred, by
operation of law or otherwise, to any successor or assignee without the
prior written approval of the City.
§ 493-20 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-20
1:414
§ 493-21. Monitoring of industrial discharges.
§ 493-22. Pretreatment requirements.
F. All industrial users shall notify the City in advance of any change in its
industrial operations that could have an effect upon the waste and
wastewaters generated, or of any substantial change in the volume or
character of pollutants in their discharge. In such event, the City may
add to, change or modify the conditions of such permit to give
recognition to the change in industrial operation.
G. The City reserves the right to amend any issued permit by adding or
deleting such provisions, requirements and conditions as it deems
appropriate. The City shall notify the industrial user of any changes in
the permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of such change.
Any change or new condition to the permit shall allow for a reasonable
period of time for compliance by the user.
H. Any permit issued under this article shall be revocable by the Common
Council for violation of the terms and condition thereof, and such
violations may be subject to penalties listed in this chapter.
A. The City, at its own discretion, may require an industrial user to install a
suitable structure, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling
and measurement of the wastes being discharged to the public
sewerage system. Such structure, when required, shall be accessible
and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the City. The structure shall be installed by the owner at
his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times. In the event that the industrial user fails to
construct such a structure, the City may do so and shall assess the cost
thereof to the industrial user.
B. The City may require the industrial user to collect representative
samples of its wastewater discharge, to analyze the sample for
parameters specified by the City, and to report the results to the City in
a timely manner. Any samples collected during such monitoring shall
follow a strict chain-of-custody procedure to ensure security of the
samples and anonymity during analysis.
C. The City may elect to independently monitor the discharge of any
industrial user to assess compliance with applicable standards. Any
samples collected during such monitoring shall follow a strict chain-ofcustody
procedure to ensure security of the samples and anonymity
during analysis.
A. The Public Works Department may require pretreatment of industrial
discharges if, in its opinion, pretreatment is necessary to protect the
wastewater facilities or prevent the discharge of incompatible
pollutants and to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The
§ 493-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-22
1:415
criteria for such a decision are the existing capacity of the plant relative
to BOD and SS.
B. Existing industries or new industrial users found to be subject to
applicable categorical pretreatment standards shall be in compliance
with these standards in accordance all federal, state, and local laws or
regulations.
C. Grease, oil, and/or sand interceptors or traps may be required to be
installed by the user at its own expense when, in the opinion of the
Public Works Department, such facilities are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease or floatable oils in excess of
limitations specified in § 493-13 hereof, or any sand, inflammable
wastes, or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the Public Works Department and shall
be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning by the user
and for inspection by the Department.
D. When pretreatment facilities are required, the industrial user shall
construct and install the necessary facilities at its own expense, and in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Public Works
Department, and any other local, state, or federal agencies having
regulatory authority with respect to such pretreatment facilities. No
pretreatment plant or facility shall be constructed or operated unless
all plans, specifications, technical operating data and other information
pertinent to its proposed operation and maintenance have been
approved as described.
E. All pretreatment facilities shall be operated and maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operating condition at the
user's expense.
F. The Public Works Department shall determine the wastewater
discharge requirements for the pretreatment facilities. Dilution of an
industrial discharge for purposes of reducing the pollutant
characteristics or concentrations to below the limitations established
by this chapter, or below any other applicable pretreatment standard, is
prohibited.
§ 493-22 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-22
1:416
ARTICLE V
Septage and Holding Tank Waste
[Adopted as Sec. 13.06 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 493-23. Discharge into public sewers prohibited.
No person may discharge septage, holding tank waste or any other waste
into a manhole or other opening in the sewage collection system without
prior approval of the Public Works Department.
§ 493-24. Disposal application.
A. Licensed disposers may make application to the Public Works
Department to dispose of septage or holding tank waste to the City's
wastewater facilities. Applications for disposal during the winter
(November 15 to April 15) shall be submitted prior to September 1 of
that year (Wis. Adm. Code requirement).
B. The licensed disposer shall make a written application containing, as a
minimum, the following information:
(1) Name of disposer and license number.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of disposer.
(3) Type of waste and source(s).
(4) Estimates of quantities, disposal dates (by type), and methods for
discharge into the sewerage system.
(5) Statement certifying that:
(a) The waste contains no known toxic substances; and
(b) The disposer is familiar with and understands the Department
requirements for waste disposal.
C. The Public Works Department shall require the licensed disposer to
analyze representative samples of the waste in order to determine the
characteristics of the waste and the compatibility with the sewerage
system. The Public Works Department may not require the analysis of
waste from exclusively residential sources.
D. The Public Works Department may deny or approve an application for
septage or holding tank waste disposal during the period between April
16 and November 14. The only requirements that licensed disposers
discharge to the sewerage system and that the Department accept and
treat said waste during nonwinter months are those provided in § NR
113.07, Wis. Adm. Code. If approved, the Department may set
conditions for disposal.
E. For applications for disposal between November 15 and April 15, the
Department shall review the application and provide written approval
§ 493-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-24
1:417
§ 493-25. Limitations on discharge.
Any septage, holding tank waste, or similar waste permitted to be
discharged under this article shall be of domestic origin and/or contain
compatible pollutants only. The hauler or licensed disposer shall comply
with the provisions of any and all applicable laws and regulations, including
these regulations. Without limiting other relevant provisions of these
regulations, such person or licensed disposer shall not deposit or drain any
gasoline, oil, acid, alkali, grease, rags, volatile or flammable liquids, or other
deleterious substances into any manhole, building sewer, or public sewer;
nor shall such person or licensed disposer allow any grease, earth, sand, or
other solid materials to pass into any part of the sewerage system; nor shall
such person or licensed disposer discharge any liquid, gaseous, or solid
wastes determined by the Department to be detrimental to the sewerage
system or the City's employees or to the process of sewage treatment.
or denial of disposal to the licensed disposer by October 1 of each year.
The Department may deny acceptance of the waste if the Department
determines that:
(1) Treatment of the septage or holding tank waste would cause the
wastewater treatment plant to exceed its operating design capacity
or to violate any applicable effluent limitations or standards, water
quality standards, or any other legally applicable requirements,
including court orders or state or federal statutes, rules,
regulations, or orders; or
(2) The septage or holding tank waste is not compatible with the
sewerage system; or
(3) The disposer has not applied for and received approval to dispose
of septage or holding tank waste to the sewerage system or the
disposer fails to comply with the disposal plan or rules promulgated
by the Department.
F. The Public Works Department may require the disposer to post a bond
or other financial guarantee that the disposer will comply with the
Department's requirements.
§ 493-24 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-25
1:418
ARTICLE VI
Private Wastewater Disposal
[Adopted as Sec. 13.07 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 493-26. General.
§ 493-27. Construction and operation of private wastewater
disposal system.
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provision of
§ 493-2D, and with the approval of the Common Council, the building
sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system
complying with the provisions of this article.
B. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Building
Inspector.
C. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in § 493-2D, the
building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within 10 days and the
private wastewater disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with sand, gravel or similar material. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Before commencement of the construction of a private wastewater
disposal system or additions to an existing private wastewater disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the office of
the City Building Inspector.
B. The type, capacity, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal
system shall comply with all requirements of the applicable regulatory
agency.
C. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the City.
§ 493-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-27
1:419

ARTICLE VII
User Charges
[Adopted as Sec. 13.08 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 493-28. Normal wastewater service charge.
§ 493-29. Industrial wastewater service charge.
A. There is hereby levied and assessed, upon each lot or parcel of land
with a building having a lateral available to discharge normal sewage to
the public sewer system, a wastewater service charge based upon rates
established by the Common Council. Said charges shall be assessed and
collected monthly. The wastewater service charges taxed or levied
pursuant to this article shall be collected by the Utility. Wastewater
service charges shall consist of a fixed charge and volume charge to
recover operation and maintenance expenses, debt service,
replacement fund, and depreciation fund expenses from all users in a
fair and equitable manner. Fixed charge shall be the minimum monthly
wastewater service charge as established by resolution of the Common
Council of the City of Reedsburg, as amended from time to time. The
current fixed charges shall be based on the size of the water meter(s)
serving the user.
B. Volume charge. In addition to the minimum fixed charge, there shall be
a volume charge based on water usage as determined from regular
water meter readings by the Water Utility. The charge shall be
determined by resolution of the Common Council, as amended from
time to time.
C. If customers obtain all or part of their water from sources other than
the Water Utility, all or any part of which is discharged into the public
sewers, a flat-rate charge shall be determined for wastewater service.
Should the City determine that the minimum flat-rate charge is less
than the charge would be on a metered basis, the City shall have the
authority to set a higher rate based on estimated total usage and the
metered rate schedule. Should the residential customer request it, a
water meter shall be installed and the customer shall be charged on the
same basis as commercial or industrial customers having private water
supplies.
D. Summer adjustment for water not reaching the sewerage system.
Sewerage bills for residential customers of the sewerage system shall
be reduced by 15% for the billing periods of July, August and
September. For the purposes of this article, "residential customers"
means persons who are full-time residential occupants of a property,
notwithstanding the zoning classification of the property. The Director
of Public Works shall designate the customers who will receive the
seasonal adjustment. Notice of this adjustment shall be given in
sewerage bills in the billing cycle, which precedes the adjustment.
§ 493-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-29
1:421
A. Charges for industrial wastewater may be based on the same method
used for normal concentration wastewater described in § 493-28 when
the concentrations of pollutants in said wastewater do not exceed
normal concentration wastewater. Otherwise, charges for industrial
wastewater shall be based on volume, BOD, suspended solids,
ammonia, phosphorus, and such other constituents that affect the cost
of collection and treatment as provided herein; the amount of charge
shall reflect the cost incurred by the Public Works Department in
treating said constituents. Charges shall be made in accordance with
rates established by resolution of the Common Council hereafter.
B. Charges for industrial wastewater based on volume, BOD, suspended
solids, ammonia, and phosphorus shall be calculated as follows:
Waste Charge = FC + VC + PC
Where:
FC = the fixed meter charge based on the rates established in
§ 493-28A
VC = the volume charge as defined in § 493-29C
PC = the pollutant charge as defined in § 493-29D
C. The volume of industrial discharge used for computing the volume
charge shall be the actual volume of waste as determined by an
industrial waste metering installation or, in lieu of such facilities, the
metered water consumption, subject to adjustments as otherwise
provided herein. The volume charge shall be calculated as follows:
Volume Charge (VC) = VD\1,000 x $V
Where:
VD = the volume of industrial discharge for time period, gallons
$V = the unit volume charge established in § 493-29E per
1,000 gallons
D. The pollutant charges shall be based on the actual measured
concentration of the industrial wastewater for BOD, suspended solids,
ammonia, phosphorus and any other constituents; in lieu of actual
discharge measurements, the Department may elect to use average
assumed concentrations. The total pollutant charge shall be the sum of
each individual pollutant charge, calculated as follows:
Pollutant Charge (PC) = VD\1,000 x CP x $P x 0.00834
Where:
VD = the volume of industrial discharge for time period, gallons
CP = the concentration of pollutant as determined by the
Department, mg/L
§ 493-29 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-29
1:422
$P = the unit pollutant charge established in § 493-29E per
pound of pollutant
E. The rates of charge for each of the aforementioned constituents will be
at the prevailing rate at the time. The Reedsburg Common Council may
adjust rates. Said prevailing rates shall be assessed as follows:
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
Parameter Unit Charge
Volume ($V) $ per 1,000 gallons
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) $ per pound
Suspended Solids (SS) $ per pound
Ammonia-Nitrogen (NH3-N) $ per pound
Phosphorus (P) $ per pound
F. In addition to the above charges, the Public Works Department's costs
of sampling and analyzing industrial wastes may be charged to the
applicable industry.
G. Where industrial wastes are of such a strength or magnitude, or are
delivered over such a period of time that the above charges do not
reflect the actual cost of treatment to the Public Works Department, the
Department reserves the right to establish a special charge for
handling the waste. The portion of charge related to debt service shall
be based on the design capacity required for the particular waste. In no
event shall the charges be less than those charges determined by
applying the above charges.
H. If an industrial user obtains all or any part of its water from sources
other than the City of Reedsburg Water Utility, all or any part of which
is discharged into the public sewers, the user shall be required to have
a water meter or meters installed for the purpose of determining the
volume of water obtained from these other sources. Should the City
determine that the water usage is too small to justify a meter, the City
shall have the authority to waive this requirement and a flat rate may be
charged based on estimated water usage and the metered rate
schedule. The water meters shall be furnished by the Public Works
Department and installed by the user. All costs in connection with the
water meter installation shall be at the expense of the user. The Public
Works Department will charge for each meter at the rate of 50% of the
basic rate set for that size meter charged each period, not a one-time
payment, to compensate for furnishing, reading and servicing the
meter. This charge shall be in addition to the wastewater service
charge.
I. In the event that an industrial user produces evidence satisfactory to
the City that significant amounts of the water used for all purposes do
§ 493-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-29
1:423
§ 493-30. Septage, leachate and holding tank disposal service
charges.
Service charges for septage, leachate and holding tank waste are calculated
based on the following assumed concentrations and the unit rates specified
in § 493-29E:
§ 493-31. Late payment charge.
A charge of no more than 1% per month will be added to bills not paid within
20 days from date of issuance. The late payment charge shall be applied
to the total unpaid balance for utility service, including unpaid payment
charges. This charge is applicable to all customers.
§ 493-32. Remedies for failure to pay service charges.
Each wastewater service charge levied by, or pursuant to, this chapter is
hereby made a lien upon the corresponding lot, land, or premises served
by a connection to the sanitary sewer system of the City, and if the same
is not paid within the period allotted for such payment, said charge shall
constitute a lien on the property served and be inserted in the City tax roll
as provided in § 66.0821, Wis. Stats., in the same manner as water rates
are taxed and collected under the provisions of § 66.0809(1) or § 62.69(2)(f),
not reach the sanitary sewer, the user may be permitted to have an
exemption water meter(s) installed. Said meter(s) shall be furnished by
the Public Works Department and installed by the user. All other costs
shall be at the expense of the user requiring the meter(s), including any
piping revisions required to ensure that the exemption meter measures
only water not reaching the sanitary sewer. The City will charge for
each meter at the rate of 50% of the basic rate set for that size
meter charged each period, not a one-time payment, to compensate
for furnishing, reading and servicing the meter. This charge shall be in
addition to the wastewater service charge. The amount of exemption
water measured shall be subtracted from the total amount of water
used by the person to determine the applicable wastewater service
charge.
A. Holding tank waste: $/1,000 gal.
(Based on BOD @ 600 mg/L; SS @ 1,800 mg/L; NH3-N @ 100 mg/L; and
P @ 30 mg/L)
B. Septic tank waste: $/1,000 gal.
(Based on BOD @ 5,000 mg/L; SS @ 15,000 mg/L; NH3-N @ 350 mg/L;
and P @ 300 mg/L)
C. Leachate waste. Based upon analysis of a suitable sample(s), the charge
for leachate waste shall be calculated at the same rate as the surcharge
for industrial wastewater as authorized in § 493-29 of this article.
§ 493-29 REEDSBURG CODE § 493-32
1:424
Wis. Stats., as same has been, and from time to time may be, amended or
recreated, so far as applicable.
§ 493-33. Biannual audit.
A. An audit of the Department's financial standing shall be made
biannually. This audit will be used to review the adequacy of the
existing rates, and said rates shall be adjusted if necessary to provide
sufficient revenues to adequately finance the Department's operation in
accordance with the original intent of the rate structure. The biannual
audit and review shall also be used to ensure that each recipient of
sewage service (or user class) is charged in proportion to the cost of
providing said recipient (or user class) with sewage service. Excess
revenues collected from a class of users shall be applied to the costs
attributable to that class for the next year, and the rates shall be
adjusted accordingly.
B. All sewer customers shall be notified annually of the current sewer
charges.
C. Income from the wastewater service charges that constitutes funds
designated as "replacement" shall be separately accounted for and shall
not be utilized for any other purpose except replacement. These costs
include costs necessary to ensure replacement of all equipment,
accessories or appurtenances to maintain the wastewater facilities.
D. Income from the wastewater service charges that constitutes funds
designated as "depreciation" shall be separately accounted for and shall
not be utilized for any other purpose except reconstruction or
improvements of the collection system.
E. Water bypass meters prohibited in all residential zones. Separate
meters, commonly referred to as "sewer deduct meters," installed by
the property owner for the purpose of measuring water usage for lawn
watering, car washing, swimming pools or similar such usages of water
which bypasses the City sewer systems are prohibited in the City. Sewer
deduct meters existing at the time of passage of this article may
continue to be used until the property changes ownership or the
existing meter fails, at which time the meter's use shall cease and shall
be removed. [Amended 8-27-2007]
§ 493-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-33
1:425

ARTICLE VIII
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted as Sec. 13.09 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 493-34. Notice and correction.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be
served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and provide a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
Within the period of time stated in such notice, the offender shall
permanently cease all violations.
§ 493-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person that continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for
in § 493-34 shall, upon conviction thereof, pay forfeiture in the amount of at
least $50 and not more than $1,000 for each violation. Each day in which
any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 493-36. Liability.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the City and others, as their interests may appear, for any expense,
loss, or damage occasioned the City or others by reason of such violation,
including any costs in connection with repairing damages to the wastewater
facilities or any downstream user of facilities damaged as a result of a
prohibited discharge or any other violation of this chapter.
§ 493-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-36
1:427
Chapter 501
SEX OFFENDERS RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 501-1. Purpose.
The City finds and declares that sex offenders are a serious threat to
public safety. When convicted sex offenders reenter society, they are likely
to be rearrested for a new rape or sexual assault. Given the high rate
of recidivism for sexual offenders and that reducing opportunity and
temptation is important to minimizing the risk of reoffense, there is a
need to protect children where they congregate or play in public places,
in addition to the protections afforded by state law, near schools, day-care
centers and other places children frequent. The City finds and declares
that in addition to schools, day-care centers, and public parks; children
congregate at movie theaters, swimming pools, athletic fields, libraries and
recreational clubs and academies.
§ 501-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIME AGAINST CHILDREN — Any of the following offenses set forth
within the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, or the laws of this or any other
state or the federal government, having like elements necessary for the
conviction, respectively:
A. Section 940.225(1), First Degree Sexual Assault;
B. Section 940.225(2), Second Degree Sexual Assault;
C. Section 940.225(3), Third Degree Sexual Assault;
D. Section 940.22(2), Sexual Exploitation by Therapist;
Section 940.30, False Imprisonment; victim was minor and not the
offender's child;
E.
Section 940.31, Kidnapping; victim was minor and not the offender's
child;
F.
G. Section 944.01, Rape (prior statute);
H. Section 944.06, Incest;
I. Section 944.10, Sexual Intercourse with a Child (prior statute);
J. Section 944.11, Indecent Behavior with a Child (prior statute);
K. Section 944.12, Enticing Child for Immoral Purposes (prior statute);
L. Section 948.02(1), First Degree Sexual Assault of a Child;
§ 493-36 REEDSBURG CODE § 501-2
1:428
PERSON — A person who has been convicted of or has been found
delinquent of or has been found not guilty by reason of disease or mental
defect of a sexually violent offense and/or crime against children.
RESIDENCE — The place where a person sleeps, which may include more
than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
SEXUALLY VIOLENT OFFENSE — Shall have the meaning as set forth in
§ 980.01(6), Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
§ 501-3. Residency restrictions.
M. Section 948.02(2), Second Degree Sexual Assault of a Child;
N. Section 948.05, Sexual Exploitation of a Child;
O. Section 948.055, Causing a Child to View or Listen to Sexual Activity;
P. Section 948.06, Incest with a Child;
Q. Section 948.07, Child Enticement;
R. Section 948.08, Soliciting a Child for Prostitution;
Section 948.095, Sexual Assault of a Child by School Staff Person or a
Person who Works or Volunteers with Children;
S.
Section 948.11(2)(a) or (am), Exposing Child to Harmful Material;
felony sections;
T.
U. Section 948.12, Possession of Child Pornography;
V. Section 948.13, Convicted Child Sex Offender Working with Children;
W. Section 948.30, Abduction of Another's Child;
Section 971.17, Not Guilty by Reason of Mental Disease of an included
offense; and
X.
Y. Section 975.06, Sex Crimes Law Commitment.
A. A person shall not reside within 1,500 feet of the real property
comprising any of the following:
(1) Any facility for children [which means a public or private school; a
group home, as defined in § 48.02(7), Wis. Stats.; a residential care
center for children and youth, as defined in § 48.02(15d), Wis.
Stats.; a shelter care facility, as defined in § 48.02(17), Wis. Stats.; a
day-care center licensed under § 48.65, Wis. Stats.; a day-care
program established under § 120.13(14), Wis. Stats.; a day-care
provider certified under § 48.651, Wis. Stats., or a youth center, as
defined in § 961.01(22), Wis. Stats.]; and/or
(2) Any facility used for:
(a) A public park, parkway, parkland, park facility;
§ 501-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 501-3
1:429
§ 501-4. Residency restriction exceptions.
A person residing within 1,500 feet of the real property comprising any of
the uses enumerated in § 501-3 above does not commit a violation of this
chapter if any of the following apply:
§ 501-5. Original domicile restriction.
In addition to and notwithstanding the foregoing, but subject to § 501-4
above, no person and no individual who has been convicted of a sexually
violent offense and/or a crime against children shall be permitted to reside
in the City of Reedsburg, unless such person was domiciled in the City of
Reedsburg at the time of the offense resulting in the person's most recent
(b) A public library;
(c) A recreational trail;
(d) A public playground;
(e) A school for children;
(f) Athletic fields used by children;
(g) A movie theater;
(h) A day-care center;
(i) Any specialized school for children, including, but not limited
to, a gymnastics academy, dance academy or music school;
(j) A public or private golf course or range; and
(k) Public swimming pool or other aquatic facilities open to the
public.
B. The distance shall be measured from the closest boundary line of the
real property supporting the residence of a person to the closest real
property boundary line of the applicable, above-enumerated use(s). A
map depicting the above-enumerated uses and the resulting residency
restriction distances, as amended from time to time, is on file in the
Office of the City Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection.
A. The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile
facility, or other correctional institution or facility.
B. The person has established a residence prior to the effective date of this
chapter on December 20, 2007, which is within 1,500 feet of any of the
uses enumerated in § 501-3 above, or such enumerated use is newly
established after such effective date and it is located within such 1,000
feet of a residence of a person which was established prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
C. The person is a minor or ward under guardianship.
§ 501-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 501-5
1:430
conviction for committing the sexually violent offense and/or crime against
children.
§ 501-6. Child safety zones.
§ 501-7. Child safety zone exceptions.
A person does not commit a violation of § 501-6 above and the enumerated
uses may allow such person on the property supporting such use if any of
the following apply:
A. No person shall enter or be present upon any real property upon which
there exists any facility used for or which supports a use of:
(1) A public park, parkway, parkland, park facility;
(2) A public library;
(3) A recreational trail;
(4) A public playground;
(5) A school for children;
(6) Athletic fields used by children;
(7) A movie theater;
(8) A day-care center;
(9) Any specialized school for children, including, but not limited to, a
gymnastics academy, dance academy or music school;
(10) A public or private golf course or range;
(11) Public swimming pool or other aquatic facilities open to the public;
and
(12) Any facility for children [which means a public or private school; a
group home, as defined in § 48.02(7), Wis. Stats.; a residential care
center for children and youth, as defined in § 48.02(15d), Wis.
Stats.; a shelter care facility, as defined in § 48.02(17), Wis. Stats.; a
day-care center licensed under § 48.65, Wis. Stats.; a day care
program established under § 120.13(14), Wis. Stats.; a day-care
provider certified under § 48.651, Wis. Stats., or a youth center, as
defined in § 961.01(22), Wis. Stats.].
B. A map depicting the above-enumerated uses and the resulting
residency restriction distances, as amended from time to time, is on file
in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection.
A. The property supporting an enumerated use under § 501-6 also
supports a church, synagogue, mosque, temple or other house of
§ 501-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 501-7
1:431
religious worship (collectively "church"), subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Entrance and presence upon the property occurs only during hours
of worship or other religious program/service as posted to the
public; and
(2) Written advance notice is made from the person to an individual in
charge of the church and approval from an individual in charge of
the church as designated by the church is made in return of the
attendance by the person; and
(3) The person shall not participate in any religious education
programs which include individuals under the age of 18.
B. The property supporting an enumerated use under § 501-6 also
supports a use lawfully attended by a person's natural or adopted
child(ren), which child's use reasonably requires the attendance of the
person as the child's parent upon the property, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Entrance and presence upon the property occurs only during the
hours of activity related to the use as posted to the public; and
(2) Written advance notice is made from the person to an individual in
charge of the use upon the property and approval from an
individual in charge of the use upon the property as designated by
the owner of the use upon the property is made in return of the
attendance by the person.
C. The property supporting an enumerated use under § 501-6 also
supports a polling location in a local, state or federal election, subject to
the following conditions:
(1) The person is eligible to vote;
(2) The designated polling place for the person is an enumerated use;
and
(3) The person enters the polling place property, proceeds to cast a
ballot with whatever usual and customary assistance is provided to
any member of the electorate; and the person vacates the property
immediately after voting.
D. The property supporting an enumerated use under § 501-6 also
supports an elementary or secondary school lawfully attended by a
person as a student, under which circumstances the person who is a
student may enter upon that property supporting the school at which
the person is enrolled, as is reasonably required for the educational
purposes of the school.
§ 501-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 501-8
1:432
§ 501-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
If any person violates § 501-2 above by establishing a residence within
1,500 feet of those premises as described herein, without any exception(s)
as also set forth above, the City Attorney, upon referral from the Chief
of Police and the written determination by the Chief of Police that upon
all of the facts and circumstances and the purpose of this chapter, such
residence occupancy presents an activity or use of property that interferes
substantially with the comfortable enjoyment of life, health, safety of
another or other, shall bring an action in the name of the City in the Circuit
Court for Sauk County to permanently enjoin such residency as a public
nuisance. If a person violates § 501-6 above, in addition to the aforesaid
injunctive relief, such person shall be subject to forfeiture of not less than
$25 nor more than $250 for each offense. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the City may undertake all
other legal and equitable remedies to prevent or remove a violation of this
chapter.
Chapter 509
SNOWMOBILES
§ 509-1. Prohibition.
Unless otherwise authorized by law, snowmobiling shall be prohibited in the
City of Reedsburg except for:
A. On public and private property presently designated for a snowmobile
trail located within the City of Reedsburg, tying the state-funded
snowmobile trail east of Reedsburg with the 400 Trail which begins in
the center of Reedsburg, plus two dead-end spur trails [Subsection A(3)
and (10)]. The areas affected are:
(1) Starting in the S 1/2 of Sections 12 and 11 in the Town of
Reedsburg, T12N, R4E contained within the City of Reedsburg;
proceeding west over lands owned by Skinner Transfer Corp. and
Lakeside Foods to west side of Veterans Drive.
(2) Operating north on Veterans Drive right-of-way along Reedsburg
Airport, VFW Hall and Burger King property.
(3) Crossing State Highway 23/33 at the intersection of Veterans Drive
to provide access to food, fuel and lodging from the businesses
along 23/33.
(4) Proceeding west along 23/33 to the west side of airport, then south
and southwest on a line parallel to the open drainage ditch located
on Reedsburg Airport property.
(5) Crossing Commercial Avenue at the intersection of the abovereferenced
drainage ditch.
§ 501-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 509-1
1:433
Chapter 518
SOLID WASTE
§ 518-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote recycling, composting and
resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling
program, as provided in Ch. 287, Wis. Stats., and Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm.
Code.
§ 518-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 287.09, Wis. Stats.
§ 518-3. Administration.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Public Works
Director.
§ 518-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIMETAL CONTAINER — A container for carbonated or malt beverages that
is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
(6) On South Dewey Avenue proceeding south to a point 200 feet south
of the railroad crossing and proceeding westerly on private
property to a point where the trail crosses Division Street into the
City of Reedsburg's Wastewater Treatment Facility.
(7) Proceeding west through South Park to a point where Beaver
Street and South Pine Street intersect.
(8) Proceeding north on South Pine Street to a point where it turns
onto private property to South Avenue to the 400 Trail Railhead
(Reedsburg Depot).
(9) Snowmobile travel on the 400 Trail will be in compliance with an
arrangement between the City of Reedsburg and the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
(10) Proceeding on both sides of King Street traveling in the same
direction as vehicular traffic from a connection with the above
reference to trail parallel to the open drainage ditch located on the
Reedsburg Airport [Subsection A(4)] to a point 100 feet from its
intersection with Main Street (State Highway 23/33).
(11) Snowmobile operators shall have permission of private property
owners to cross the owner's property.
§ 509-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 518-4
1:434
COMMERCIAL WASTE — Any refuse that is accumulated in or upon
property used for wholesale or retail commercial purposes.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from form
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
GARBAGE — All kinds of organic kitchen waste resulting from the
preparation of food, and all decayed food products from any source
whatsoever.
HDPE — High-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code No. 2.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any refuse that is accumulated in or upon property
used for manufacturing or industrial purposes.
LDPE — Low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code No. 4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven,
refrigerator, stove, furnaces, boilers, heat exchanger, dishwashers and
water heaters.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A property having three or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
NEWSPAPER — A newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high-grade.
OTHER RESINS or MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins labeled by the SPI
code No. 7.
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
local governmental unit, as defined in § 66.0131, Wis. Stats., state agency
or authority or federal agency.
PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code No. 1.
PLASTIC CONTAINER — An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a retail sale.
A. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
B.
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
C.
§ 518-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-4
1:435
POST-CONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in § 291.01(7),
Wis. Stats., waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in § 289.01(35),
Wis. Stats.
PP — Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code No. 5.
PS — Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code No. 6.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code No. 3.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes lead acid batteries; major
appliances; waste oil; hard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper
or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers;
magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including
those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple
resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bimetal containers.
REFUSE — All waste matter such as ashes, tin cans, glass, paper, rags,
garden refuse, and other items of a similar nature, but shall not include
leaves, trees, tree limbs, earth, stone, sewage, demolition material or
manure.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT — A property having a single-family
dwelling or a duplex.
RESIDENTIAL WASTE COLLECTOR — The exclusive provider of residential
solid waste services selected by the City to provide such services.
SOLID WASTE — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(33), Wis. Stats.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(35), Wis.
Stats.
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste.
TREATMENT — Includes incineration.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact
root balls.
§ 518-5. License required.
A. Nonresidential waste collector. Collector of nonresidential waste may
not operate in the City of Reedsburg without a nonexclusive
nonresidential waste collector license issued by the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
§ 518-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 518-5
1:436
§ 518-6. Selection of residential waste collector.
§ 518-7. Mandatory residential service.
§ 518-8. Fees; solid waste fund.
§ 518-9. Frequency of pickups.
B. Residential waste collector. Residential waste in the City shall be
collected only by the exclusive residential waste collector selected and
licensed by the City.
A. On or before May 1, 2002, the City shall solicit bids for the exclusive
residential solid waste collection license. Applications shall be
submitted not later than June 1, 2002, on forms to be prepared by the
City Administrator.
B. The applications shall be forwarded to the Public Works Committee,
which shall make a recommendation to the Common Council.
C. The Common Council shall select a licensee for a three-year period
commencing September 1, 2002.
D. The Mayor and City Clerk-Treasurer are authorized to enter into a
three-year contract with the licensee.
E. The license application and issuance process shall be repeated every
three years.
A. The residents of residential dwelling units shall have their solid waste
and recycling collected by the Residential Waste Collector contracted
by the City. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. The residential waste collector shall provide its residential customers a
container for solid waste and a container for recyclables.
A. The fees to be paid for the residential waste collection service shall be
established from time to time by the Common Council by resolution.
B. Fees shall be billed by the City on an annual basis as a special charge on
the tax roll.
C. Unpaid fees may be collected as a special charge against real property
pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
D. Fees collected for residential waste collection services shall be to a
separate, segregated Solid Waste Fund to be managed and
administered by the City Administrator. The City Administrator may
create subaccounts within the fund and may establish rules for the
administration of the residential solid waste collection service.
§ 518-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-9
1:437
§ 518-10. Collection facilities and equipment; condition.
§ 518-11. Condition of containers and refuse.
§ 518-12. Transport to approved facilities.
Solid waste and recyclables generated in the City shall be disposed of at
sites approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or other
approval agency.
A. The residential waste collector shall collect solid waste and recyclables
from its customers at least weekly at the same time.
B. Collections shall not take place on the following holidays: New Year's
Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and
Christmas. Collections scheduled for those days shall take place within
48 hours of the scheduled collection day.
C. Nonresidential collections shall take place pursuant to schedules
negotiated between the providers and their customers.
A. All facilities and equipment used in the collection of solid waste and
recyclables in the City shall be kept and maintained in a safe, clean and
sanitary condition.
B. All vehicles used in the collection of solid waste and recyclables in the
City shall be completely enclosed.
C. All solid waste and recyclables collected in the City shall be deposited
directly from the collection container to the collection vehicle.
A. All solid waste shall be placed in the pickup area in a covered metal or
plastic container with a close-fitting lid.
B. The containers for solid waste and recyclables shall be well-drained and
shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
C. Containers with residential solid waste and recyclables shall be placed
curbside for pickup unless the customer and the collector agree upon
an alternate pickup site.
D. The City may, from time to time, establish by resolution rules and
guidelines regarding the preparation and collection of solid wastes and
recyclables.
E. A collector of solid waste or recyclables may refuse to collect refuse
which is not in accord with this chapter. If refuse is refused, the
collector shall advise the customer, in writing, of the reason by
attaching a tag to the refused refuse or container.
§ 518-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 518-13
1:438
§ 518-13. Separation of recyclable materials.
The following recyclable materials shall be separated from post-consumer
waste:
§ 518-14. Separation requirements exempted.
The separation requirements of § 518-13 of this chapter do not apply to the
following:
A. Lead acid batteries.
B. Major appliances.
C. Waste oil.
D. Yard waste.
E. Aluminum containers.
F. Bimetal containers.
G. Corrugated paper or other container board.
H. Foam polystyrene packaging.
I. Glass containers.
J. Magazines.
K. Newspaper.
L. Office paper.
M. Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and
other resins or multiple resins.
N. Steel containers.
O. Waste tires.
A. Solid waste and recyclables processed at a processing facility licensed
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that recovers the
materials from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
B. Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less
than 30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste
burned as supplemental fuel.
C. A recyclable material specified in § 518-13 for which a variance has
been granted by the Department of Natural Resources under
§ 287.11(2m), Wis. Stats., or § NR 544.14, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 518-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-15
1:439
§ 518-15. Care of separated recyclable materials.
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in
accordance with § 518-13 of this chapter shall be clean and kept free
of contaminants such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other
nonrecyclable materials, including but not limited to household hazardous
waste, medical waste, and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable
materials shall be stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain
and other inclement weather conditions.
§ 518-16. Disposal of lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste
oil and yard waste.
§ 518-17. General prohibitions.
A. Lead acid batteries shall be disposed of as provided in § 287.18, Wis.
Stats.
B. Major appliances shall be picked up at curbside on an as-needed basis
by a licensed hauler or during annual or semiannual pickup events
sponsored by the City. The property owner shall be responsible for the
pickup charges.
C. Waste oil may be delivered to service stations within the City with
facilities to receive the oil or may be disposed of as provided by
§ 287.15, Wis. Stats.
D. Yard waste shall be disposed of through the use of personal compost
piles with larger materials being broken down, packaged and picked up
on a semiannual/annual basis by the City.
A. No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a
solid waste treatment facility any of the recyclable materials specified
in § 518-13 which have been separated for recycling, except waste tires
may be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
B. No person shall deposit, throw, or place any solid waste or recyclables
on or within any public street, alley, park, sidewalk or other public
place, or within or upon any private property or premises, whether
owned, kept or controlled by such person or not, unless the same shall
be placed in containers as herein provided, or disposed of through a
mechanical disposal unit connected to a sanitary sewer.
C. No person shall bury or burn any solid waste or recyclables on private
or public property but cause to be collected and/or disposed of in the
manner herein provided.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person other than a
City-authorized refuse collector shall collect or interfere with any
garbage, refuse, or recycling materials after they shall have been put
into a recycling receptacle and deposited at the curb for the collector,
nor shall any person molest, hinder, or delay or in any manner interfere
§ 518-15 REEDSBURG CODE § 518-17
1:440
§ 518-18. Enforcement.
§ 518-19. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
with the City-authorized refuse collector in the discharge of its duties.
No person shall hoard garbage for periods longer than a normal
collection period. After any recyclable are placed at the curb for
collection, they shall become and are the property of the City of
Reedsburg. No one other than the authorized refuse collector for the
City of Reedsburg is allowed to collect, pick up or receive recyclable
materials placed at the curb for collection. [Added 5-14-2007]
A. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the City
of Reedsburg may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling,
post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites
and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records
relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when
necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse
access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized representative
of the City of Reedsburg who requests access for purposes of inspection
and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct,
hamper or interfere with such an inspection.
B. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be issued a
citation by the Public Works Director or his/her designee to collect
forfeitures. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding
under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other
matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the
same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation
under this subsection.
C. The occupant of a one- or two-family dwelling may have the opportunity
to correct a violation of this chapter and retain the material not
prepared properly for collection for the next regular pickup.
D. Penalties for violating this chapter may be assessed as follows:
(1) Any person who violates § 518-18A may be required to forfeit $50
for a first violation, $200 for a second violation and not more than
$2,000 for a third or subsequent violation, together with taxable
court costs.
(2) Any person who violates a provision of this chapter, except
§ 518-18A, may be required to forfeit not less than $10 nor more
than $1,000 for each violation, together with taxable court costs.
§ 518-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-19
1:441
Where any terms or requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or
conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply.
Where a provision of this chapter is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a
standard in Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the ordinance provision
is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin
Statutes and Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code, standards in effect on the date of
the adoption of this chapter, or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this chapter.
§ 518-20. Severability.
Should any portion of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not
be affected.
§ 518-21. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply.
Chapter 530
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
§ 530-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EROSION CONTROL —
PERMIT APPLICATION —
Reducing sediment and pollutants in runoff during construction;
and
(1)
(2) Reducing sediment and pollutants in post-development runoff.
(1) Stormwater management and erosion control permit application;
Written stormwater management plan with accompanying
drawings and supporting engineering data;
(2)
Written erosion control plan with accompanying drawings and
supporting engineering data;
(3)
(4) Maintenance agreement; and
(5) Fees.
§ 518-19 REEDSBURG CODE § 530-1
1:442
§ 530-2. Adoption of standards.
The provisions and regulations of Ch. 62, Wis. Stats., and Chs. NR 281, NR
283 and NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code, adopted by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources are hereby made a part of this chapter by reference, and
shall extend over and govern all of the stormwater management systems
installed, maintained, altered or repaired in the City of Reedsburg.
§ 530-3. Inspection and supervision.
The City Engineer and Building Inspector or their designee shall administer,
direct and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 530-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all land disturbing activities greater than one
acre and land disturbing activities of less than one acre which are adjacent
to the FEMA-designated floodplain or the City's primary north-to-south
storm drainageways or adjacent to Babb Creek, and said land disturbing
activities will impact stormwater flow to or in said floodplain, drainageway
or Babb Creek; provided, however, for the following exemptions and
exclusions:
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT —
Reducing the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and 100-year,
twenty-four-hour storm post-developed peak discharges to
predeveloped levels;
(1)
(2) Reducing flooding or erosive discharges of runoff; and
(3) Infiltrating stormwater where applicable.
B. The definition of terms as described in § NR 151.002, Wis. Adm. Code,
shall have the same meanings in this chapter.
A. Erosion control exemptions.
(1) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
(2) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(3) Routine maintenance for project sites of under one acre of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
B. Stormwater discharge/detention exemptions:
(1) A redevelopment post-construction site with no increase in exposed
parking lots or roads.
(2) A post-construction site with less than 10% connected
imperviousness based on complete development of the post-
§ 530-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-4
1:443
construction site, provided the cumulative area of all parking lots
and rooftops is less than one acre.
(3) Agricultural facilities and practices.
(4) Silviculture activities.
(5) Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and fiberoptic
lines. This exemption does not apply to the construction of
any aboveground structures associated with utility construction.
C. Stormwater infiltration exclusions:
(1) Areas associated with tier-one industrial facilities identified in § NR
216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including storage, loading, rooftop
and parking.
(2) Storage and loading areas of tier-two industrial facilities identified
in § NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code. Runoff from tier-two parking
and rooftop areas may be infiltrated, but may require pretreatment.
(3) Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
(4) Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet downgradient
of karst features.
(5) Areas with less than three feet separation distance from the bottom
of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high
groundwater or the top of bedrock. This does not prohibit
infiltration of roof runoff.
(6) Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and institutional
parking lots and roads and residential arterial roads with less than
five feet separation distance from the bottom of the infiltration
system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of
bedrock.
(7) Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in § NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code, or within 100 feet of a
private well as specified in § NR 812.08(4), Wis. Adm. Code, for
runoff infiltrated from commercial, industrial and institutional land
uses or regional devices for residential development.
(8) Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in § NR
720.03(2), Wis. Adm. Code, are present in the soil through which
infiltration will occur.
(9) Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the following soil
characteristics between the bottom of the infiltration system and
the seasonal high groundwater and top of bedrock: at least a threefoot
soil layer with 20% fines or greater; or at least a five-foot soil
layer with 10% fines or greater. This does not apply where the soil
§ 530-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 530-4
1:444
§ 530-5. Permitting procedures, fees and requirements.
medium within the infiltration system provides an equivalent level
of protection. This does not prohibit infiltration of roof runoff.
D. Stormwater infiltration exemptions:
(1) Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6 inches/
hour measured at the site.
(2) Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for
commercial and industrial development.
(3) Redevelopment post-construction sites.
(4) In-fill development areas less than five acres.
(5) Infiltration areas during periods when the soil on the site is frozen.
(6) Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and
arterial residential roads.
A. Procedures for permit applicants and the City Engineer or Building
Inspector:
(1) All land disturbing activities that are governed by this Code shall
submit a permit application 10 business days before planned land
disturbing activities.
(2) The permit applicant shall be the landowner of the property. The
application will require the landowner's signature.
(3) Within 10 business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, the City Engineer shall inform the applicant whether
the application is approved or disapproved.
(4) If the permit application is approved, the City Engineer shall issue
the permit.
(5) If the permit application is disapproved, the City Engineer shall
detail, in writing, the reasons for disapproval.
(6) The City Engineer may request additional information from the
applicant. If additional information is submitted, the City Engineer
shall have 10 business days from the date the additional
information is received to inform the applicant that the permit
application is either approved or disapproved.
(7) Failure by the City Engineer to inform the permit applicant of a
decision within 15 business days of a required submittal shall be
deemed to mean approval of the submittal, and the applicant may
proceed as if a permit had been issued.
§ 530-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-5
1:445
(8) The applicant shall notify the City Engineer when the project has
been completed and final stabilization of the site has occurred. The
City Engineer, or other designee, will perform a final inspection
within three business days of the notification and submit a written
approval or disapproval within five business days of the final
inspection.
(9) A denial of a permit may be appealed to the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
B. Fees for permit application:
(1) Fee amount shall be as set forth in the current City Fee Schedule on
file in the City's offices. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) The fee is nonrefundable after approval or disapproval of permit
application has been issued.
(3) The fee will be doubled if land disturbing activities occur prior to
permit application approval.
(4) The fee for the permit covers the initial submittal and two
resubmittals for a project. Additional fees will be required for each
resubmittal after the third disapproval.
C. All permits issued under this chapter shall be subject to the following
conditions, and the permit applicant shall be deemed to have accepted
these conditions:
(1) The City Engineer may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a
permit condition immediately following written notification to the
permittee. An action by the City Engineer to suspend or revoke this
permit may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsibility of
the permittee to comply with other applicable federal, state, and
local laws and regulations.
(3) Installation, inspection, recording, repairs and maintenance of all
stormwater management and erosion control measures shall be in
accordance with the approved stormwater management and
erosion control plan.
(4) The permittee shall notify the City Engineer at least three business
days before commencing any work in conjunction with the
stormwater management and erosion control plan and within three
business days upon completion of the stormwater management
practices. If required as a special condition to the permit, the
permittee shall make additional notifications in accordance to a
schedule established by the City Engineer.
§ 530-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 530-5
1:446
§ 530-6. Stormwater management design criteria.
All land disturbing activities governed by this chapter shall model the peak
flows using TR-55 methods and infiltration rates using SLAMM, P8 or an
equivalent program:
(5) The City Engineer shall be notified of any modifications to an
approved stormwater management and erosion control plan. The
City Engineer may require that the proposed modifications
supporting documentation be submitted for approval prior to
installation.
(6) The City Engineer shall perform any work or operations necessary
to bring the site into conformance with the approved stormwater
management and erosion control plan, and the permittee consents
to a special assessment or charge against the property as
authorized under Subch. VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or to charging
such costs against the financial guarantee posted under § 530-11.
(7) If so directed by the City Engineer, the permittee shall repair, at the
permittee's own expense, all damage to adjoining municipal
facilities and drainageways caused by runoff, where such damage
is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved
stormwater management and erosion control plan.
(8) The permittee shall provide property access to the City Engineer
for inspecting the property for compliance with the approved
stormwater management and erosion control plan.
(9) Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in
direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from
a site, the City Engineer may require the permittee to make
appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners
concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or public
safety.
(10) The permittee is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties
detailed in § 530-12 if the permittee fails to comply with the terms
of this permit.
D. Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions
established by City Engineer in additional to the requirements needed
to meet the performance standards.
E. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of
issuance through the date the City Engineer notifies the responsible
party that all stormwater management and erosion control practices
have passed the final inspection.
A. Peak discharge management design.
§ 530-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-6
1:447
(1) By design, BMPs shall reduce the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fiftyand
100-year, twenty-four-hour storm post-developed peak
discharges to predeveloped levels.
(2) Predevelopment conditions shall assume good hydrologic
conditions for appropriate land covers as identified in TR-55.
However, when predevelopment land cover is cropland, the runoff
curve numbers in Table 1 shall be used.
Table 1
Maximum Predevelopment Runoff Curve Numbers for
Cropland Areas
Hydrologic Soil
Group
A B C D
Runoff Curve
Number
56 70 79 83
(3) Post-development conditions shall assume good hydrologic
conditions for appropriate land covers as identified in TR-55.
(4) The BMP shall be designed to release peak flows at a safe rate for
the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and 100-year, twenty-fourhour
storm events.
B. Infiltration design.
(1) BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate
runoff to the maximum extent practicable.
(2) For residential developments, one of the following shall be met:
(a) Post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 90% of
the predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an average
annual rainfall. No more than 1% of the project site is required
as an effective infiltration area.
(b) Infiltrate 25% of the post-development runoff from the twoyear,
twenty-four-hour design storm event. Separate curve
numbers for pervious and impervious surfaces shall be used to
calculate runoff volumes and not composite curve numbers as
defined in TR-55. No more than 1% of the project site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
C. For nonresidential development, including commercial, industrial and
institutional development, one of the following shall be met:
(1) Post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 60% of the
predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an average annual
rainfall. No more than 2% of the project site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
§ 530-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 530-6
1:448
§ 530-7. Stormwater management plan.
All land disturbing activities that are governed by this chapter shall have
a stormwater management plan. The stormwater management plan shall
contain, at a minimum, the following information:
(2) Infiltrate 10% of the runoff from the two-year, twenty-four-hour
design storm. Separate curve numbers for pervious and impervious
surfaces shall be used to calculate runoff volumes, and not
composite curve numbers as defined in TR-55. No more than 2% of
the project site is required as an effective infiltration area.
D. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot
runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial,
industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system.
The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system
from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect
groundwater quality. Pretreatment options may include, but are not
limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration,
swales or filter strips.
A. Name, address, and telephone number for the following:
(1) Landowner.
(2) Developer.
(3) Stormwater management designer.
(4) Contractor responsible for installation of stormwater management
practices.
(5) Responsible party for reporting, monitoring, maintaining and
repairing stormwater management facilities during construction.
(6) Responsible party for reporting, monitoring, maintaining and
repairing stormwater management facilities post-construction.
B. A legal description of the property to be developed and street address if
applicable.
C. Predevelopment site conditions map(s), including:
(1) A scaled map with North arrow.
(2) A vertical bench mark.
(3) The property boundary, rights-of-way and easements.
(4) Predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups.
(5) Predeveloped cover type and condition.
(6) Watershed boundaries used in hydrology determinations.
§ 530-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-7
1:449
(7) Existing two-foot contour interval or less.
(8) Topography and drainage patterns, including enough of the
contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and
from the site.
(9) Watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site.
(10) Rivers, ponds, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site.
(11) Limits of the 100-year floodplain.
(12) Location of wells and wellhead protection areas adjacent to the
site.
(13) Limits of land disturbing activities.
(14) All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s).
D. Post-development site conditions map(s) including:
(1) A scaled map with North arrow.
(2) A vertical benchmark.
(3) The property boundary, rights-of-way and easements.
(4) Predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups.
(5) Predeveloped cover type and condition.
(6) Watershed boundaries used in hydrology determinations.
(7) Proposed two-foot contour interval or less.
(8) Topography and drainage patterns, including enough of the
contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through and
from the site.
(9) Watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site.
(10) Rivers, ponds, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site.
(11) Limits of the 100-year floodplain.
(12) Location of wells and wellhead protection areas adjacent to the
site.
(13) Limits of land disturbing activities.
§ 530-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 530-7
1:450
(14) All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s).
E. Stormwater management map(s), including:
(1) A scaled map with North arrow.
(2) A vertical bench mark.
(3) The proposed property boundary, rights-of-way and easements.
(4) Proposed two-foot contour interval or less.
(5) Topography, including enough of the contiguous properties to show
runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site.
(6) Watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site.
(7) Rivers, ponds, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site.
(8) Limits of the 100-year floodplain.
(9) Location of wells and wellhead protection areas adjacent to the
site.
(10) Limits of land disturbing activities.
(11)BMP detail information such as location, storage volume, size,
bottom elevation, overflow elevation, outlet structure, top of berm
elevation and all other information required to determine that the
BMP was adequately sized.
F. Hydrology computations as needed to show compliance with
performance standards. The computations shall be made for each
discharge point in the development, and the geographic areas used in
making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the
required map(s).
G. Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the
placement and design of stormwater management measures. Detailed
drawings including cross sections and profiles of all permanent
stormwater conveyance and treatment practices.
H. A description and installation schedule for the stormwater management
practices needed to meet the performance standards.
I. A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater
management practice as stated in § 530-9D.
J. Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of
each stormwater management practice.
§ 530-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-7
1:451
§ 530-8. Erosion control design criteria.
All land disturbing activities that are governed by this chapter shall be
required to reduce erosion during construction and post-construction:
§ 530-9. Erosion control plan requirements.
All land-disturbing activities that are governed by this chapter shall submit
a written erosion control plan with accompanying drawings and supporting
K. Other information requested, in writing, by the City Engineer or City
Engineer's designee to determine compliance of the proposed
stormwater management measures with the provisions of this chapter.
L. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall
be certified by a licensed professional engineer to be prepared in
accordance with accepted engineering practice and requirements of
this chapter.
A. Erosion control during construction. By design, BMPs shall reduce the
sediment load in runoff by 80%.
B. Post-construction erosion and sediment control:
(1) For new development, by design, reduce the total suspended solids
load by 80% based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to
no runoff management controls.
(2) For redevelopment, by design, reduce the total suspended solids
load by 40% based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to
no runoff management controls.
(3) For in-fill development under five acres that occurs within 10 years
after the effective date of this chapter, by design, reduce the total
suspended solids load by 40% based on an average annual rainfall,
as compared to no runoff management controls.
(4) For in-fill development that occurs 10 or more years after the
effective date of this chapter, by design, reduce the total suspended
solids load by 80% based on an average annual rainfall, as
compared to no runoff management controls.
(5) Notwithstanding Subsection B(1) to (4), if the design cannot
achieve the applicable total suspended solids reduction specified,
the erosion control plan shall include a written and site-specific
explanation why that level of reduction is not attained and the total
suspended solids load shall be reduced to the maximum extent
practicable.
(6) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has created
Conservation Practice Standards which shall be used to design
BMPs.
§ 530-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 530-9
1:452
engineering data which shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
§ 530-10. Maintenance agreement.
A. Name, address, and telephone number for the following:
(1) Landowner.
(2) Developer.
(3) Erosion control designer.
(4) Contractor responsible for installation of erosion control practices.
(5) Responsible party for reporting, monitoring, maintaining and
repairing erosion control measures during construction.
(6) Responsible party for reporting, monitoring, maintaining and
repairing erosion control measures post-construction.
B. A legal description of the property to be developed and street address,
if applicable.
C. A description and installation schedule for the erosion control practices
needed to meet the performance standards.
D. A maintenance plan developed for erosion control practice, including
the required maintenance activities and maintenance activity schedule.
E. Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of
each permanent erosion control structure.
F. Other information requested, in writing, by the City Engineer to
determine compliance of the proposed stormwater management
measures with the provisions of this chapter.
G. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall
be certified by a licensed professional engineer to be prepared in
accordance with accepted engineering practice and requirements of
this chapter.
A. A maintenance agreement for stormwater management practices shall
be between the City and the responsible party to provide for
maintenance of stormwater practices beyond the duration period of the
permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the County
Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding
upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the stormwater
management practices.
B. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following information
and provisions:
§ 530-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-10
1:453
§ 530-11. Financial guarantee.
(1) Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the
drainage area served by the facilities.
(2) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the
stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater
management plan.
(3) Identification of the responsible party(parties) for long-term
maintenance of the stormwater management practices identified in
the stormwater management plan.
(4) Requirement that the responsible party(parties) shall maintain
stormwater management practices in accordance with the
schedule in Subsection B(2).
(5) Authorization for the City Engineer to access the property to
conduct inspections of stormwater management practices as
necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and
operated in accordance with the agreement.
(6) A requirement of the City Engineer to maintain public records of
the results of the site inspections, to inform the party responsible
for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically
indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater
management practice into proper working condition.
(7) A requirement that the party designated under Subsection B(3) as
responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater
management practices be notified by the City Engineer of
maintenance problems which require correction. The specified
corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time
frame as set by the City Engineer.
(8) Authorization of the City Engineer to perform the corrected actions
identified in the inspection report if the responsible party
designated under Subsection B(3) does not make the required
corrections in the specified time period. The City Engineer shall
enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a
special assessment against the property pursuant to Subch. VII of
Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
A. The City may require the submittal of a financial guarantee by the
landowner, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to the City
Engineer. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by
the City Engineer to be the estimated cost of construction and the
estimated cost of maintenance of the stormwater management
practices during the period which the designated party in the
maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial
guarantee shall give the City Engineer the authorization to use the
funds to complete the stormwater management practices if the
§ 530-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 530-11
1:454
§ 530-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall fail
to obtain a permit as required hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, of the Code of the City of
Reedsburg.
Chapter 537
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
responsible party defaults or does not properly implement the approved
stormwater management plan, upon written notice to the responsible
party by the City Engineer that the requirements of this chapter have
not been met.
B. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as follows:
(1) The City Engineer shall release the portion of the financial
guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by
the City Engineer to complete installation of practices, upon
submission of as built plans by a licensed professional engineer.
The City Engineer may make provisions for a partial, pro rata
release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of
various development stages.
(2) The City Engineer shall release the portion of the financial
guarantee established under this section to assure maintenance of
stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by the City Engineer,
at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is
passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance
agreement.
§ 530-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-12
1:455

ARTICLE I
Official Map
[Adopted as Sec. 8.01 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 537-1. Map established.
An Official Map of the City of Reedsburg is hereby established to conserve
and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, a
copy of which is on file in the City Clerk-Treasurer's office at the Reedsburg
City Hall.
§ 537-2. Content.
Said Official Map shall show the streets, highways, parkways, parks, and
playgrounds heretofore laid out, adopted and established by law.
§ 537-3. Filing.
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall file with the Register of Deeds for Sauk
County, Wisconsin, a certificate showing that the City has established an
Official Map.
§ 537-4. Effect.
The placing of any street, highway, parkway, park or playground line or lines
upon the Official Map shall not in and of itself constitute or be deemed to
constitute the opening or establishing of any street, parkway, or playground,
or the taking or acceptance of any land for such purpose.
§ 537-5. Amendment. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
For the purpose of preserving the integrity of such Official Map, no permit
shall hereafter be issued for any building in the bed of any street, highway
or parkway shown or laid out on such map and no permit for the erection
of any building shall be issued unless a street, highway or parkway giving
access to such proposed structure has been duly placed on such map,
except as provided in § 62.23(6)(d) and (g), Wis. Stats. The proper official
authorized to issue building permits may require each applicant to submit
a plot plan certified by a registered survey and showing accurately the
location of any proposed building with reference to any street, highway
or parkway shown on the Official Map. The streets, highways or parkways
shown on the Official Map may be shown as extending beyond the
boundaries of the City a distance of 1 1/2 miles as provided by Ch. 236,
Wis. Stats. Any person desiring to construct a building in the bed of a
street, highway or parkway so shown as extended may apply to the Building
Inspector for a building permit. Unless such application is made and the
permit granted, or not denied, within 30 days, such person shall not be
entitled to compensation for damage to such building in the course of
construction of the street, highway or parkway. If the land within such
§ 537-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-5
1:457
mapped street, highway or parkway is not yielding a fair return, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may in a specific case, by the vote of a majority of its
members, grant a permit for a building in such street, highway or parkway
which will, as little as practicable, increase the cost of opening such street,
highway or parkway or tend to cause a change of such Official Map; and
such board may impose reasonable requirements as a condition of granting
such permit, which requirements shall be designed to promote the health,
convenience, safety or general welfare of the community. Such board shall
refuse a permit where the applicant will not be substantially damaged by
placing his building outside the mapped street, highway or parkway.
§ 537-6. Subdivision plat recommendations.
The Plan Commission shall require uniformity with the Official Map in
recommending approval of any subdivision plat.
§ 537-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 537-6
1:458
ARTICLE II
Street and Sidewalk Grades
[Adopted as Sec. 8.02 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 537-7. Establishment.
The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established by the
Common Council and recorded by the City Clerk-Treasurer in his/her office.
No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is
established.
§ 537-8. Alteration of grades prohibited.
No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public
ground in the City unless authorized to do so by the Public Works
Committee.
§ 537-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-8
1:459

ARTICLE III
Excavations
[Adopted as Sec. 8.03 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 537-9. Permit required. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No person or utility shall make or cause to be made any excavation in or
under any street, alley or sidewalk nor shall any curb be cut in the City
without first obtaining from the Public Works Committee a written permit
for undertaking such excavation. Fees as provided in the current City Fee
Schedule on file in the City’s offices or available on the City’s website shall
be made for each opening, which shall be paid at the time of application.
§ 537-10. Application. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The application for such excavation permit shall state the purpose for which
the permit is desired and the location of the proposed excavation, which
shall contain an agreement that the applicant will pay all damages to
persons or property, public or private, caused by the applicant, his agents,
employees, or servants in the doing or erection of the work for which
the permission is granted, and that he will save the City free and clear
of any damages or claims against it by reason of the application of the
work for which the permit is granted. Any applicant may be required, as a
condition to the granting of a permit, in the discretion of the Public Works
Committee, to file a bond in such amount as the Public Works Committee
shall determine to leave the street, sidewalk or alley in as good condition
as the same was in when the work was commenced, to at all times keep the
place where the excavation was made properly guarded by day and lighted
by night, and to save the City harmless from any and all damages, cost and
charges that may accrue from the applicant's use of such street, sidewalk
or alley by reason of such excavation.
§ 537-11. Restrictions.
When excavations are made under this article, the excavations shall not be
larger and shall not be left open longer than the necessities of the work
demand. In refilling the excavations, such as soil, stone and screen shall be
thoroughly and properly replaced and the surface of the street, sidewalk or
alley left in as good condition as the same was in before the excavation.
§ 537-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-11
1:461

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Construction and Repair; Curb and Gutter Construction
[Adopted as Secs. 8.04 and 8.05 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 537-12. Applicability of standards. [Amended 7-28-2008]
Section 66.0907, Wis. Stats., shall apply.
§ 537-13. Curb and gutter construction. [Amended 10-26-2009]
It is the policy of the City to have curb, gutter and sidewalks on all existing
and future streets. To effectuate this policy, the following procedures will be
followed:
A. An owner of unimproved land abutting on an existing opened street who
improves said property by erecting buildings thereon shall install curb,
gutter and sidewalk along the street abutting said land where curb,
gutter or sidewalk do not exist. No building permit shall be issued until
application for such curb, gutter and sidewalk grade has been made.
The finished lawn or surface grade shall conform to the sidewalk grade.
B. No street shall be opened or improved unless curb and gutter are
installed, at the expense of the abutting landowners, by the City, either
directly or by contract, at the time the street is opened. No application
for the opening and improving of a street shall be granted unless
accompanied by an application for curb and gutter signed by all owners
of land abutting on the street to be opened.
C. If the owner of any parcel of land fails to construct the curb, gutter and
sidewalk, in a timely manner as required by the City, said construction
may be performed by the City either directly or by contract, and the
cost may be charged to the property owner.
D. If the Common Council determines that curb, gutter and sidewalk shall
be constructed on any street in the City, it may be constructed by the
City, either directly or by contract, and the cost thereof shall be charged
to the property owner.
E. All subdivisions created after January 1, 1990, shall be subject to the
same curb and gutter requirements as set forth above; however,
sidewalks shall be installed in the subdivision upon the occurrence of
any of the following events:
(1) The passage of 24 months from the date that any property within
the subdivision is sold or transferred by the developer;
(2) The sale or transfer of 75% of the lots within the subdivision; or
(3) The passage of five years from the date that the original subdivision
plat is approved.
§ 537-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-13
1:463
F. The costs of constructing curb and gutter may be specially assessed
pursuant to the Code of the City of Reedsburg and state law. The costs
of constructing sidewalk may be assessed pursuant to § 537-12 and Wis.
Stats. § 66.0907.
§ 537-13 REEDSBURG CODE § 537-13
1:464
ARTICLE V
Obstructions and Encroachments
[Adopted as Sec. 8.06 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 537-14. Obstructions and encroachments prohibited.
No person shall encroach upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any
street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds, or land dedicated to public use, or
any part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed
or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which is the owner
or occupant, except as provided in § 537-15 of this article.
§ 537-15. Exceptions.
The prohibition of § 537-14 shall not apply to the following:
A. Signs or clocks attached to buildings which project no more than six
feet from the face of such building and which do not extend below any
point 10 feet above the sidewalk, street or alley.
B. Awnings which do not extend below any point seven feet above the
sidewalk, street, or alley.
C. Public utility encroachments duly authorized by state law or by the
Common Council.
D. Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded which
do not extend more than three feet on a sidewalk, provided such goods,
wares, etc., do not remain thereon for more than three hours.
E. Obstruction and encroachments are not to exceed 10 minutes except
for dumpsters associated with construction/remodeling projects, so
long as the dumpster has reflective tape or paint of at least 36 square
inches in an area on each side of each corner of the dumpster.
Dumpsters shall not be left on the street within 15 feet of an
intersection or within four feet of a driveway. Dumpsters shall not be
left on the street for more than 30 consecutive days. The vendor of the
dumpster shall be identified on the dumpster. [Amended 1-14-2008]
F. Tables and chairs for the consumption of food and nonalcohol
beverages may be situated within 15 feet of the property line but not
more than 1/3 of the width of the sidewalk, whichever is less.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
G. Merchants within the Business Improvement District may display
merchandise and provide tables, benches and chairs for customer
seating and/or for the service of food and nonalcohol beverages, as
approved by the Business Improvement District Board, within 15 feet of
the property line but no more than 1/3 of the width of the sidewalk,
whichever is less. [Amended 7-9-2007; at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 537-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-15
1:465

ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 1-26-2009 (Sec. 8.07 of the former Municipal Codebook)]
§ 537-16. Owner's responsibility. [Amended 9-27-2010; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, Art. II)]
The owner of any lot or parcel abutting on public sidewalk shall remove all
snow, ice, dirt, rubbish or refuse matter from the sidewalk. If ice has formed
on the sidewalk and cannot be removed, then the owner shall be responsible
for sprinkling the ice with a material that will prevent slipping. An owner's
responsibility to remove, or cause to be removed, dirt, rubbish or refuse
matter shall be a continuing responsibility. The owner of a lot or parcel
used for commercial purposes shall be responsible for clearing, or causing
to be cleared, all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalk by 9:00 a.m. of
the morning after the snow has ceased. All other owners of lots or parcels
in the City of Reedsburg must clear, or cause to be cleared, the abutting
sidewalks on or before 6:00 p.m. on the day set forth above. If the owner
does not comply with this article, the City Engineer/Public Works Director
may cause the work to be done and the expense reported to the City Clerk-
Treasurer, who shall enter such expense on the tax roll as a special tax
against the premises. The expenses so charged for the work performed will
be $1 per foot for a contractor to remove the snow from the sidewalk, along
with a $100 administrative fee, in addition to any citations being issued to
the property's owner. This article shall not apply to sidewalks installed on
the west side of Viking Drive (Highway H) between Huntington Park Drive
and Eighth Street.
§ 537-17. Depositing snow and ice in streets.
Depositing snow in streets is prohibited. No person shall push, shove or in
any way deposit any snow or ice onto any public street, alley, sidewalk or
public lands as dedicated for public use except for parcels in the downtown
business district where the sidewalk exists from the edge of the building
to the City right-of-way curbline. In such instances, the owners, occupants
and/or employees of owners of said parcels or lots in the downtown business
district shall be permitted to deposit snow and ice from the sidewalks onto
the public streets.
§ 537-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-17
1:467

ARTICLE VII
Coasting Prohibited
[Adopted as Sec. 8.08 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 537-18. Prohibited on sidewalks.
No coasting with wagons, sleds, skates, skateboards or other devices on
sidewalks shall be permitted in the City.19
19.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (2), which immediately followed this section, of the
former Municipal Codebook was repealed 11-14-2011.
§ 537-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-18
1:469

ARTICLE VIII
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted as Sec. 8.10 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 537-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order, rule
or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, of the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
§ 537-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-19
1:471
Chapter 548
TAXICABS
§ 537-19 REEDSBURG CODE § 537-19
1:472
ARTICLE I
Licensing of Businesses and Drivers
[Adopted as Sec. 12.11 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 548-1. Definition of taxicab.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAXICAB — Includes all vehicles transporting passengers for remuneration
for which patronage is solicited publicly. This definition shall not apply to:
§ 548-2. Taxicab license.
No person shall for remuneration transport passengers in a taxicab within
the City without first having obtained a taxicab license.
§ 548-3. Application for taxicab license.
Vehicles operating on established routes which are regulated by the
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin;
A.
Vehicles rented to be driven by the renter or his agent, commonly
known as "rent-a-cars";
B.
C. Vehicles operated solely as funeral cars or ambulances.
A. Application for taxicab license to operate one or more taxicabs or an
application to operate additional taxicabs under an existing license
shall be made, in writing, to the City Clerk-Treasurer upon forms
furnished by him, giving the address from which the business is
conducted and signed by the owner of the business or his duly
authorized agent. The application must also state, for each vehicle to be
operated, the make, model, and year of manufacture, the engine
number, serial number and capacity for passengers, and the Wisconsin
State certificate of title number and license number.
B. The application shall be submitted by the City Clerk-Treasurer to the
Council, which shall set a date for a public hearing before the Council to
examine the public convenience and necessity of granting such license.
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the applicant of the time and place
set for the hearing. No license shall be granted until the Council shall
by resolution have determined that the public convenience and
necessity will be served by the service proposed in the application for
license. The Council may hold such further hearings and procure such
additional information as it may deem necessary or advisable in making
such determination.
§ 548-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 548-4
1:473
§ 548-4. License fees. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The taxicab license fee shall be per year, or any fractional part thereof, for
each vehicle operated by the same licensee, as set from time to time by
the Common Council. The license year shall commence January 1 and end
December 31. If less than six months remain of the license year, the license
fee for the first taxicab shall be reduced one half.
§ 548-5. Insurance.
§ 548-6. Issuing of taxicab license.
After passage of the resolution of convenience and necessity and upon
filing with the City Clerk-Treasurer a receipt of the City Clerk-Treasurer
showing payment of the required license fees and the policy of insurance as
hereinafter provided, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue to the applicant a
taxicab license. Each license granted shall be numbered and shall show the
owner's name and place of business and the number of vehicles which may
be operated thereunder.
A. No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant deposits with the
City Clerk-Treasurer a policy of liability insurance covering all vehicles
to be included under the license. Such policy shall describe each vehicle
by make, model and serial number, number of passengers capable of
being accommodated therein at one time, and the number of the state
motor vehicle license. Such insurance policy shall be issued by a
company licensed to do business in the State of Wisconsin, and shall
insure the licensee against loss from liability to the amount of $25,000
for the injury or death of more than one person in any one accident; and
in the amount of $10,000 for damage to property of others for any one
accident due to the negligent operation of such vehicle. Liability
amounts may be revised from time to time by the Common Council.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. The policy of insurance shall be approved by the City Attorney as to
legal form before it is filed and shall contain a provision that the same
may not be canceled before the expiration of its term, except upon 10
days' written notice to the City.
C. The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy issued in
compliance with this section shall automatically revoke and terminate
all licenses issued for the vehicles covered by such insurance policy,
unless another policy shall have been filed and approved pursuant to
this section, and shall be in effect at the time of such cancellation or
termination.
§ 548-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 548-7
1:474
§ 548-7. Transfer of taxicab licenses.
No taxicab license shall be transferable either from the vehicle described
in the original application to another vehicle or from the original license to
another person without formal permission from the Council.
§ 548-8. Renewal.
Taxicab licenses may be renewed by the City Clerk-Treasurer upon the
payment of the fees and filing of policies of insurance as required for the
original license.
§ 548-9. Revocation.
A taxicab license may be revoked at any time by the Council for violation
of any provision of this section or for violation of any provision of Chs. 340
to 347, Wis. Stats., or of any such statutory provision incorporated in a
municipal ordinance. Such revocation may be for all vehicles or any vehicle
included under a license. When any taxicab license is revoked, the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately notify the licensee to cease immediately
to operate the taxicab for which the license has been revoked.
§ 548-10. Condition of vehicles.
§ 548-11. Taxi driver's license.
A. The licensee shall keep each taxicab in a clean and sanitary condition,
well-painted, and equipped and maintained as required by Chs. 340 to
347, Wis. Stats.
B. The Chief of Police shall inspect each taxicab to determine whether it is
properly equipped and maintained before a license is issued. Said
inspection to be made yearly between December 30 and December 31.
A. No person shall operate a taxicab unless he shall possess a taxi driver's
license. The fee for such license shall be as set from time to time by
Common Council. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Each applicant shall submit, in writing, to the Chief of Police, on forms
furnished by the Police Department, a statement of the applicant's full
name, his present residence, his residence for three years past, his age,
color, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, citizenship, place of last
previous employment, marital status, Wisconsin State motor vehicle
operator's license number, whether he has ever been convicted of a
felony or a misdemeanor, whether he has ever been previously licensed
as a driver or chauffeur and, if so, when and by what authority, whether
his license has ever been revoked or suspended and, if so, for what
cause, and the name of the prospective employer. Applications shall be
retained as Police Department records.
C. No license shall be granted to any person:
§ 548-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 548-11
1:475
(1) Who is under 18 years of age;
(2) Who does not possess a valid Wisconsin State motor vehicle
operator's license;
(3) Who has been convicted of a felony or who has been convicted of
driving a vehicle upon the highway while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotics, unless two years have elapsed
since his date of conviction or discharge from a penal institution,
whichever is later.
D. A taxi driver's license shall expire on December 31 following its
issuance. It may be renewed upon application to the Chief of Police on a
form furnished by him entitled "Application for Renewal of Taxi Driver's
License," which shall show the full name and address of the applicant,
and the date upon which his original license was granted and the
number thereof.
E. Upon presentation of the City Clerk-Treasurer's receipt for payment of
the license fee, the Chief of Police shall deliver to each licensed taxi
driver a license, of such form and style as the Chief of Police may
prescribe, with the license number thereon and which must, under
penalty of revocation of the license, be continuously and conspicuously
displayed on the taxicab when he is engaged in his employment.
F. The Chief of Police shall revoke a taxicab driver's license if the licensee
has, since the granting of the permit:
(1) Been convicted of a felony;
(2) Had his state motor vehicle operator's license revoked or
suspended;
(3) Been convicted of driving while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor, or narcotics;
(4) Had, during any continuous six-month period, three or more
convictions of any of the offenses set forth in the motor vehicle code
of the Wisconsin Statutes, or of any such statutory provisions
incorporated in a municipal ordinance;
(5) Demonstrated to the Chief of Police that, in the interest of the
preservation of the public safety, welfare, morals, or good order,
the licensee is unfit to drive a taxicab.
G. Written notice of such revocation or refusal to renew shall be given the
licensee. Any person whose license shall have been revoked or renewal
refused by the Chief of Police may, within 10 days thereof, appeal to the
Council for a hearing thereon; and the Council may, after the hearing,
affirm or reverse the action of the Chief of Police. If no appeal is taken
within 10 days, the action of the Chief of Police shall be final.
H. The Chief of Police shall repossess each license which is revoked.
§ 548-11 REEDSBURG CODE § 548-12
1:476
§ 548-12. Transfer of drivers.
A taxi driver may not transfer from one taxicab driver licensee to another
licensee until such transfer has been recorded, in writing, with the Chief of
Police.
§ 548-13. Taxicabs to be marked.
Every taxicab shall be conspicuously marked on the right and left side
with the name of the licensee and the words "cab" or "taxicab." A card
containing the name of the licensee, taxicab license number, and rates and
fares printed thereon shall be kept in a conspicuous place inside of such
vehicle at all times.
§ 548-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 548-13
1:477

ARTICLE II
Regulation of Taxicab Services
[Adopted as Ch. 30 of the former Municipal Codebook]
§ 548-14. Clerk to advertise for proposals.
When authorized by the Common Council, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
advertise in the manner provided by law for proposals from private parties
to provide taxi service for the City of Reedsburg under the Public
Transportation Assistance Program established by §§ 85.20 and 85.23, Wis.
Stats. A contract shall be prepared to comply with this article and Wisconsin
transportation statutes.
§ 548-15. Hours of operation. [Amended 11-14-2011]
The minimum hours of operation shall be as follows:
Monday through Thursday 5:45 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Friday and Saturday 5:45 a.m. to 2:30 a.m.
Sunday 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
§ 548-16. Fare schedule.
§ 548-17. Changes in fare schedule and contracts.
No changes in this fare schedule or the contract shall be made without prior
approval of the City and the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. The
operator shall be bound by any changes in this article upon publication of
those changes as required by law. The operator shall be entitled to provide
no less than 30 days' notification of intent to terminate this contract in the
event of a change in the article.
A. Taxi rates that apply to all destinations within the City limits of the City
of Reedsburg: [Amended 11-14-2011; at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Fares within City boundaries shall be set as approved by Common
Council and the Department of Transportation from time to time.
(2) Children under the age of five shall ride for no charge and shall be
accompanied by an adult.
B. Fares outside of City limits. In addition to the fares set forth in
Subsection A, there shall be a trip charge assessed at the rate of $2 per
mile from the edge of the City limits to the destination point furthest
from the City.
§ 548-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 548-18
1:479
§ 548-18. Records.
The operator shall maintain true and accurate records of all gross revenues,
depreciations, salaries, return on investments and all operating expenses as
required by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and make books
and records available to the City and subject to audit by the City and the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation at any time.
§ 548-19. Compliance with other provisions.
The operator shall provide such financial statements as may be required by
the City and the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. The operator and
his/her employees shall comply with the Code of the City of Reedsburg and
all applicable state and federal regulations.
§ 548-20. Vehicles required.
§ 548-21. Maintenance of logs and records.
§ 548-22. Leased office space.
In the event that the City provides a City-owned facility for the operator to
utilize as an office for the cab service, the operator shall enter into a lease
agreement with the City.
§ 548-23. Operator to use radio dispatch.
The operator must provide radio dispatch services during all service hours.
Operator shall comply with all applicable state and federal licensing
requirements for operation of his/her radio.
§ 548-24. Insurance.
Operator shall maintain bodily injury liability insurance coverage with a
solvent and reputable insurance company approved by the City in an
A. The operator shall maintain two motor vehicles in good operating
condition during service hours, and one additional motor vehicle shall
be maintained in reserve that is in good operating condition. No vehicle
shall be less than 10 years old on the anniversary date of the contract.
B. If the City provides any motor vehicle(s) for the operator, the operator
shall enter into a lease agreement with the City.
A. The operator shall maintain daily operating logs showing for each trip
the number of passengers, time, pickup point, destination and charge,
and said log shall be subject to inspection by the City at any time.
B. The operator shall keep maintenance and repair records for each motor
vehicle used to provide transportation services, and the City shall have
the right to inspect each taxicab and the maintenance and repair record
at any time.
§ 548-18 REEDSBURG CODE § 548-24
1:480
amount not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and for property damage
in an amount not less than $100,000 per occurrence, and the said policy
shall name the City of Reedsburg as an additional insured.
§ 548-25. Performance bond.
When required by the City, the operator shall maintain a performance bond
in the amount of $10,000 during the life of the contract and any of its
renewals.
§ 548-26. Revocation or suspension.
§ 548-27. Abuse of passengers.
The operator or any driver of a taxicab shall at no time use any profane or
obscene language toward any passengers.
§ 548-28. Independent contractor status.
The operator of the transportation service shall be an independent
contractor of the City of Reedsburg.
A. In the event of a violation of any state or federal law, the Code of the
City of Reedsburg, or the terms of the contract, the Common Council
shall, after notice and hearing, be entitled to either suspend or revoke
the operator's licensing privileges granted under the terms of this
article.
B. Driving in violation of § 346.63, Wis. Stats., as amended, shall be
grounds for immediate suspension of any operator's license as granted
by the contract. A hearing on that suspension shall be held no later than
10 days from the date of violation of the above statute or the date on
which the City is advised of the violation (whichever is later).
§ 548-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 548-28
1:481
Chapter 556
TOURIST ROOMING HOUSES
§ 556-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish local license, administration and
enforcement standards for tourist rooming houses.
§ 556-2. Definition; license and registration; room tax.
A "tourist rooming house" (TRH) is any lodging place or tourist cabin and
cottage, other than hotels and motels, in which sleeping accommodations
are offered for pay to tourists or transients. It does not include private
boarding or rooming houses not accommodating tourists or transients, bedand-
breakfast establishments or units operated by a hotel, motel or resort.
§ 556-3. Standards for tourist rooming houses.
A. The TRH shall have a current license from the Department of
Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection or the successor state
licensing agency.
B. the owner shall register with the Clerk-Treasurer's office and pay room
tax as required under Chapter 72, Finance and Taxation, of the Code of
the City of Reedsburg.
C. Only the owner-occupant of the property may operate a TRH.
D. The license shall remain in effect, subject to annual reviews by the
Building Inspector, to verify in writing that a lodging license has been
obtained and is current and the conditions attached to the license and
all requirements of this chapter are adhered to. Reapplication for
renewal shall be required with a change in ownership, alterations to the
operational rules, noncompliance with the standards of this chapter, or
documented violations. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. The TRH shall comply with Ch. 97, Wis. Stats., and Ch. ATCP 72, Wis.
Adm. Code, or the successor statute and/or administrative code that is
in effect at the time.
B. The maximum number of tenants allowed to reside in the TRH for
overnight accommodations shall not exceed two persons per bedroom,
plus two persons.
C. Each TRH shall have a registry available on site for inspection,
indicating the identity of all guests and dates of stay. The registry shall
include all information from the current registry year and the year
immediately prior.
§ 548-28 REEDSBURG CODE § 556-3
1:482
Chapter 565
TOWING
§ 565-1. Definitions and word use.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future; words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
ASSIGNMENT — A call or referral by or from the City or its Police
Department to a wrecker requesting towing service hereunder licensed.
CITY — The City of Reedsburg.
D. Contact information shall be posted on an exterior wall near the main
and/or transient entrance and an interior common area of the TRH with
a minimum display area of five inches by seven inches. The following
must be provided:
(1) Address of property.
(2) Emergency contact information (police, fire, ambulance).
(3) Owner's and local contact person's telephone numbers.
(4) Maximum number of occupants allowed.
E. No TRH shall be located within 250 feet from any other TRH, bed-andbreakfast,
or boardinghouse unless approved by the Ordinance
Committee.
F. At least one on-site, off-street, paved parking space shall be available.
G. No tourist shall use a gas grill, charcoal grill, or other similar device on
or under any combustible surface or use a recreational camping vehicle
in conjunction with the TRH.
H. Garbage and refuse shall be stored inside a building or concealed from
public and neighbor view. It shall be placed in proper containers and
comply with Chapter 518, Solid Waste, of the Code of the City of
Reedsburg.
I. Performance standards shall comply with Chapter 690, Zoning, of the
Code of the City of Reedsburg. The appearance of the dwelling shall not
be altered in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its
residential character either by the use of colors, materials,
construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds, odors, dust,
vibrations, or other effects that can carry beyond the premises.
§ 556-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-1
1:483
CLASS I TOW — Involves vehicles which of necessity must be removed
from public or private property at the request of the Reedsburg Police
Department without the owner's permission, where such vehicles are
abandoned, constitute a public or private nuisance, are illegally parked, are
evidence, or stolen, or are or were in the ownership or control of a prisoner
or dead or disabled person who is unable to personally arrange for towing.
CLASS II TOW — Involves vehicles which have become disabled and their
operator has no preference for a tower and where the public convenience
requires the Police Department to arrange for towing service.
CLASS III TOW — Involves disabled City vehicles which need to be towed
promptly upon request, for a reasonable fee.
LICENSEE — One who has been issued a license by the Common Council to
perform towing service for or at the request of the City of Reedsburg or its
Police Department.
NO-PREFERENCE TOW — Any motor vehicle accident or disablement
where a motor vehicle operator requiring towing service expresses no
preference as to a named wrecker.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PREFERENCE TOW — Any motor vehicle accident or disablement where a
motor vehicle operator requiring towing service expresses a preference as
to a named wrecker.
STORAGE LOT — Premises which are subject to use in accordance with
local and state laws, rules and regulations as a place to temporarily keep
towed vehicles pending the final disposition thereof. Storage lots must be
completely enclosed with a six-foot-high fence which is of such a nature as
will offer reasonable protection for vehicles and their contents against theft
and/or vandalism. Any side of the enclosing fence which is viewable from a
public thoroughfare must be constructed in such a manner as will screen
from view the vehicles stored within the fenced enclosure. The storage
lot shall provide outside storage for a minimum of 10 vehicles and inside
storage for a minimum of two vehicles. The storage lot shall be located
at the wrecker's (licensee's) principal place of business, unless otherwise
approved by the Police Department and Common Council.
TOW — To remove a motor vehicle from a given place, whether temporarily
or permanently disabled, by use of a vehicle designed or customarily used
for that purpose, to a place of storage, pending the repair, salvage, recovery,
sale or disposal of such vehicle.
TOWER — A person engaged in the business or offering the services of
a vehicle wrecker or towing service, whereby disabled motor vehicles are
towed or otherwise removed from the place where they are disabled by use
of a wrecker so designed for that purpose or by a truck, automobile or other
vehicle so adapted to that purpose and who is engaged in Class I, Class II
or Class III tows.
§ 565-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 565-1
1:484
WRECKER — One engaged in the business of or offering the services of a
motor vehicle tower.
§ 565-2. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate a truck or other type of motor
vehicle designed and capable to service or perform Class I, Class II or Class
III tows for hire within the City of Reedsburg unless a license therefor shall
first be obtained from the City Clerk-Treasurer as hereinafter provided.
§ 565-3. Application.
No such license shall be issued unless an application therefor shall have
been filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer upon a form prescribed therefor,
which shall include.
§ 565-4. License fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
An application for license or renewal hereunder shall be accompanied with
a fee of $27.50, or as amended from time to time by the Common Council,
regardless of the number of months such license may be valid. All licenses
shall expire on December 30 of each year.
§ 565-5. Standards of operation.
The Common Council may not consider or grant a license to an applicant
who does not meet the following minimum requirements:
A. The name, home address and proposed business address of the
applicant.
B. The location, description and hourly availability of the tow trucks
owned or operated by the applicant.
C. Available space the applicant has for properly accommodating and
protecting all disabled motor vehicles to be towed or otherwise
removed from the place where they are disabled.
D. Such other information as the City Clerk-Treasurer shall find
reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and to
arrive at a fair determination of whether the terms of this chapter have
been complied with.
A. Own or exclusively lease for the license period two tow trucks, one of
which shall have a minimum of four-ton winch capacity and one of
which shall have a minimum GVW of 12,000 pounds and a minimum
eight-ton winch; a flatbed truck with a minimum GVW of 12,000 pounds
and a minimum eight-ton winch; a flatbed truck with a minimum GVW
of 20,000 pounds and a minimum four-ton winch with a compatible
hydraulic combination of eight tons may be substituted. Each truck
shall be equipped with a two-way commercial radio, lights and such
§ 565-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-5
1:485
§ 565-6. Standard rate schedule; claiming of vehicles.
other safety devices as will comply with Ch. 347, Wis. Stats., a rubber
tow sling, a dolly, 100 feet of tow cable and equipment for cleaning up
glass and debris at an accident scene. City assignments must be given
top priority as a condition of holding a license.
B. Ownership or exclusive lease for the license period of a storage lot as
herein defined.
C. The principal place of business and storage lot must be within seven
miles of the center of the City of Reedsburg.
D. Execution of an indemnity and hold harmless agreement protecting the
City from the payment of any claims for property damage, personal
injury or death and from all expenses, attorney's fees and court costs
associated with such claims resulting from or arising out of the
licensee's operation under this chapter, including, but not limited to,
the towing and storage of vehicles.
E. Proof of a licensed carrier authority from the State of Wisconsin.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
F. Towing equipment which is adequate to perform towing services in a
reasonable and workmanlike manner.
G. Certificates of insurance providing a minimum of 10 days' written
notice to the City before any such policy is amended or canceled, which
shows statutory workers' compensation coverage of employees,
insurance on the tow trucks written in comprehensive form, providing
minimum limits of bodily injury liability and property damage liability,
as required by the State of Wisconsin for obtaining carrier authority,
and which shows protection of the City and the licensee against all
claims arising from injuries to persons or damage to property of others
arising out of any act or omission of the licensee or its agents relative to
performance of work for which the license is granted.
H. Proof of law enforcement authority from the State of Wisconsin should
such authority be provided for by the state.
I. A statement that the applicant is not directly or indirectly financially
interested in any other such license issued under this chapter.
J. The licensee shall, at all times, be solely responsible for the conduct of
its employees.
K. Each licensee shall keep and maintain adequate and complete records
showing all vehicles towed, stored and released, all services rendered
and all fees charged and collected. All records shall be available for
inspection by the City at any time during normal business hours.
§ 565-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 565-6
1:486
§ 565-7. Responsibility for charges.
The vehicle owner or other party contracting or benefiting from such towing
services shall be responsible to the tower for the charges specified in
§ 565-6 above.
§ 565-8. Rotating list.
Wreckers shall perform towing services for the City on a rotation basis from
a list administered by the Police Department. When the owner or driver of a
disabled vehicle indicates a preference of a specific licensee, that licensee
shall be called, and no tow truck shall be assigned from the rotating list. In
the event that a licensee called does not respond as quickly as is necessary,
in the opinion of the police officer in charge at the scene of an accident or
other emergency, the police officer may call another licensed tow truck. At
no time shall it be more than 20 minutes from the time the licensee is called.
§ 565-9. Interception of police calls.
No wrecker shall intercept police calls by shortwave radio.
§ 565-10. Tower to provide twenty-four-hour service.
Towing service must be provided 24 hours a day, each and every day of
the year. The failure of a licensee to perform licensed services shall be
grounds for revocation or suspension of this license. Any licensee who fails
to respond to or accept three calls during any license year may be called
before the Common Council to explain such failure. If such failure is not
justified, the licensee shall be put on probation for the balance of the license
year. Any further failure to perform services during the same license year
shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license.
§ 565-11. Revocation of license.
A. Licensees shall maintain records of the amounts charged for tows and
shall charge no more than the rates approved by the Common Council
for their services while towing for or at the request of the City.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Vehicles which are towed pursuant to this chapter may be claimed at
the storage lot upon which they are stored during regular business
office hours, Monday through Friday.20
A. The Common Council shall revoke a license issued hereunder when it
finds any of the following grounds:
20.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 41.07, License fee, which immediately followed this section of
the former Municipal Codebook, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 565-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-11
1:487
§ 565-12. Transferability.
A license issued hereunder shall not be transferred or assigned to another
person or business.
Chapter 577
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
§ 577-1. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in sales within
the City of Reedsburg without being registered for that purpose as provided
herein.
§ 577-2. Definitions.
In this chapter:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation or
one purporting to be such.
CLERK — The City Clerk-Treasurer.
MERCHANDISE — Includes personal property of any kind and shall include
merchandise, goods or materials provided incidental to services offered or
sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for
the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
(1) The licensee illegally employed any radio to obtain information as
to the location of the scene of an accident or disabled vehicle.
(2) The licensee paid in the form of a gratuity any third person not
involved in the accident or disabled vehicle for information as to
the location of the accident.
(3) The licensee has violated the fee schedule by overcharge or
improper charge.
(4) The licensee has violated any of the requirements of this chapter.
(5) The license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement
of a material fact or that a fact concerning the applicant was not
disclosed at the time of his making application and such fact would
have constituted just cause for refusal to issue such license.
B. Any wrecker who attempts to or who does influence the orderly rotation
of assignments or who otherwise violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to revocation, termination or suspension of his license
following written notice of a hearing, containing a statement of the
complaint made against the licensee and the name of the party
requesting the hearing, and a hearing before the Common Council.
§ 565-11 REEDSBURG CODE § 577-2
1:488
PERMANENT MERCHANT — Any person who, for at least one year prior to
the consideration of the application of this chapter to said merchant:
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any individual who engages in the retail sale
of merchandise at any place in the City of Reedsburg temporarily, and who
does not intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant of
such place. For purposes of this chapter, sale of merchandise constitutes
the greatest part of value for the price received, but does not include a
farm auction sale conducted by or for a resident farmer of personal property
used on the farm or sale of produce or other perishable products at retail or
wholesale by a resident of this state.[Amended 3-25-2013]
§ 577-3. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:
Has continuously operated an established place of business in the local
trade area along the communities bordering the place of sale;
A.
Has continuously resided in the local trade area among the
communities bordering the place of sale and now does business from
his/her residence.
B.
A. Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods
to regular customers on established routes;
B. Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such
merchandise;
C. Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders at the
home of the buyer for merchandise regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within this county and who delivers such merchandise in
their regular course of business;
D. Any person who has an established place of business where the
merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis, and in
which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested, a
home visit by said person;
E. Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer;
F. Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the
sale or offering for sale of merchandise;
G. Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided
that there is submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer proof that such
charitable organization is registered under § 202.12, Wis. Stats. Any
charitable organization engaging in the sale of merchandise and not
registered under § 202.12, Wis. Stats., or which is exempt from that
§ 577-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-3
1:489
§ 577-4. Registration.
statute's registration requirements, shall be required to register under
this chapter;
H. Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom
complaint has been made to the Clerk-Treasurer that such person is a
transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the Clerk-
Treasurer proof that such person has leased for at least one year or
purchased the premises from which he/she has conducted business in
the market area for at least one year prior to the date the complaint was
made;
I. Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in § 15.01(7),
Wis. Stats.;
J. Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law;
K. Transient merchants while doing business at special events authorized
by the Common Council;
L. Any group sales authorized by the Common Council; and
M. Any resident holding a garage sale of personal property on premises.
A. Applicants for registration must complete and return to the Clerk-
Treasurer a registration form furnished by the Clerk, which shall
require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any;
(2) Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the transient merchant represents
or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold;
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any;
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
merchandise and any services offered;
(6) Proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable;
(7) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the
applicant in the conduct of his/her business;
(8) Most recent cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where the
applicant conducted his/her business;
§ 577-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 577-4
1:490
§ 577-5. Investigation.
(9) Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this City;
(10) Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient
merchant business within the last five years and the nature of the
offense and the place of conviction.
B. Applicants shall present to the Clerk-Treasurer for examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required;
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures, where the applicant's business requires use
of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities;
(3) A state Health Officer's certificate where applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law; such certificate to state that the applicant
is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated
not more than 90 days prior to the date the application license is
made.
C. At the time the registration is returned, a fee as set from time to time by
the Common Council shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer to cover the
cost of processing said registration. The applicant shall sign a
statement appointing the Clerk-Treasurer as his/her agent to accept
service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant
arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in
connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant, in the event
the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally.
Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall register the applicant as a transient merchant and date
the entry. Said registration shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in § 577-5B
below. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Upon receipt of each application, the Clerk-Treasurer may refer it
immediately to the Chief of Police, who may make and complete an
investigation of the statements made in such registration.
B. The Clerk-Treasurer shall refuse to register the applicant if it is
determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that the application
contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement;
complaints of a material nature have been received against the
applicant by authorities in the most recent cities, villages and towns,
not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business;
the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance
§ 577-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-5
1:491
§ 577-6. Appeal.
Any person refused or denied registration may appeal the denial through
the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Common
Council, or if none has been adopted, under the provisions of §§ 68.07
through 68.16, Wis. Stats.
§ 577-7. Regulation of transient merchants.
violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly
related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the
applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of § 577-4B
above.
A. Prohibited practices.
(1) A transient merchant shall be prohibited from calling at any
dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place
where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No
Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of
any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked
to leave by the owner, occupant, or other person having authority
over such premises.
(2) A transient merchant shall not misrepresent or make false,
deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity or characteristics of any merchandise offered for sale, the
purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity of the
organization he/she represents. A charitable organization transient
merchant shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of
the merchandise being offered will actually be used for the
charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Said
portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the
merchandise.
(3) No transient merchant shall impede the free use of sidewalks and
streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from
vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No transient merchant shall make any loud noises or use any
sound-amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced
is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the
source.
(5) No transient merchant shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in
or around the area in which he/she is conducting business.
B. Disclosure requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a transient merchant shall expressly
§ 577-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 577-7
1:492
§ 577-8. Records.
The Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk-Treasurer all convictions for
violation of this chapter, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall note any such
violation on the record of the registrant convicted.
§ 577-9. Revocation of registration.
disclose his/her name, the name of the company or organization
he/she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of merchandise or
services he/she offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant, or any
offer for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the seller, the
buyer shall have the right to cancel said transaction if it involves
the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25, in
accordance with the procedure as set forth in § 423.203, Wis. Stats;
the seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed
notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of
§ 423.203(1)(a)(b) and (c), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
(3) If the transient merchant takes a sales order for the later delivery
of merchandise, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide
the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the
agreement, the amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no
advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone
number of the seller, the delivery or performance date, and
whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms
thereof.
A. Licenses issued hereunder may be revoked by the Council after notice
and hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the
course of carrying on his business as solicitor, transient merchant,
itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
(5) Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient
merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, as the case may
be, in an unlawful manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
§ 577-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-9
1:493
§ 577-10. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the City Clerk-
Treasurer in the denial of a permit or license may appeal to the Council.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council, within 14 days after
notice of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth fully
the grounds for the appeal. The Council shall set a time and place for a
hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given at the
appeal and in the same manner as provided in § 577-9B for notice of hearing
on revocation.
§ 577-11. Reapplication.
No licensee whose license has been revoked shall make further application
until a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since the last
previous revocation.
§ 577-12. Expiration of licenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No license shall be issued for a longer period than one year. All annual
licenses issued hereunder shall expire at midnight on December 31 in the
year when issued. Other than annual licenses, all other licenses shall expire
at midnight on the date specified in the license.
Chapter 584
TREES AND SHRUBS
§ 584-1. Intent; Applicability.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by the
City Clerk-Treasurer, in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at
least five days prior to the date set for hearing.
A. Intent and purpose. It is the policy of the City to regulate and establish
policy for the control of planting, removal, maintenance and protection
of trees and shrubs in or upon all public areas and terrace areas of the
City to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may
result in injury to persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public areas; to promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of
the City; to prohibit the undesirable and unsafe planting, removal,
treatment and maintenance of trees and shrubs located in public areas;
and to guard all trees and shrubs, both public and private, within the
City against the spread of disease, insects or pests.
B. Application. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to trees and
shrubs growing or hereafter planted in or upon public areas and terrace
§ 577-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 584-1
1:494
§ 584-2. Definitions.
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter, they shall
be construed to have the following meanings:
BOULEVARD OR TERRACE AREAS — The land between the normal location
of the street edge or curbing and the street right-of-way. Where there is
no curb and gutter, the edge of the roadway (pavement or gravel) to the
right-of-way line shall be deemed to be a "boulevard" for the purpose of this
chapter. "Boulevard" shall have the same meaning as "terrace." Where there
are no sidewalks, the area from the curbing or edge of street to the right-ofway
line shall be deemed "boulevard areas" under this chapter.
EVERGREEN TREE — Any woody plant normally having one stem or trunk
and bearing foliage in the form of needles and crowns which extend from
ground level throughout its entire height.
MAJOR ALTERATION — Trimming a tree beyond necessary trimming to
comply with this chapter.
PERSON — Person, firm, association or corporation.
PUBLIC AREAS — Includes all public parks, playgrounds, recreation areas,
parkways, common open spaces, greenways, forests, conservancies and
other lands owned or leased by the City under the authority of the Parks
and Recreation Committee.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any tree or shrub or part thereof which, by reason
of its condition, interferes with the use of any public area; is infected with
a plant disease; is infested with injurious insects or pests; is injurious to
public improvements or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of
persons or property.
PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS — All trees and shrubs located or to be
planted in or upon public areas.
PUBLIC WAYS — Includes all public streets, roads, rights-of-way,
boulevards, terraces, alleys, sidewalks, cemeteries, and other lands owned
or leased by the City and under the authority of the Public Works
Committee.
SHRUBS — Any woody vegetation or a woody plant having multiple stems
and bearing foliage from the ground up.
STAFF FORESTER — Person designated to carry out provisions of this
chapter.
TREE — Any woody plant, normally having one stem or trunk, bearing its
foliage or crown well above ground level to heights of 16 feet or more.
§ 584-3. Staff forester; powers and duties.
areas and also to all trees and shrubs growing or to be planted in or
upon any private premises which shall threaten the life, health, safety
or welfare of the public or of any public areas.
§ 584-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 584-3
1:495
§ 584-4. Interference with staff forester prohibited.
No person shall interfere with the staff forester or his authorized
representative while he or she is engaged in carrying out any work or
activities authorized by this chapter.
§ 584-5. Abatement of tree disease nuisances.
A. Staff forester. The Parks and Recreation Director and the Director of
Public Works are appointed the title of staff forester. The staff forester
shall have the following general powers and duties:
(1) To direct, manage, supervise and control the planting, removal,
maintenance, protection of all trees and shrubs on all public areas;
to supervise City personnel in the planting, removal, maintenance,
and protection of said trees and shrubs.
(2) To guard all trees and shrubs within the City located on public
areas so as to prevent the spread of disease or pests and to
eliminate dangerous conditions which may affect the life, health or
safety of persons or property.
(3) Such other powers and duties as are provided by the laws of
Wisconsin, particularly §§ 27.08 and 27.09, Wis. Stats., by
ordinance of the City and by the Parks and Recreation Committee.
B. Parks and Recreation Committee appointment. The Parks and
Recreation Committee may also designate a municipal employee or
citizen to perform the duties of staff forester under Chapter 27, Wis.
Stats., and may authorize such forester to perform the duties and
exercise the powers imposed by this chapter.
C. Right-of-entry. The City forester or other authorized City
representatives may enter upon private premises at all reasonable
times for the purpose of examining any tree or shrub located upon or
over such premises and carrying out any of the provisions of this
chapter. If a request to inspect such trees or shrubs is denied by the
person responsible for the property, an inspection warrant may be
obtained pursuant to § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
A. Dutch elm, emerald ash borer and other tree diseases a public
nuisance. Whereas the Common Council has determined that there are
many trees growing on public and private premises within the City, the
loss of which would substantially depreciate the value of public and
private property, impair the use and enjoyment of public and private
premises and erode the tax base of the City, and that the health and life
of such trees is threatened by fatal diseases such as Dutch elm disease,
which is spread by the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.)
or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.), the Common Council hereby declares
its intention to control and prevent the spread of such disease and the
insect pests and vectors which carry such diseases.
§ 584-3 REEDSBURG CODE § 584-5
1:496
B. Definitions. As used in this section, unless otherwise clearly indicated
by the context:
PERSON — Person, firm or corporation.
PUBLIC NUISANCE —
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Owned or controlled by the City, including,
without limitation because of enumeration, public sites, parks,
playgrounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, and the terrace
strip between the lot line and the curb or improved portion of any public
way.
Dutch elm disease; elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.)
or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.).
(1)
(2) Oak wilt (ceratocystis fagacearum).
(3) Asian longhorned beetle (Anoplophora glabripennis)
(4) Emerald ash borer (Agrilus planipennis)
(5) Any other deleterious or fatal tree disease.
Any tree or part thereof which, by reason of its condition and
location, is hazardous or dangerous to persons and property using
or upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public
place, including the terrace strip between curb and lot line.
(6)
Any tree or part thereof which is infested by the eastern tent
caterpillar or other defoliating larvae.
(7)
C. Inspection.
(1) The staff forester shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises
and places within the City to determine whether any public
nuisance exists thereon. He shall also inspect or cause the
inspection of any tree reported or suspected to be infested with
disease or beetles.
(2) Whenever necessary to determine the existence of disease or
beetles in any tree, the person inspecting such tree shall remove or
cut specimens from the tree in such manner as to avoid fatal injury
thereto and deliver such specimens to the forester, who shall
forward them to the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade
and Consumer Protection at Madison for analysis to determine the
presence of such nuisances.
D. Abatement of nuisances; duty of forester.
(1) The Parks and Recreation Committee, upon the recommendation of
the staff forester, shall order, direct, supervise and control the
abatement of public nuisances as defined in this section by
spraying, removal, burning or by other means which it determines
to be necessary to prevent as fully as possible the spread of
§ 584-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 584-5
1:497
disease, fungus, other deleterious insect pests or vectors known to
carry such diseases.
(2) Whenever the forester, after inspection or examination, shall
determine that a public nuisance as herein defined exists on public
property in the City, he shall ask the Parks and Recreation
Committee to abate or cause the abatement of such nuisance in
such manner as to destroy or prevent as fully as possible the spread
of disease, other deleterious insect pests or vectors known to carry
such disease fungus.
(3) When the Parks and Recreation Committee shall determine with
reasonable certainty that a public nuisance exists upon private
premises, it shall immediately serve or cause to be served
personally or by registered mail upon the owner of such property, if
he can be found, or upon the occupant thereof a written notice of
the existence of such nuisance and of a time and place for a hearing
before the Parks and Recreation Committee, not less than 14 days
after service of such notice, on the abatement action to be taken.
Such notice shall describe the nuisance and recommend
procedures for its abatement, and shall further state that unless
the owner shall abate the nuisance in the manner specified in the
notice, or shall appear at the hearing to show that such nuisance
does not exist or does not endanger the health of trees in the City,
the Parks and Recreation Committee shall cause the abatement
thereof at the expense of the property served. If the owner cannot
be found, such notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation in the City.
(4) If, after hearing held pursuant to Subsection D(3), it shall be
determined by the Parks and Recreation Committee that a public
nuisance exists, it shall forthwith order the immediate abatement
thereof. Unless the property owner abates the nuisance as directed
within five days of such hearing, the Parks and Recreation
Committee shall proceed to abate the nuisance and cause the cost
thereof to be assessed against the property in accordance with the
procedures provided in this section. The Parks and Recreation
Committee may extend the time allowed the property owner for
abatement work, but not to exceed 10 additional days.
E. Spraying.
(1) Whenever the forester shall determine that any tree or part thereof
is infected with a deleterious or fatal tree disease or is in a
weakened condition or harbors elm bark beetles, he may request
the Parks and Recreation Committee to authorize the spraying of
all trees within a 1,000-foot radius thereto with an effective,
disease-destroying concentrate or other insecticide.
(2) In order to facilitate the work and minimize the inconvenience to
the public of any spraying operations conducted under this section,
§ 584-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 584-5
1:498
§ 584-6. Assessment of costs of abatement.
the staff forester shall cause to be given advance public notice
of such operations by newspaper, radio, television, public service
announcements or other effective means and shall also cause the
posting of appropriate warning notices in the areas and along the
streets where trees are to be sprayed at least 24 hours in advance
of spraying. When any residue or concentrate from municipal
spraying operations can be expected to be deposited on any public
street, the staff forester shall also notify the Chief of Police, who
shall take all necessary steps to make and enforce temporary
parking and traffic regulations on such streets as conditions
require. Temporary no-parking notices shall be posted in each
block of any affected street at least 24 hours in advance of spraying
operations.
(3) When appropriate warning notices and temporary no-parking
notices have been given and posted in accordance with Subsection
E(2) of this section, the City shall not allow any claim for damages
to any vehicle caused by such spraying operations.
(4) When trees on private property are to be sprayed, the staff forester
shall notify the owner of such property and proceed in accordance
with the requirements of Subsection E(2).
A. The entire cost of abating any public nuisance or spraying trees, as
defined herein, shall be charged to and assessed against the parcel or
lot abutting on the street, alley, terrace, boulevard or parkway upon or
in which such tree is located or the parcel or lot upon which such tree
stands in accordance with § 66.0703 or § 27.09, Wis. Stats. The cost of
abating any such nuisance or part thereof which is located in or upon
any park shall be borne by the City.
B. The cost of abating a public nuisance or spraying elm trees, elm wood
or trees infected with other tree diseases located on private premises,
when done at the direction and under the supervision of the Parks and
Recreation Committee and staff forester, shall be assessed to the
property on which such nuisance, tree or wood is located as follows:
(1) The Parks and Recreation Committee shall keep a strict account of
the cost of such work or spraying and the amount chargeable to
each lot or parcel and shall report such work, charges, description
of lands to which charged and names and addresses of the owners
of such lands to the Common Council on or before October 15 of
each year.
(2) Upon receiving the Parks and Recreation Committee's report, the
Council shall hold a public hearing on such proposed charges,
giving at least 14 days' advance notice of the time, place and
purpose of such hearing to interested persons by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality and by mail to
§ 584-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 584-6
1:499
§ 584-7. Planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs.
the owner of each property proposed to be charged. Each property
owner shall be notified of the amount proposed to be assessed
against his premises and the work for which such charge is being
made.
(3) After such hearing, the Common Council shall affirm, modify and
affirm or disapprove such assessments by resolution; and
(4) The City Clerk-Treasurer shall mail notice of the amount of such
final assessment to each owner of property assessed at his last
known address, stating that, unless paid within 30 days of the date
of the notice, such assessment will be entered on the tax roll as a
tax against the property, and all proceedings in relation to the
collection, return and sale of property for delinquent real estate
taxes shall apply to such assessment.
(5) The City hereby declares that, in making assessments under this
section, it is acting under its police power and no damages shall be
awarded to any owner for the destruction of any diseased or
infested tree or wood or part thereof.
A. Permit required. No person, except upon order of the staff forester or
Public Works Director, shall plant or remove, or perform major
alterations, as determined by the forester or Public Works Director, on a
tree or shrub in the public right-of-way or terrace area or cause such
act to be done by others without first obtaining permission for such
work from the staff forester or Public Works Director as herein
provided. The applicant shall comply with the planting standards of
§ 584-8.
B. Permit exemptions. No permit shall be required to cultivate, fertilize or
water trees or shrubs or for work by City personnel on park properties.
No permit is necessary to plant trees inside the property line.
C. Permit issuance. If the staff forester determines that the proposed work
or planting described in an application for a permit is necessary and in
accord with the purposes of this chapter, taking into account the safety,
health and welfare of the public, location of utilities, public sidewalk,
driveways and streetlights, general character of the area in which the
tree or shrub is located or proposed to be located, type of soil,
characteristics and physiological need of the genus, species and variety
of tree or shrub, he shall issue a permit to the applicant.
D. Permit form; expiration; inspection. Every permit shall be issued by the
staff forester on a standard form and shall include a description of the
work to be done and shall specify the genus, species and variety, size,
nursery grade and location of trees or shrubs to be planted, if any. Any
work under such permit must be performed in strict accordance with
the terms thereof and the provisions of this chapter. Permits issued
§ 584-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 584-7
1:500
§ 584-8. Planting of trees and shrubs.
under this section shall expire six months after date of issuance. There
will be no charge for this permit.
E. Permits to public utilities.
(1) Whenever a permit is issued under this section to a public utility to
remove, trim, prune, cut, disturb, alter or perform surgery on any
public tree or shrub, the staff forester shall limit the work to be
done to the actual necessities of the utility and may assign an
inspector to supervise the work done under the provisions of the
permit. The expense of such inspection or supervision shall be
charged to the utility at the usual City rate.
(2) A public utility may secure an annual working agreement with the
staff forester's office which gives the staff forester the
authorization to supervise and direct work associated with trees
and shrubs.
A. Purpose. The Common Council hereby states its determination that the
planting, care and protection of the trees within the City is desirable for
the purposes of beauty, shade, comfort, noise abatement and economic
betterment, and hereby encourages all persons to assist in a program of
tree planting, care and protection.
B. Tree planting program. The staff forester shall recommend to the
Common Council a program for tree planting, care and protection for
public parks. The Common Council shall also encourage the planting,
care and protection of trees and shrubs on private premises within the
City. Planting of trees in the terrace areas shall be according to the City
approved tree planting list.
C. Planting.
(1) The size and genus, species and variety of trees and shrubs to be
planted in terraces, tree banks and boulevards and the manner of
planting shall be submitted to the staff forester for approval before
commencement of such work. The permit application process is
required in § 584-7.
(2) There shall be a minimum distance of 16 feet and a recommended
distance of 25 to 50 feet between terrace area trees, depending
upon the size of tree and other factors. Terrace trees shall be
planted equal distance between the sidewalk or proposed sidewalk
and back of the curb or proposed back of curb. In terrace areas less
than three feet wide, planting will not be permitted. Terrace area
trees shall be a minimum of 25 feet from an intersection.
(3) Evergreen trees shall not be planted in a terrace area.
§ 584-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 584-8
1:501
§ 584-9. Trimming.
(4) It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain shrubbery, ground cover or
other plants not considered to be a deciduous leaf tree within
terrace areas whose growth is in excess of eight inches in height
above the top of the nearest curb.
(5) Tree grates shall be provided for terrace trees surrounded by
concrete by the adjacent property owner and shall be level with
adjacent concrete.
(6) Per City policy, trees or shrubs shall not be planted closer than
three feet to any sidewalk or curb.
(7) All new required shade trees must be a minimum of one-and-threequarter-
inch-diameter caliper at the time of planting. All new
required evergreen trees must be a minimum of six feet high when
planted, except for low creeping shrubs.
(8) Recommended tree species can be found in the Public Tree
Inventory Report and Management Plan, Appendix C, dated
September 2014.21
D. Unlawfully planted trees. Trees, plants or shrubs planted within any
terrace or planting easement without the authorization and approval of
the forester may be removed. The forester shall notify the abutting
owner, in writing, listing the unlawfully planted trees, plants or shrubs,
ordering their removal, and establishing a reasonable time within
which such removal shall be accomplished. In the event that removal is
not to be accomplished within the time specified, the City may remove
such trees, plants or shrubs and assess the costs thereof to the owner.
E. Frames. Any person adjacent to whose land any shade or ornamental
tree or shrub is growing in any street may, for the purpose of protecting
such tree or shrub, surround the same with a suitable box or frame for
protection, but all such work shall be performed under the supervision
and direction of the staff forester.
F. Planting instructions. Appropriate planting instructions can be found in
the Public Tree Inventory Report and Management Plan, Appendix J,
dated September 2014.22
A. Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any boulevard, public area or
upon any private premises adjacent to any public right-of-way or public
areas shall be kept trimmed so that the lowest branches projecting over
the public street or alley provide a clearance of not less than 14 feet.
The staff forester may waive the provisions of this section for newly
21.Editor's Note: The Public Tree Inventory Report and Management Plan is on file in the
City's offices or available on the City's website.
22.Editor's Note: The Public Tree Inventory Report and Management Plan is on file in the
City's offices or available on the City's website.
§ 584-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 584-9
1:502
§ 584-10. Trees and shrubbery obstructing view at intersection or of
traffic signs.
planted trees if he determines that they do not interfere with public
travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight or endanger public safety.
B. The necessity of the pruning may be determined by the staff forester.
C. Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches shall not be less than seven
feet. All trees standing upon private property in the City, the branches
of which extend over the line of the street, shall be trimmed so that no
branch shall grow or hang over the line of the sidewalk lower than
seven feet above the level of the sidewalk. No tree shall be permitted to
grow in such a manner as to obstruct the proper diffusion of light from
any public lamp.
D. Trimming or pruning of more than 2/3 of the crown shall be considered
to be a major alteration and shall require a permit from the staff
forester.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person shall
maintain, plant or permit to remain on any private or public premises
situated at the intersection of two or more streets or alleys in the City
any hedge, tree, shrub or other growth which may obstruct the view of
the operator of any motor vehicle or pedestrian approaching such
intersection.
B. It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow, allow to grow or
maintain any trees, bushes, shrubbery or vegetation of any kind which
is an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any traffic sign or
driveway approach to a street in the City. It shall be the duty of every
owner of such tree, bush, shrubbery or vegetation to remove such
obstruction.
C. Any shrub, tree or other plant which obstructs the view at an
intersection or the view of a traffic sign shall be deemed to be
dangerous to public travel, and the Public Works Committee, upon the
recommendation of the staff forester, may order, by written notice, the
owner or occupant of any private place or premises on which there
stands a tree or shrub which unreasonably interferes with or
encroaches upon the street or sidewalk to take such steps as are
necessary to remove such interference. If such owner or occupant fails,
within 10 days of receipt of notice, to take such necessary steps, the
Public Works Committee and/or Common Council shall order City
employees to remove the interference. The cost of removing the
interference shall be levied and collected as a special tax upon the
property upon which or in front of which such tree or shrub stands.
D. Any person who is an owner or occupant or firm or corporation failing
to obey the written notice as specified in Subsection C above shall, upon
§ 584-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 584-10
1:503
§ 584-11. Removal of trees and stumps.
§ 584-12. Prohibited acts.
conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture as established in Chapter
1, General Provisions, § 1-3 of this Code.
A. Dangerous, obstructive and infected trees. Any tree or part thereof,
whether alive or dead, which the staff forester shall find to be infected,
hazardous or a nuisance so as to endanger the public or other trees,
plants or shrubs growing within the City, or to be injurious to sewers,
sidewalks or other public improvements, whether growing upon public
or private premises, shall be removed, trimmed or treated by the owner
of the property upon or adjacent to which such tree or part thereof is
located. The staff forester shall give written notice to said owner to
remedy the situation which shall be served personally or posted upon
the affected tree. Such notice shall specifically state the period of time
within which the action must be taken, which shall be within not less
than 24 hours nor more than 14 days, as determined by the staff
forester on the basis of the seriousness of the condition of the tree or
danger to the public. If the owner shall fail to remove, treat or trim said
tree within the time limit, the staff forester shall cause the tree to be
removed, treated or trimmed and shall report the full cost thereof to the
City Clerk-Treasurer, who shall thereupon enter such cost as a special
charge against the property.
B. Removal standards. In cutting down trees located in public and terrace
areas, the tree must be removed with the root stump grubbed out, or
ground out to a depth of at least nine inches below grade measured in a
straight line with the normal grade of sidewalk to top of curb. All wood
and debris must be removed from the street prior to the end of each
working day, and all holes shall be filled to normal grade level with
topsoil as soon as practicable. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Private removal. No person, firm, organization or corporation shall
plant, injure, trim, remove or destroy any tree or shrub located in or
upon any public place, until a permit shall have been issued by the staff
forester. Such permit shall be issued only when the removal, trimming
or cutting of the tree or shrub is necessary, as determined by the staff
forester, because of disease, damage, hazardous condition, and/or
location, or its location is such that substantial detriment is done to the
property upon which the tree or shrub stands, or property abutting the
same. Such permit shall expressly state the premises upon which the
tree stands and the location of the tree thereon.
A. Damage to public trees. No person shall, without the consent of the
owner, in the case of a private tree or shrub, or without written permits
from the staff forester, in the case of a terrace-area tree, public tree or
§ 584-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 584-12
1:504
shrub, perform or cause to be performed by others any of the following
acts:
(1) Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire sign, unprotected electrical
installation or other device or material to, around or through a tree
or shrub.
(2) Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or
permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub.
(3) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious
substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any tree or
shrub or place cement or other solid substance around the base of
the same.
(4) Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for
the protection of a public tree or shrub, or close or obstruct any
open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to
permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
(5) Attach any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree, or fasten
any guy wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree;
except that the City may tie temporary no-parking signs to trees
when necessary in conjunction with street improvement work, tree
maintenance work or parades.
(6) Cause or encourage any fire or burning near or around any tree.
B. Excavations. All trees on any parkway or other publicly owned property
near any excavation or construction of any building structure or street
work shall be sufficiently guarded and protected by those responsible
for such work as to prevent any injury to said trees. No person shall
excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or install pavement within a
radius of 10 feet from any public tree without a permit from the staff
forester.
C. Interference with forester. No person shall:
(1) Interfere with or prevent any acts of the forester or his agents or
employees while they are engaged in the performance of duties
imposed by this section.
(2) Refuse to permit the forester or his duly authorized representative
to enter upon his premises at reasonable times to exercise the
duties imposed by this section.
D. Refusal to abate nuisance. No person shall permit any public nuisance
to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him when ordered by
the forester to abate such nuisance. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 584-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 584-13
1:505
§ 584-13. Appeal from determinations or orders.
Any person who receives a determination or order under this chapter from
the staff forester or Parks and Recreation Committee and objects to all or
any part thereof shall have the right to appeal such determination or order,
subject to the provisions of Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., to the Common Council
within seven days of receipt of the order, and the Common Council shall
hear such appeal within 30 days of receipt of written notice of the appeal.
After such hearing, the Common Council may reverse, affirm or modify the
order or determination appealed from, and the grounds for its decision shall
be stated in writing. The Common Council shall, by letter, notify the party
appealing the order or determination of its decision within 10 days after the
hearing has been concluded. The Council shall file its written decision with
the City Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 584-14. Adoption of standards.
Sections 27.09 and 86.03, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.
Chapter 608
VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN
§ 608-1. Intent; applicability.
The City Council has considered the recreational and economic value of
all-terrain vehicle and utility-terrain vehicle (ATV/UTV) routes and trail
opportunities weighed against protecting the public safety, liability aspects,
terrain involved, traffic density, and history of automobile traffic. After due
consideration, this chapter is created to establish all-terrain vehicle and
utility terrain vehicle routes on public roadways and trails on the City
property and to regulate the operation of such vehicles on such routes and
trails to provide safe and healthful conditions for the enjoyment of ATV/
UTV recreation consistent with public rights and interest pursuant to City
authority under Wis. Stats. §§ 62.11(5), 23.33(8) and 23.33(11).
§ 608-2. Adoption of standards.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions in
Wis. Stats. Chs. 23, 340 to 348, and 350 establishing definitions and
regulations with respect to ATVs and UTVs, and Wis. Adm. Code. Ch.
NR 64, All-Terrain Vehicles, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to
penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the
statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are hereby adopted
and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any act required to be performed
or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required
or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of the statutes or administrative codes incorporated herein
§ 584-13 REEDSBURG CODE § 608-2
1:506
are made a part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide
regulation of ATVs and UTVs, except to the extent that the provisions of this
chapter are more restrictive.
§ 608-3. Designating ATV/UTV routes and trails.
Designated ATV/UTV routes include all public streets and alleys except
connecting highways within the City of Reedsburg City limits except as
posted. In addition, under Wis Stats. § 23.33(11)(am)4, ATVs/UTVs are
authorized to operate on STH 33 (East and West Main Street) and STH
23 (South Albert Avenue) where the speed limit is 35 MPH or less. The
Reedsburg Police Department may temporarily close any ATV/UTV route
whenever conditions require closure.
§ 608-4. Trail and route signs.
Designated ATV/UTV route and trail signs shall be shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 64.12(7).
§ 608-5. Operation of ATVs and UTVs.
Operation of ATVs and UTVs on designated ATV/UTV routes shall be subject
to all provisions of § 23.33, Wis. Stats., which is adopted as a part of this
chapter by reference. The following restrictions apply to operation of ATVs
and UTVs on all city streets designated as ATV/UTV routes:
A. The City of Reedsburg is solely responsible for ATV/UTV route signage
installation and no person may install any sign on a designated ATV/
UTV route without written authorization of the City.
B. All required signs shall be in accordance with state statutes and
administrative codes applicable to ATV/UTV routes on public streets
and bridge crossings.
C. No person may erect, remove, obscure, or deface any authorized ATV/
UTV route sign without written authorization of the City of Reedsburg.
A. ATVs and UTVs may only be operated on approved ATV/UTV routes
from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
B. ATVs and UTVs shall operate at a safe speed not to exceed the posted
speed limits.
C. No person under the age of 16 may operate an ATV or UTV on any
segment of a street or highway in the City of Reedsburg.
D. Every person who operates an ATV or UTV on any street or highway in
the City of Reedsburg shall have in his or her immediate possession a
valid motor vehicle operator's license. The ATV/UTV operator shall
display the operator's license upon demand from any law enforcement
officer, state patrol officer, inspector under Wisconsin State Stats.
§ 110.07(1), conservation warden, or municipal peace officer.
§ 608-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 608-5
1:507
§ 608-6. Notifications.
A copy of this chapter shall be sent to the Wisconsin State Patrol, Sauk
County Sheriff's Department and to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
§ 608-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 615
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 615-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 5-11-2009; 7-23-2018 by
Ord. No. 1880-18; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all provisions
of Chs. 340 to 350, Wis. Stats., and the Department of Transportation
sections describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and
traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including penalties to
be imposed and procedure for prosecution, are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by a statute incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Sections 615-2, 615-3,
615-4, 615-5, 615-6, 615-7, 615-8, 615-9, 615-10, 615-11, 615-12, 615-13,
E. No operator or passenger of an ATV or UTV may possess in or on an
ATV or UTV on any street or highway in the City of Reedsburg, any
bottle or receptacle containing alcohol beverages if the bottle or
receptacle has been opened, the seal has been broken, or the contents
of the bottle or receptacle have been partially removed or released.
F. All ATV and UTV equipment is required to have applicable liability
insurance and have proof of insurance.
A. Except as provided in § 23.33(13)(am) to (e), Wis. Stats., any person
who violates any section of this chapter or statutes adopted by
reference shall pay a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $250
for each offense. Said forfeiture is exclusive of mandatory assessments
and costs.
B. The penalty for operating an ATV/UTV off the roadway of a designated
ATV/UTV route to include the grassy in-slope, ditches, or other highway
right-of-way; other than for direct access from a trail to a roadway on a
designated trail, or operating outside of permitted times for route use,
or operating in excess of permitted speed; shall result in a forfeiture of
not less than $100 nor more than $250, as established in Wis. Stats. Ch.
23. Said forfeiture is exclusive of mandatory assessments and costs.
C. In addition to any forfeiture, a court may order restitution to repair any
damage caused by violation of this chapter.
§ 608-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-1
1:508
615-14, 615-15, 615-16, 615-17, 615-18, 615-19, 615-20, and 615-21 may be
changed, modified and updated through a City resolution recommended by
action to the Public Works Committee upon recommendation of the Public
Works Director/City Engineer to the Common Council This section shall
pertain to all of the statutes set forth below along with any amendments,
additions or deletions that may occur.
A. Chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code Department of
Transportation Rules and Regulations adopted by reference shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Chapter Trans 100, Accident reporting and safety responsibility.
(2) Chapter Trans 101, Demerit point system and graduated driver
license restriction extensions.
(3) Chapter Trans 102, Operator's licenses and identification cards.
(4) Chapter Trans 104, Examination procedures for operator's license.
(5) Chapter Trans 105, Licensing of driver schools and instructors.
(6) Chapter Trans 107, Driver licensing of persons with chemical
abuse or dependency problems.
(7) Chapter Trans 112, Medical standards for driver licensing and
general standards for school bus endorsements.
(8) Chapter Trans 113, Administrative suspension of operating
privilege for operating a motor vehicle with a prohibited alcohol
concentration.
(9) Chapter Trans 115, Third party testing.
(10) Chapter Trans 117, Occupational driver's license.
(11) Chapter Trans 118, Employer notification program.
(12) Chapter Trans 129, Motorcycle licensing and courses.
(13) Chapter Trans 130, Special identification cards and special
registration plates for physically disabled.
(14) Chapter Trans 132, Temporary license plates and permits.
(15) Chapter Trans 134, Authorized special groups.
(16) Chapter Trans 154, Vehicle odometer disclosure requirements.
(17) Chapter Trans 155, Vehicle identification number inspection.
(18) Chapter Trans 157, Titling of vehicles held by trusts.
(19) Chapter Trans 196, Counter service and special handling service
for certificates of title and registration.
§ 615-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-1
1:509
(20) Chapter Trans 303, Equipment standards for special vehicles.
(21) Chapter Trans 304, Slow moving vehicle emblem.
(22) Chapter Trans 305, Standards for vehicle equipment.
(23) Chapter Trans 306, Use of studded tires.
(24) Chapter Trans 307, Standards for load securement.
(25) Chapter Trans 308, Requirements for trailer and semi-trailer
brake, hitch and coupling, safety chains, cables and leveling bars.
(26) Chapter Trans 309, Ambulance inspection.
(27) Chapter Trans 310, Child restraint standards and exemptions.
(28) Chapter Trans 311, Breath alcohol testing, approval and permit
program.
(29) Chapter Trans 312, Weigh station stopping requirements.
(30) Chapter Trans 313, Breath alcohol ignition interlock devices.
(31) Chapter Trans 315, Safety belt usage; physical or medical
exemption.
(32) Chapter Trans 320, Calculation of fees for special events, security,
traffic enforcement and escort services.
B. Sections of Chs. 340 to 350, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Section 340.01, Words and phrases defined.
(2) Section 341.11(4), Display of registration plates.
(3) Section 341.15, Display of registration plates.
(4) Section 341.16(4), Issuance of replacement plate.
(5) Section 341.41(4), Reciprocity agreements authorized.
(6) Section 341.55, Penalty for misuse of plates.
(7) Section 341.57(3), Registration of finance companies and financial
institutions.
(8) Section 341.63, When registration to be suspended.
(9) Section 342.05(4), When certificate of title required.
(10) Section 342.15(5), (6) and (7), Transfer of interest in a vehicle.
(11) Section 342.23, Secured party's and owner's duties.
(12) Section 342.30, 342.31.
§ 615-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-1
1:510
(13) Section 342.34.
(14) Section 343.01, Words and phrases defined.
(15) Section 343.305, Tests for intoxication; administrative suspension
and court-ordered revocation.
(16) Section 343.35, Surrender of licenses upon cancellation,
revocation or suspension.
(17) Section 343.45 to 343.46, Unlawful practices relative to licenses.
(18) Section 343.73, Penalty.
(19) Section 344.01, Words and phrases defined.
(20) Sections 344.45 and 344.46, Penalties for violation of chapter.
(21) Section 344.51, Financial responsibility for domestic rented or
leased vehicles.
(22) Section 345.01, Words and phrases defined.
(23) Section 345.20 to 345.53, Arrests, bail, penalties.
(24) Section 345.55, Traffic officers not to profit from arrests.
(25) Section 346.01, Words and phrases defined.
(26) Section 346.02, Applicability of chapter.
(27) Section 346.03, Applicability of rules of the road to authorized
emergency vehicles.
(28) Section 346.04(1) and (2), Obedience to traffic officers, signs and
signals; fleeing from officer.
(29) Section 346.05 to 346.16, Driving, meeting, overtaking and
passing.
(30) Section 346.17, Penalty for violating sections 346.04 to 346.16.
(31) Section 346.18 to 346.21, Right of way.
(32) Section 346.22, Penalty for violating sections 346.18 to 346.21.
(33) Section 346.23 to 346.29, Drivers and pedestrians.
(34) Section 346.30, Penalty for violating sections 346.23 to 346.29.
(35) Section 346.37 to 346.42, Traffic signs, signals, and pavement
markings.
(36) Section 346.43, Penalty for violating sections 346.37 to 346.42.
(37) Section 346.44 to 346.48, Required stops.
§ 615-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-1
1:511
(38) Section 346.49, Penalty for violating ss. 346.44 to 346.48.
(39) Section 346.50, Exceptions to stopping and parking restrictions.
(40) Section 346.505, Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in
parking spaces reserved for vehicles displaying special registration
plates or special identification cards.
(41) Section 346.55, Other restrictions on parking and stopping.
(42) Section 346.56, Penalty for violating sections 346.503 to 346.55.
(43) Sections 346.57(2), (3) and (4)(a) to (c), Speed restrictions.
(44) Sections 346.57(4)(d),(5),(6) to 346.595, Speed restrictions.
(45) Section 346.60, Penalty for violating sections 346.57 to 346.595.
(46) Section 346.61, Applicability of sections relating to reckless and
drunken driving.
(47) Section 346.62(1) and (3), Reckless driving.
(48) Section 346.64, Employment of drunk operators.
(49) Section 346.65(1)(2), Penalty for violating sections 346.62 to
346.64.
(50) Section 346.66, Applicability of sections relating to accidents and
accident reporting.
(51) Sections 346.68 to 346.69, Duty upon striking unattended vehicle,
duty upon striking property on or adjacent to highway.
(52) Section 346.70(4), Duty to report accident; assistance following
accident, police and traffic agencies to report.
(53) Section 346.70(5), Duty to report accident; assistance following
accident, falsifying reports.
(54) Section 346.77 to 346.807, Bicycles, electric personal assistive
mobility devices, personal delivery devices, and play vehicles.
(55) Section 346.82, Penalty for violating sections 346.77 to 346.807.
(56) Section 346.87 to 346.94, Miscellaneous rules.
(57) Section 346.95, Penalty for violating sections 346.87 to 346.94.
(58) Section 347.01 to 347.05, General provisions.
(59) Section 347.06 to 347.29, Lighting equipment.
(60) Section 347.30, Penalty for violating lighting equipment
requirements.
§ 615-1 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-1
1:512
§ 615-2. Speed limits. [Amended 8-9-2004]
(61) Section 347.35 to 347.49, Other equipment.
(62) Section 347.50, Penalties.
(63) Section 348.01 to 348.02, Size, weight, load; general provisions.
(64) Section 348.05 to 348.10, Size and load.
(65) Section 348.11, Penalty for violating size and load limitations.
(66) Section 348.15 to 348.20, Weight.
(67) Section 348.21, Penalty for violating weight limitations.
(68) Section 348.25 to 348.27, Permits.
(69) Section 348.28, Permits to be carried.
(70) Section 349.03, Regulations by local authorities forbidden;
exceptions.
(71) Section 349.06, Authority to adopt traffic regulations in strict
conformity with state law.
(72) Section 349.18, Additional traffic-control authority of counties and
municipalities.
(73) Sections 350.01 to 350.10, Snowmobiles.
(74) Section 346.63, Operating under influence of intoxicant or other
drug.
C. Other laws adopted. There are also hereby adopted by reference the
following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, but the prosecution of
such offenses under this chapter shall be as provided in Chs. 340 to
348, Wis. Stats., and the penalty for violation thereof shall be limited to
a forfeiture as provided in § 615-23 of this chapter.
(1) Section 941.01(1), Negligent operation of vehicle (off highway).
(2) Section 346.935, Intoxicants in motor vehicles.
A. State speed limits adopted. The provision of §§ 346.57, 346.58 and
346.59, Wis. Stats., relating to the maximum and minimum speed of
vehicles are hereby adopted as a part of this section as if fully set forth
herein, except as modified pursuant to § 349.11(1)(c), Wis. Stats.
B. Pursuant to § 349.11, Wis. Stats., the speed limits on the following
streets shall be as indicated:
§ 615-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-2
1:513
§ 615-3. Through highways.
In the interest of public safety and pursuant to § 349.07, Wis. Stats., the
following streets or portions thereof are declared to be through highways,
and traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by the
Reedsburg Police Department in accordance with § 615-6 of this chapter.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
8th Street
[Added
5-11-2009]
35 From a point 200 feet west of
Eastridge Drive to a point 150 feet
east of Crestview Drive
Barbara Ann
Drive
35 From Myrtle Street west 1,120 feet to
the bridge on Barbara Ann Drive
City parks 15
Golf Course Road 35 From its intersection with Highway
23-33 to the northern City limits
K Street 35 From Alexander Avenue to the
westerly City limits
Main Street 35 From Veterans Drive to a point 200
feet east of Lilac Drive
Main Street 45 From a point 200 feet east of Lilac
Drive to the easterly City limits
Mobile home
parks within City
15
Myrtle Street 35 Both sides from a point 800 feet north
of Mary Avenue north to Mittlesteadt
Drive
North Dewey
Avenue [Added
5-11-2009]
25 From a point 700 feet south of Hay
Creek Trail to a point 150 feet north
of Hay Creek Trail
Old Loganville
Road [Amended
5-11-2009]
35 From a point 300 feet south of K
Street to a point 150 feet south of
Lois Drive
South Albert
Avenue
35 From Franklin Street to K Street
South Albert
Avenue
45 From a point 200 feet south of K
Street to the southerly City limits
Viking Drive 35 From Main Street to 20th Street
Viking Drive 45 From 20th Street to the northerly
City limits
§ 615-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-3
1:514
Location
2nd Street west of Myrtle Street to North Walnut Street
8th Street east of Myrtle Street
Lime Ridge Road west to South Albert Avenue. (STH 23)
Main Street in its entirety
Myrtle Street in its entirety
Pine Street north of Railroad Street
Railroad Street west of Pine Street
South Albert Avenue (STH 23)
South Dewey Avenue
Vine Street west of Pine Street to South Walnut Street
Walnut Street north of Railroad Street to Riverview Road south to North
Walnut Street
§ 615-4. Preferential streets.
A. The following streets are hereby designated preferential streets, and all
traffic entering them will be controlled by yield right-of-way signs:
Name of Street
8th Street west of Myrtle Street
Booster Boulevard
Dewey Avenue, except traffic shall be controlled by stop signs on
each street
Lucky Street
Railroad Street east of Pine Street
Webb Avenue from Railroad Street to 8th Street
B. Yield signs shall be placed at the following locations:
(1) On Center Street where it enters Booster Boulevard.
(2) On South Pine Street where Booster Boulevard enters it.
(3) On Ash Street where it enters Railroad Street.
(4) On Warren, Willow, South Grove and Badger Streets where they
enter Lucky Street.
(5) On Plum Street, 3rd Street, 4th Street, Washburn Street, Seymour,
High Street, and 6th Street where they enter Dewey Avenue.
(6) On Locust Street where it enters 8th Street from the south.
(7) On the Webb Park Drive where it enters Webb Avenue.
§ 615-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-4
1:515
§ 615-5. Stop signs.
(8) On 4th Street where it enters Webb Avenue.
(9) At the northeast corner where Industrial Avenue intersects with
Dewey Avenue.
(10) On Plum Street at the intersection of South Grove Street.
(11) At the intersection of Webb, Vine and Railroad for cars crossing
railroad tracks from Vine, cars crossing railroad tracks from Webb
and cars entering intersection from South Webb.
(12)On Seymour Street where it enters North Grove from the east and
west.
(13)On Ellinwood Avenue where it enters Clark Street from the east
and west.
A. The following streets shall be controlled by stop signs:
(1) On 2nd Street where it enters North Webb Avenue.
(2) On South Walnut Street where it enters Railroad Street.
(3) On South Pine Street where it enters Railroad Street from the
north.
(4) On North Webb Avenue where it crosses Riverview Road.
(5) On North Webb Avenue where it enters 8th Street from the north.
(6) On Plum Street where it enters South Park Street.
(7) On South Locust Street where it crosses Plum Street.
(8) On Lucky Street where it enters South Dewey Avenue.
(9) On Lucky Street where it enters South Pine Street.
(10) On North Pine Street where it enters 8th Street.
(11) On North Park Street where it enters 8th Street.
(12)On Booster Boulevard where it enters South Pine Street.
[Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1874-18]
(13)On Division Street where it enters South Dewey Avenue from the
west.
(14) On 5th Street where it crosses North Park Street.
(15) On 6th Street where it crosses North Park Street.
(16) On 3rd Street where it crosses North Park Street.
§ 615-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-5
1:516
(17) On 4th Street where it crosses North Park Street.
(18) On South Park Street where it enters Railroad Street.
(19) On Ridge Street where it enters 8th Street from the south.
(20) On 3rd Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the west.
(21) On 4th Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the west.
(22)On Wellington Drive where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the
east.
(23)On Seymour Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the
west.
(24)On High Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the east.
(25) On 6th Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the west.
(26) On 7th Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the east.
(27) On 9th Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the west.
(28)On 10th Court where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the west.
(29) On 12th Street where it crosses North Dewey Avenue.
(30)On 14th Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the east.
(31)On 19th Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the east.
(32) On 21st Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the east.
(33) Four-way stop at the intersection of North Dewey Avenue and 8th
Street.
(34)On Maple Street where it enters South Dewey Avenue from the
east.
(35) On South Oak Street where it enters Plum Street from the south.
(36)On 11th Street where it enters North Dewey Avenue from the west.
(37) On Logelin Drive where it enters Main Street from the north.
(38) On Ash Street where it enters Railroad Street from the north.
(39) On North Grove Street where it crosses 8th Street.
(40) There shall be no stop sign placed on Center Street where it enters
Booster Boulevard.
(41)On the alley between 2nd and 3rd Streets where it enters North
Webb Avenue.
(42) On 3rd Street where it crosses Laurel Street.
§ 615-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-5
1:517
(43) At the intersection of Commercial Avenue and South Dewey (fourway
stop).
(44) At the intersection of Viking Drive and Huntington Park Drive (fourway
stop).
(45) At the intersection of Industrial Street and Commercial Avenue
(four-way stop).
(46) On 3rd Street at the intersection of Oak Street.
(47) On 2nd Street at the intersection of Laurel Street.
(48) On 3rd Street where it enters Webb Avenue.
(49) On Lilac Road at the intersection of Highway 23.
(50) North Golf Course Road at the intersection of Highway 23.
(51) Fairway Drive at the intersection of Golf Course Road.
(52) King Street at the intersection of Golf Course Road.
(53) On Vine at intersection of Railroad and Webb.
(54)On South Webb (proceeding north) at the intersection of Railroad
and Vine.
(55) On 4th Street where it crosses Laurel Street.
(56) On 6th Street where it enters North Oak from the east and west.
(57)On Seymour Street where it enters North Oak Street from the east
and west.
(58)On 4th Street where it enters North Oak Street from the east and
west.
(59) On 19th Street where it enters Highway H from the west.
(60) On 19th Street where it enters Hemlock Drive from the east.
(61)On Viking View Drive where it enters Reedsburg Road from the
south.
(62)On Plum Street where it enters Willow Street from the east and the
west.
(63)On Willow Street where it enters Plum Street from north and south.
(64)On 6th Street where it enters North Willow from the east and the
west.
(65)On 3rd Street where it enters North Locust from the east and west.
(66) On Winfield Place where it enters 19th Street from the north.
§ 615-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-5
1:518
(67) At North/South Connector where it intersects Highway 33.
(68) At Lands End Lane where it intersects Highway H.
(69) On Wellington Drive where it enters 8th Street from the south.
(70) On North Webb where it intersects 8th Street from the south.
(71)On North Webb where it intersects 4th Street from the north and
south.
(72) On 4th Street where it intersects North Webb from the east.
(73) On 19th Street as it enters Ridgeview Drive.
(74) On Ridgeview Drive as it enters 21st Street.
(75)On 19th Street where it intersects North Dewey and where it
intersects Highway K.
(76)On both sides of North Grove Street where it intersects 3rd Street,
4th Street, Seymour Street and 6th Street.
(77) On Cady Street where it enters Wengel Drive.
(78)On 4th Street where it enters North Locust from the east and west.
(79) On the east and west sides of West 2nd at LaValle Street.
(80) On the east and west sides of West 2nd at North James Street.
(81) On both sides of South Walnut Street where it enters 2nd Street.
(82) On both sides of South Walnut Street where it enters Vine Street.
(83) On both sides of 4th Street where it enters North Willow Street.
(84) On both sides of Jessica Lane where it enters 19th Street.
(85) On both sides of Taylor Circle where it enters 19th Street.
(86) On both sides of Amanda Drive where it enters 19th Street.
(87) On both sides of Ridge Street where it enters Wellington Drive.
(88) At 22nd Street where it meets Highway K north.
(89) At Sunset Drive where it meets 19th Street.
(90) At Gavin Court where it enters 19th Street.
(91) At Prothero Drive where it enters Commercial Avenue.
(92) Vine Street where it intersects with South Willow, eastbound.
(93) Four-way stop at the intersection of South Grove Street and Plum
Street.
§ 615-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-5
1:519
(94) South Grove Street where it intersects with Lucky Street,
northbound.
(95) Industrial Avenue where it intersects with South Dewey Avenue,
westbound.
(96) Seymour Street where it intersects with Laurel Street, westbound.
(97) Seymour Street where it intersects with North Willow, eastbound
and westbound.
(98) Krystle Court where it intersects with Amanda Drive.
(99) Justin Circle where it intersects with Amanda Drive.
(100) Jacob Circle where it intersects with Amanda Drive.
(101) Zachery Circle where it intersects with Amanda Drive.
(102) 21st Street where it intersects Ridgeview Drive.
(103) 22nd Street where it intersects North Dewey.
(104) Southridge Boulevard where it intersects Highway 23.
(105) Lois Drive where it intersects Old Loganville Road.
(106) On Pheasant Street where it intersects with Ellinwood Avenue.
(107)On both sides of Charles Street where it intersects with Ellinwood
Avenue.
(108)On both sides of Franklin Street where it intersects with
Ellinwood Avenue.
(109)On both sides of Clark Street where it intersects with Ellinwood
Avenue.
(110)On both sides of Clark Street where it intersects with South James
Avenue.
(111)On both sides of Franklin Street where it intersects with South
James Street.
(112) On Babb Avenue where it intersects with Pheasant Street.
(113) On Pheasant Street where it intersects with Preston Avenue.
(114) On Charles Street where it intersects with Preston Avenue.
(115) On Franklin Street where it intersects with Preston Avenue.
(116)On both sides of Clark Street where it intersects with Preston
Avenue.
(117) On Clark Street where it intersects with Alexander Avenue.
§ 615-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-5
1:520
(118) On Carousel Drive where it intersects with Alexander Avenue.
(119) On Preston Avenue where it intersects with West 2nd Street.
(120) On Crimson Court where it intersects with Preston Avenue.
(121) On Preston Avenue where it intersects with LaValle Street.
(122) On James Avenue where it intersects with LaValle Street.
(123) On West 2nd Street where it intersects with Eagle.
(124) On Lancer Court where it intersects with Huntington Park Drive.
(125)On Vine Street where it intersects with Park Street east and
westbound.
(126)On South Preston Avenue where it intersects with K Street in both
directions.
(127) On Reinhardt Court where it intersects with Joseph Circle.
(128) On Mabel Court where it intersects with Joseph Circle.
(129) On Joseph Circle where it intersects with 22nd Street.
(130)Winfield Drive where it intersects with Ridgeview Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(131) Both sides of Winfield Drive where it intersects with 21st Street.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(132) Sunset Drive where it intersects with 21st Street. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(133) Summit Circle where it intersects with Sunset Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(134) Russet Circle where it intersects with Winfield Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(135) Zinga Drive where it intersects with Veterans Drive. [Amended
2-11-2002]
(136) Utility Court where it intersects with Zinga Drive. [Amended
2-11-2002]
(137) Amber Court where it intersects with Winfield Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(138) Harvest Lane where it intersects with Winfield Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(139) Harvest Lane where it intersects with Sunset Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
§ 615-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-5
1:521
(140) 17th Court where it intersects with Hemlock Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(141) 17th Street where it intersects with Hemlock Drive.23 [Amended
10-28-2002]
(142) 15th Court where it intersects with Hemlock Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(143) 15th Street where it intersects with Hemlock Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(144) Both sides of 14th Street where it intersects with Hemlock Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(145) Borland Court where it intersects with Hemlock Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(146) Both sides of 7th Street where it intersects with Ridge Street.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(147) Reed Street where it intersects with 7th Street. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(148) Reed Street where it intersects with High Street. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(149) High Street where it intersects with Ridge Street. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(150) Ridge Street where it intersects with 3rd Street. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(151) Hills Crest Lane where it intersects with 3rd Street. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(152) Hills Crest Lane where it intersects with Logelin Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(153)Woodbridge Court where it intersects with Wellington Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(154) Cadbury Court where it intersects with Wellington Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(155) Huntington Park Drive where it intersects with Wellington Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(156) Inverness Court where it intersects with Wellington Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
23.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 142, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 5-11-2009.
§ 615-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-5
1:522
(157) Canterbury Court where it intersects with Wellington Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(158) Coventry Court where it intersects with Huntington Park Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(159) Viking View Drive where it intersects with Huntington Park Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(160) Valhalla View Court where it intersects with Viking View Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(161) Tivoli Lane where it intersects with Viking View Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(162) Nordic Court where it intersects with Tivoli Lane. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(163) Tivoli Lane where it intersects with Huntington Park Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(164) Both sides of Eastridge Drive where it intersects with Huntington
Park Drive. [Amended 10-28-2002]
(165) Thomas Road where it intersects with Barbara Ann Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(166)On Jaz Circle where it intersects with Barbara Ann Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(167) Harrison Lane where it intersects with Barbara Ann Drive.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(168) Michael Court where it intersects with Joseph Circle. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(169) 12th Street where it intersects with Pineview Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(170) North Park Street where it intersects with Modern Avenue.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(171) North Locust Street where it intersects with Modern Avenue.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(172) Meadow Lane where it intersects with May Avenue. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(173) Both sides of North Locust Street where it intersects with Mary
Avenue. [Amended 10-28-2002]
(174) Both sides of North Locust Street where it intersects with 8th
Street. [Amended 10-28-2002]
§ 615-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-5
1:523
§ 615-6. Through street intersections.
Where the following through streets intersect, traffic will stop as follows
and shall be controlled by stop signs.
(175) Midway Drive where it intersects with Carousel Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(176) Both sides of Bindl Drive where it intersects with Southridge
Boulevard [Amended 10-28-2002]
(177) Lois Drive where it intersects with Roloff Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(178) Roloff Court where it intersects with Roloff Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(179) Roloff Drive where it intersects with Bindl Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(180) Bindl Drive where it intersects with Lois Drive. [Amended
10-28-2002]
(181) North Locust Street where it intersects with 5th Street.
[Amended 10-28-2002]
(182) Sarah Rose Lane where it intersects with Barbara Ann Drive.
[Amended 8-11-2003]
(183) Thomas Road where it intersects with Barbara Ann Drive.
[Amended 8-11-2003]
(184) Barbara Ann Drive where it intersects with Highway V.
[Amended 8-11-2003]
(185) 6th Street where it intersects with Laurel Street eastbound and
westbound. [Amended 8-11-2003]
(186) North Locust Street where it intersects with 6th Street.
[Amended 8-11-2003]
(187) North Willow Street where it intersects with 3rd Street.
[Amended 8-11-2003]
(188) Viking Drive where it intersects with 8th Street. [Amended
12-8-2003]
(189) Maple Street where it intersects with King Street. [Amended
11-8-2004]
(190) Myrtle Street where it intersects with 8th Street. [Added
9-10-2007]
§ 615-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-6
1:524
§ 615-7. One-way traffic.
One-way traffic is authorized at the following location:
§ 615-8. Right turn no stop; left-hand-only lanes.
A. Wherever a through street intersects with Main Street, the other street
shall be controlled by stop signs.
B. Where Pine Street and 2nd Street intersect, 2nd Street traffic will stop
and shall be controlled by stop signs.
C. Where Walnut Street and Railroad Street intersect, Walnut Street
traffic shall stop and be controlled by signs and Railroad Street traffic
from the east shall stop, except that right turn traffic onto Walnut Street
need not stop.
D. Sections 346.31 and 346.37, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted by
reference as they pertain to overhead traffic control signs erected by
the City of Reedsburg at the intersections of Main Street and Walnut
Street to control the flow of traffic by designated lanes.
A. In a south-to-north direction in the east lane of Webb Avenue between
4th and 8th Street.
B. In a north-to-south direction in the west lane of Webb Avenue between
4th and 8th Street.
C. In an east-to-west direction in the alley of the north 200 block lying
between North Webb Avenue and North Walnut Street.
D. In a south-to-north direction in the first block of North Walnut Avenue.
E. In a north-to-south direction in the first block of South Walnut Avenue.
F. Clockwise in a north-to-south direction to South Grove Street from the
intersection of South Grove Street and Lucky Street, thence west on
Ash Street, thence north on Badger Street to its intersection with Lucky
Street.
G. In a north-to-south direction on South Willow Street from East Main
Street to Plum Street. [Added 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1834-16]
A. At the following locations, right-turning traffic shall not be required to
stop and right turn no stop signs will be placed at said intersections:
(1) Riverview Road at Walnut Street.
(2) Railroad Street at Pine Street.
B. Left-hand-only lanes. Only left hand turns shall be permitted at the
following intersection locations:
§ 615-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-8
1:525
§ 615-9. Parking limits.
(1) From the interior lane of Main Street (eastbound) proceeding north
on Webb Avenue and the interior lane of Main Street (westbound)
proceeding east on Main Street.
(2) From the interior lane of Webb Avenue (northbound) proceeding
west on Main Street and the interior lane of Webb Avenue
(southbound) proceeding east on Main Street.
(3) From the interior lane of Main Street (eastbound) proceeding north
on Walnut Street and the interior lane of Main Street (westbound)
proceeding south on Walnut Street.
(4) From the interior lane of Walnut Street (northbound) proceeding
west on Main Street and the interior lane of Walnut Street
(southbound) proceeding east on Main Street.
(5) From the interior lane of Main Street (eastbound) proceeding north
on Dewey Avenue and the interior lane of Main Street (westbound)
proceeding south on Dewey Avenue.
(6) From the interior lane of Main Street (eastbound) proceeding north
on Highway H and the interior lane of Main Street (westbound)
proceeding onto the airport/salvage yard properties.
(7) From the interior lane of Highway H (southbound) proceeding east
on Main Street.
A. When signs are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle for longer than the period hereinafter specified at
any time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. each day except that the
period shall be between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Friday. The parking
periods shall not apply on Sundays and legal holidays. A vehicle shall be
considered to be in violation of this chapter if it is not moved a distance
of at least 30 feet away from its initial parking space within the period
of time provided in the various sections below. In no case shall it be
lawful to park a nonregistered motor vehicle in any otherwise lawful
parking space.
(1) Two-hour parking limits.
(a) On Booster Boulevard from its intersection with Center Street
east to the easterly limits of Booster Boulevard, Monday
through Friday, from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(b) On the south side of East Main Street between the driveways
bordering East Main Plaza from 9:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m. on
weekdays; except Fridays from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(c) The first 225 feet of the north side of Wellington Drive
measured from the intersection of North Dewey Avenue and
Wellington Drive.
§ 615-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-9
1:526
(d) On the east side of Center Street from its intersection with
Booster Boulevard proceeding south to the alley between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(e) On the north side of Wellington Drive from Dewey to Ridge.
(2) Four-hour parking limits.
(3) One-hour parking limits.
(a) Parking on the 100 block of South Pine Street shall be as
follows: There shall be unlimited parking on the east side of the
South Pine Street from the driveway at 109/111 South Pine
Street north for a distance of 72 feet. There shall be one-hour
parking on the remainder of the 100 block of South Pine Street.
B. No parking zones. Vehicle parking or standing at any time (unless
otherwise specified) is hereby prohibited in the following areas:
(1) On the west side of South Pine from the Chicago and Northwest
Railroad right-of-way to Booster Boulevard (except a single lane of
milk truck parking will be permitted).
(2) On the west side of North Pine from Main Street to the entrance of
the service station.
(3) The parking areas located immediately in front of the Reedsburg
Police Station.
(4) On the north side of Railroad Street between South Park Street and
the east end of the Brittingham and Hixon Lumber Company
facility.
(5) On either side of North Webb Avenue or either side of the
boulevard on North Webb Avenue from the north end of North
Webb Avenue to four feet south of the second crosswalk.
(6) On the northerly four feet of the alleys located in Blocks 19 and 20
of the original plat for the City of Reedsburg (this subsection shall
also prohibit any form of operation of a motor vehicle within the
described area).
(7) On the north and south sides of Main Street from the City limits on
the east to the City limits on the west, except parking is permitted
on Main Street between Locust Street and Webb Avenue.
(8) The alley located in Block 1 of Mackey's Fourth Addition.
(9) On either side of Dewey Avenue for a distance of 175 feet north and
south of the center line of Main Street (Highway 23).
(10)On the west side of Myrtle Street for a distance of 90 feet from the
intersection of Myrtle Street and Main Street and the east side of
§ 615-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-9
1:527
Myrtle Street for a distance of 75 feet from the intersection of
Myrtle Street and Main Street.
(11)On either side of Viking Drive from Main Street north to the City
limits.
(12)On the west side of Eagle Street between its intersection with Main
Street and a point 50 feet north of that intersection.
(13)On both sides of South Albert Avenue between the intersection
with West Main Street and the intersection with Highway K.
(14)On the south side of Division Street from the westerly end of
Gerber to 825 feet of the eastern Gerber driveway on the north side
of Division Street.
(15)On the west side of South Locust Street beginning at a location 83
feet from the northwest corner of its intersection with Plum Street
and proceeding north for a distance of 40 feet.
(16) In the area located within 100 feet and on the north side of Lucky
Street where it intersects South Pine.
(17)On the east side of the 200 block of Granite Avenue, for a distance
of 30 feet beginning at a point 220 feet north of the control panel on
the City lift station.
(18)On the east side of Myrtle Street from 22nd Street north to the City
limits.
(19)On the north side of Lucky Street from its intersection of South
Grove Street for a distance of 150 feet from the intersection.
(20)On the south side of 8th Street between North Webb Avenue and
North Walnut Street.
(21)On the south side of Lucky Street between Lots 5 and 6, South Park
Addition.
(22)On the south side of Lucky Street from the west edge of the
driveway in front of Cellox to the west edge of Lot 6, Block 2, South
Park Addition.
(23)On the south side of Main Street or on the tree bank (that area
between the curb and outer boundary of the road/street right-ofway)
between the intersection of Pine Street and Main Street and a
point 75 feet to the west of the City's right-of-way at Pine Street.
(24)On the City sidewalk or in a manner which obstructs a City
sidewalk.
(25) On either side of Badger Street from Lucky Street to Ash Street.
§ 615-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-9
1:528
(26)On the north side of Division Street from the loading zone to 25 feet
east of the most eastern Gerber driveway on the north side of
Division Street.
(27)On the west side of Center Street between the alley and Booster
Boulevard.
(28)On the north side of Ash Street from Badger Street to Railroad
Street and on the south side of Ash Street, except that a loading
zone shall be created between the most easterly driveway of Grede
Foundries and the most westerly driveway of Grede Foundries.
(29) On the east side of Willow Street from Main Street to Plum Street.
(30)On the west side of Ridgeview Drive, for a distance of 880 feet
south, beginning at a point 207 feet south of the intersection of
Ridgeview Drive and 21st Street. [Amended 7-27-2009]
(31)On the east side of Ridgeview Drive, for a distance of 500 feet
north, beginning at a point 301 feet north of the intersection of
Ridgeview Drive and 19th Street.
(32)On the west side of South Willow Street from the intersection with
Main Street south 70 feet to the first driveway.
(33)On the south side of Industrial Street beginning at a point 320 feet
west of Bernien Avenue and continuing 425 feet to the west.
[Amended 5-24-2004]
(34)On the east side of Veterans Drive beginning at the south side of
Main Street and continuing 585 feet to the south and on the west
side of Veterans Drive beginning at the south side of Main Street
continuing 320 feet to the south. [Amended 5-24-2004]
(35)On the east side of Ridgeview Drive, for a distance of 100 feet north
and 100 feet south, beginning at the intersection of Ridgeview
Drive and 19th Street. [Added 7-27-2009]
(36)On the east and west sides of North Dewey Avenue 50 feet south of
the intersection with 19th Street. [Added 7-10-2017 by Ord. No.
1847-17]
C. Fifteen-minute parking zones. No vehicle shall park longer than 15
minutes:
(1) On either side of North Walnut Street in the City, from 2nd Street
north to the alley running through the block, said alley being
immediately north of the post office.
(2) On the east side of South Park Street in the 100 block.
(3) On the north side of Division Street in the loading zone hereby
created from the Hankscraft westerly property line to a point 150
feet east of the westerly corner of the factory building.
§ 615-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-9
1:529
(4) One parking space on the south side of Main Street proceeding east
from a point 74 feet from the southwest corner of the intersection
of Main Street and South Pine.
D. Downtown business parking district. All parking within the following
described district shall be based on signage in place at the time. That
signage may be changed from time to time at the direction of the Public
Works Committee with the approval of the Director of Public Works and
the Police Chief. The area included within this district is defined as
follows: [Amended 5-10-2010]
(1) Both sides of Vine Street between Webb Avenue and Locust Street;
(2) Both sides of Main Street between Webb Avenue and Locust Street;
(3) Both sides of 2nd Street between Webb Avenue and Locust Street;
(4) Both sides of Webb Avenue from its intersection with Vine Street to
the south edge of the alley running between 2nd Street and 3rd
Street;
(5) Both sides of Walnut Street from its intersection with Vine Street to
its intersection with 2nd Street;
(6) Both sides of Park Street from its intersection with Vine Street to
its intersection with 2nd Street;
(7) On the west side of Park Street from the intersection of 2nd Street
to the southern edge of the alley running between 2nd Street and
3rd Street;
(8) Both sides of Locust Street between Vine Street and Main Street.
E. Seventy-two hour limit. The operator of a vehicle shall not park such
vehicle for longer than 72 hours at any one time upon the streets of the
City. Any such vehicle may be removed by order of the Chief of Police,
Public Works Director or their designee after expiration of tow notice.
This chapter shall not prohibit the enforcement of § 615-10B
concerning alternate-side parking. (Section 615-12 shall take
precedence over this section in all snow emergency cases.) [Amended
3-24-2008: 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1880-18]
F. Parking limits in parking meter zones. In any parking meter zone where
parking meters are erected, the parking time limit shall be controlled
by such meters.
G. Removal of vehicle illegally parked in private driveways. Any vehicle
illegally parked in front of or in the entrance to a private driveway may
be removed by the City or its agents upon receipt of a signed request
from property owner, or tenant or agent, of the drive that is blocked.
The removed vehicle may be stored in a public garage, and the owner
shall pay the storage and towing charge before the vehicle is released.
§ 615-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-9
1:530
This section shall not apply to a vehicle parked on private land, but only
to one parked within street lines.
H. Removal of vehicle illegally parked in parade routes or construction
zones. Any vehicle illegally parked in a no-parking zone on a City street
designated as a temporary parade route or construction zone may be
removed by order of the Chief of Police, Public Works Director or their
designee. The removed vehicle shall be stored in a public garage, and
the owner shall pay the storage and towing charge before the vehicle is
released. [Added 3-24-2008]
I. Parking restricted. No parking along any City street where the curb has
been painted yellow by an authorized official and when such paint is
sufficiently visible to be seen by an ordinary, observant person. [Added
9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 1814-15]
J. Special residential parking permits. Those permanent residents of the
City of Reedsburg residing in the area bordered by Webb Avenue on the
west, 2nd Street on the north, Park Street on the east, and Vine Street
on the south shall be eligible to apply to the City Clerk for a permit
which will entitle them to park in the eight-hour spaces of the municipal
parking lots. Those permits shall have a duration of one month and shall
carry a monthly fee as set by the Common Council. Permits are
nontransferable and shall be displayed in the vehicle.24 [Amended
10-13-2003; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
K. Compact car parking only shall be permitted in the following locations:
(1) (Reserved)
L. City-owned parking areas.
(1) In this section, "city-owned parking areas" means the real estate
owned by the City and maintained by the City for the outdoor
parking of motor vehicles on the following described City blocks:
[Amended 1-13-2003]
(a) Block 19, Original Plat, City of Reedsburg: Lot No. 1.
(b) Block 20, Original Plat, City of Reedsburg: Lot No. 2.
(c) Block 13, Original Plat, City of Reedsburg: Lot No. 3.
(d) Block 14, Original Plat, City of Reedsburg: Lot No. 4.
(e) Block 23, Original Plat, City of Reedsburg: Lot No. 5.
(f) Block 21, Original Plat, City of Reedsburg: Lot No. 6.
(g) Parcel No. 1011 (Block 21, Original Plat): Lot No. 7.
24.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 11, when immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 5-11-2010.
§ 615-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-9
1:531
§ 615-10. Restricted parking.
(h) Block 22, Original Plat, City of Reedsburg: Lot No. 8.
(2) All parking limitations within City-owned parking areas shall be
based on signage in place at the time. That signage may be
changed from time to time by the Public Works Committee with the
approval of the Director of Public Works and Police Chief.
[Amended 5-10-2010]
A. Vehicle parking or standing is hereby prohibited in the following areas
at the following times:
(1) On either side of the boulevard of North Webb Avenue from the
second crosswalk to the first turnaround, between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(2) On the west side of Ellinwood Avenue starting at a point 267 feet
north of the intersection of Ellinwood Avenue and Highway K and
continuing north for 183 feet, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(3) On the north side of 6th Street from its intersection with Oak
running west for 100 feet, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00
p.m., when school is in session.
(4) On the west side of Willow Street from Main Street to Plum Street,
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(5) On the south side of Riverview Drive between North Webb Avenue
and North Walnut, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
B. Parking shall be permitted between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on all other
streets within the City, unless otherwise provided, from December 1 to
April 1 on the even-numbered calendar days on the even-numbered side
of the street and on the odd-numbered calendar days on the oddnumbered
side of the street, and no vehicle shall be parked contrary to
such regulation. Any person violating this subsection shall be subject to
a forfeiture as approved in the official bond schedule. [Amended
3-28-2011]
C. Except on Saturday, Sunday, and holidays, no person shall park a
vehicle of any kind on either side of North Webb Avenue or on the west
side of the boulevard on North Webb Avenue during the hours of 7:30
a.m. to 4:00 p.m. from August 15 to June 15. No parking shall be
permitted on the east side of said boulevard at any time during the day
and the year. The parking prohibitions contained herein shall be from
the northerly property line of the residence located at 504 North Webb
Avenue to the north boundary of 8th Street.
D. No person shall either park or allow to be parked on any street any
vehicle, trailer, machinery, or towed vehicle whose width at the
§ 615-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-10
1:532
§ 615-11. All-night parking prohibited.
§ 615-12. Parking in snow emergencies.
maximum extremities shall be more than eight feet zero inches from
9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Any person violating this subsection will be
subject to a forfeiture as approved in the official bond book. [Amended
5-9-2011]
E. No parking shall be permitted in the municipal parking lot between the
civic center and safety building between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. except for emergency vehicles; provided, however, that properly
identified vehicles belonging to members of the fire and police
department shall be permitted in said lot when attending drills and
training seminars.
A. No person shall park any vehicle between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of
any day, except physicians on emergency calls, and emergency vehicles,
on any of the following streets:
(1) Main Street from the Laurel Street intersection to the Baraboo
River Bridge, and West Main Street from the Baraboo River Bridge
to the James Street intersection.25
(2) South Walnut Street and South Park Street from Vine Street to
Railroad Street and South Locust Street from 2nd Street to Vine
Street.
(a) On the east side of streets between said limits on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday.
(b) On the west side of said streets between said limits on Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday.
B. Any person who shall be guilty of a violation of Subsection A may satisfy
such violation by paying to the Police Department the approved
forfeiture in the official bond schedule. [Amended 3-28-2011]
A. It is hereby declared to be the purpose and policy of the City to keep
and maintain the streets and highways of the City free and clear from
snow and ice in order to provide for the movement of vehicles, and the
transportation of food, fuel and persons, and to ensure the proper
functioning of fire, police and other vital facilities of the City. In order to
accomplish said purpose, emergency powers are hereby conferred
upon the above-mentioned City officials whenever snow removal is
necessary in the City.
B. Whenever snow has fallen, the Mayor may announce the emergency
and issue an order directing that all parking or vehicles on specified
25.Editor's Note: Original Subsections (1)(b), (c) and (d), which immediately followed this
subsection, were repealed 5-10-2010.
§ 615-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-12
1:533
§ 615-13. Continued violation of parking limit provisions. [Amended
8-24-2008]
§ 615-14. Leaving keys in vehicle prohibited.
public streets be prohibited for a given period, during which time
snow removal crews and equipment may remove snow and ice from
the streets. Such emergency order may prohibit parking only during
specified hours and may prohibit parking only on specified streets
within such time as is reasonable for the crews to fulfill their duties. A
copy of said emergency order should be delivered to the Public Works
Director, who shall forthwith cause announcement thereof to be made
by one radio or television station whose normal operating range covers
the City. The Public Works Director shall direct the placing of temporary
signs declaring such emergency along and upon the streets, one per
block, as needed.
C. When announcement has been made by radio and/or television and
temporary no-parking signs have been placed, no person shall park or
permit to be parked any vehicle on any street or highway of the City in
violation of such emergency order, provided vehicles may be
temporarily parked for a period of not more than three minutes for the
actual loading or unloading of passengers.
D. Any person who shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle in
violation of said emergency order shall be subject to a forfeiture as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3 of this Code, plus the
costs of prosecution, wrecker service and storage for the safekeeping of
said vehicle, and any or all expenses incident thereto.
E. Any City employee engaged in snow removal operations, upon
discovering a car parked in violation of this section, shall notify the
Police Department, who shall immediately take steps to enforce this
section.
A. Any person who shall park his or her vehicle on any street in the City
after prior notice of violation by citation, tow notice, or both, of some
parking limitation shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, § 1-3 of this Code, and his or her vehicle, when
parked in violation, may be removed pursuant to Subsection B.
B. The Chief of Police, Public Works Director or any of their employees
under their supervision and direction may remove any vehicle, in behalf
of the City, which may be violating Subsection A. The Chief of Police and
Public Works Director may charge the cost of removing such vehicle to
the owner or the operator thereof. They may cause removal to be made
either by their own department with City help, or may contract out such
removal. The removed vehicle shall be stored in a public garage, and
the owner shall pay the usual storage charge before the vehicle is
released. Any person who performs such removal shall carry public
liability insurance.
§ 615-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-14
1:534
§ 615-15. Vehicular weight limitations.
§ 615-16. U-turns prohibited.
It shall be illegal to make a U-turn at the intersection of Park and Main,
Webb and Main, Locust and Main, Walnut and Main, or Webb Avenue, from
the intersection of 3rd Street to the south end of the boulevard or in the
middle of the block in the business district, or any artery for through traffic
in a district at an intersection.
A. Every passenger motor vehicle shall be equipped with a lock suitable to
lock either the starting lever, throttle steering apparatus, gearshift
lever, or ignition system.
B. No person shall permit a motor vehicle not in custody to stand or
remain unattended on any street, alley, or any other public place,
except in attended parking area, unless either the starting lever,
throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift, or ignition of said vehicle is
locked, and the key for such lock is removed from the vehicle.
C. The police shall remove any key found in a car on a public street, alley,
or parking area, and take it to the police station, where the owner may
recover it.
A. Class "B" highways designated. All streets and alleys within the City,
except the following enumerated streets and alleys, are hereby
designated class "B" highways and shall be subject to the weight
limitations imposed by § 348.16, Wis. Stats.
(1) Myrtle Street from the north curbline of Main Street to and
including the intersection of South Park Street and Railroad Street
to the south City limits.
(2) North Park Street from the north line of Main Street to the south
curbline of 6th Street.
(3) Main Street from the east City limits to the west City limits.
(4) South Albert Avenue from the south curbline of Main Street to the
south City limits.
B. No vehicle, except for public transportation buses or household moving
vans, that have a combined vehicle load weight exceeding 32,000
pounds shall be operated or moved on any residential street or alley in
the City, except for the purpose of obtaining orders and/or for moving,
loading or delivering supplies and/or commodities. In any case, no
vehicle shall exceed the limitations of § 348.15 or 348.16(3), Wis. Stats.,
pertaining to class "A" highways or deliveries in class "B" highways.
§ 615-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-17
1:535
§ 615-17. Signs and/or advertising prohibited.
The following sign types are prohibited, and in no event shall a permit
therefor be granted by the City Building Inspector:
§ 615-18. Angle parking. [Amended 1-13-2003]
All parking at the curb on the following streets shall be angle parking:
Name of Street Side Location
2nd Street South Park Street to Webb Avenue
Vine Street South From Park Street to Webb Avenue
§ 615-19. Parking of vehicles over 20 feet in length.
No person shall park any truck, bus, auto and trailer, tractor and trailer, or
any other vehicle more than 20 feet in length on any section of any street in
the City of Reedsburg except as permitted below:
A. Signs placed upon, over or in any public way (including highway, street
or alley) that cause or have the potential to cause a blockage of access
or a safety hazard to the general public. This subsection shall not be
construed to apply to traffic signs, signals or other traffic devices and
official signs and notices and public utility signs permitted by state,
federal and local laws.
B. Signs placed upon or against parked vehicles to advertise a business or
product. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit permanently
attached print or copy on a vehicle such as by paint or magnetically
affixed copy to advertise a profession, business or product, nor shall
this provision be construed to prohibit signs affixed to vehicles for the
purpose of promoting an individual for elected office.
C. Lighted or flashing signs that are affixed to any vehicle except those for
governmental use.
D. Signs advertising activities which are illegal under federal, state or city
laws or regulations in effect at the location of those signs or at the
location of the activities advertised.
E. Signs which are erected or maintained upon trees or are painted or
drawn upon rocks or other features. Also prohibited under this chapter
is the attachment of temporary signs to any traffic, utility or other
public safety signs.
F. Signs which are structurally unsafe, in disrepair or are otherwise in
violation of Chapter 690, Zoning, § 690-107, of the Code of the City of
Reedsburg.
A. Except as provided by § 615-15B, no vehicle over 35 feet in length may
be parked on any residential street in the City of Reedsburg.
§ 615-17 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-19
1:536
§ 615-20. Interference with parking enforcement.
No person shall interfere with the parking enforcement action of a police
officer or City of Reedsburg parking enforcement employee, nor may any
person erase, obliterate, cover up or tamper with or remove any mark
placed by a police officer or City of Reedsburg parking enforcement
employee on the tire of a vehicle for enforcement purposes, other than by
normal use after the vehicle is moved from the parking space.
§ 615-21. School crossings designated.
The following intersections are designated "school crossings," and signs
shall be posted indicating the same:
Name of Street Intersection
Main Street and Preston Avenue
Main Street and Ellinwood Avenue
Main Street and Locust Street
Main Street and Pine Street
§ 615-22. Official traffic signs and signals.
B. Parking of any vehicles over 20 feet in length is prohibited on Main
Street or any streets designated as class "B" highways or on any block
of any street which contains angle parking. In the event that parking is
permitted under this chapter, it shall be permitted for no more than two
hours.
C. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no vehicle with a
length of over 20 feet may be parked on either side of 3rd Street
between North Walnut and North Webb.
A. The Reedsburg Police Department is authorized to procure and erect
signs and signals. The Reedsburg Police Department is hereby
authorized and directed to procure, erect and maintain appropriate
standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules of
the state Department of Transportation, giving such notice of the
provisions of this chapter as required by state law. Signs shall be
erected in such locations and manner as the Chief of Police shall
determine will best effect the purposes of this chapter and give
adequate warning to users of the street or highway.
B. Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The Reedsburg Police
Department shall have the authority granted by § 349.09, Wis. Stats.,
and is hereby directed to order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or
device placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or
§ 346.41, Wis. Stats. Any charge imposed on a premises for removal of
such an illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the Common
Council at its next regular meeting for review and certification.
§ 615-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:537
§ 615-23. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be forfeiture,
as hereinafter provided, together with the cost of prosecution imposed, as
provided in §§ 345.20 to 345.53, Wis. Stats.
§ 615-24. Enforcement. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 345.20 to 345.53 and 66.0114, Wis. Stats.
A. Uniform offenses. Forfeitures for violation of any provision of Chs. 341
to 348, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference in § 615-1 of this chapter shall
conform to forfeitures for violation of the comparable state offense,
including any variations or increases for second offenses.
B. Special local regulations. Any person who shall be guilty of a moving
violation prohibited by this chapter, the penalty for which is not covered
by Subsection A above, shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less
than $20 or more than $750, together with the costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of the forfeiture and cost of prosecution,
shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until said forfeiture and costs are
paid, but not exceeding 90 days, provided the forfeiture imposed shall
not exceed the maximum fine permitted under the statute adopted by
reference.
C. Any person who shall be guilty of a parking violation may satisfy such
violation by paying the approved forfeiture in the official bond schedule
to the Police Department. [Amended 3-28-2011]
D. The provisions of § 345.60, Wis. Stats, shall apply to adjudications for
violation of any provision of this chapter.
A. Stipulation of guilt or no contest. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may
be made by persons arrested for violations of this chapter in
accordance with § 66.0114(1)(b), Wis. Stats., whenever the provisions
of § 345.27, Wis. Stats., are inapplicable to such violations. Stipulations
shall conform to the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and
complaint under § 345.11, Wis. Stats., and may be accepted within five
days of the date of the alleged violation. Stipulations may be accepted
by the City Police Department.
B. Deposits. Any person stipulating guilt or no contest under Subsection A
of this section must make the deposit required under § 345.26, Wis.
Stats., or, if the deposit is not established under such statute, shall
deposit a forfeited penalty as provided in the schedule established by
the Chief of Police and approved by the Common Council. Deposits may
be brought or mailed to the office of the Police Department as directed
by the arresting officer. Deposits for parking or nonmoving violations
shall be mailed or brought to the City Clerk.
§ 615-23 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-24
1:538
§ 615-25. Operation of dirt bikes within City limits.
No person shall operate an unlicensed dirt bike (two- or three-wheel
motorized vehicle) within the Reedsburg City limits. If such vehicle is
licensed, then it may be operated in such areas as otherwise authorized by
law; however, in no event shall the vehicle be operated on City property
without obtaining prior written permission from the City.
§ 615-26. Handicapped parking. [Amended 1-13-2003]
C. Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited
penalty of money deposit under this chapter shall receipt therefor as
provided in § 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats. Every officer accepting a
stipulation under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the
provisions of §§ 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2), Wis. Stats., and
shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in
substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and
complaint promulgated under § 345.11, Wis. Stats. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)26]
A. It shall be illegal for anyone to park in areas designated as
"handicapped parking spaces" unless his or her vehicle is equipped with
special license plates as set forth in § 341.14, Wis. Stats., or other stateauthorized
handicapped designations. The following areas shall be
designated as handicapped parking spaces:
(1) The east corner of North Webb Avenue at its intersection with Main
Street.
(2) The east corner of North Walnut Street at its intersection with Main
Street.
(3) The west corner of South Walnut Street at its intersection with
Main Street.
(4) In four parking stalls as designated by the Director of Public Works
in City Parking Lot No. 4.
(5) On South Locust in the fifth stall from Vine Street on the west side.
(6) On the west side of Locust in an area two parking stalls wide,
commencing at a point 75 feet north of Locust's intersection with
3rd Street, on Sundays only.
(7) In one parking stall as designated by the Director of Public Works
in the triangle parking lot at Vine Street and South Webb Avenue.
(8) In a single stall located on the east side of North Willow 40 feet
north of its intersection with 6th Street.
26.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7.24 of the former Municipal Codebook, References to
statutes, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 615-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-26
1:539
§ 615-27. Traffic violation and registration program.
Any parking violation falling within the authority contained in Ch. Trans
128, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be subject to all actual costs borne by the City in
compliance with the State of Wisconsin's Traffic Violation and Registration
Program.
§ 615-28. Loading and unloading zones.
It shall be unlawful to park in areas designated as "loading/unloading zones"
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
unless an individual is loading or unloading a vehicle for commercial,
wholesale or retail purposes. The following areas are designated as loading/
unloading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
North Webb Avenue East Lying between 2nd and 3rd Streets,
commencing at the northern edge of the
alley and proceeding to the intersection
with 3rd Street
§ 615-29. Vehicles carrying hazardous materials.
(9) In a single stall located on the north side of 6th Street 104 feet east
of its intersection with Willow.
(10) Two hundred feet north of the intersection of Main Street and
North Webb Avenue.
(11) A single space 152 feet west of the intersection of Plum Street and
South Pine Street on the north side of Plum Street.
(12) A single space on South Park Street, south of Vine Street.
B. Penalty and enforcement. Any person who shall be guilty of a first
offense of this section shall be assessed a fine of $10. Second and
subsequent violations of this chapter shall be issued a uniform traffic
citation in accordance with § 615-1 of this chapter of the Code of the
City of Reedsburg. Only full-time employees of the Reedsburg Police
Department shall enforce this provision.
A. Any vehicle carrying flammable or explosive substances shall be
prohibited from parking in any residential area of the City of Reedsburg
except for the supplying of such areas with essential provisions such as
heating oil, LP gas, etc. At no time shall such vehicles be allowed to
park or stand on any street from the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
except for emergency fill-ups for residential or business properties.
B. No vehicle carrying other hazardous materials as defined by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation shall be allowed to park in
residential areas of the City of Reedsburg except to perform essential
§ 615-26 REEDSBURG CODE § 615-29
1:540
§ 615-30. Alleys.
No road tractor with semitrailer may be operated in the alley between West
Main Street and Clark Street east of parcel No. 276-0043.
§ 615-31. Dynamic braking devices prohibited.
§ 615-32. Low-speed vehicles. [Amended 11-14-2011]
§ 615-33. General penalty provisions. [Added 9-24-2007]
For a violation of a section of this chapter for which a specific penalty is not
provided, the forfeiture shall be not less than $5 nor more than $500 for
each offense, together with the costs of prosecution.
services to homes in the area. Exceptions to this chapter may be
obtained by petition and, upon the City's receipt of such a petition, a
public hearing before the Health and Safety Committee of the Common
Council shall be convened to hear and decide the merits of such
petition. Each petition shall include, but is not limited to, the following
information: name, address and telephone number of petitioner, date
petition is forwarded, type(s) and amount(s) of hazardous material
possibly to be contained in vehicle, place vehicle is to be parked and
reason for vehicle being parked in such area, safety features of such
vehicle and any other information relevant to the petition. Copies of
all approved petitions shall be forwarded to all interested departments,
including, but not limited to, Police and Fire Departments.
C. Violations of the hazardous materials ordinance shall carry a fine of not
less than $100, plus court costs, for each day a violation takes place.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE (commonly referred to as "jacobs brake,"
"engine brake" or "compression brake") — A device primarily on trucks
for conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an
air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel
brakes.
B. Use prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor
vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged, except for the aversion
of imminent danger, within the City limits.
A. Low-speed vehicles (LSV) are defined at § 340.01(27h), Wis. Stats.
B. LSVs may be operated on any roadway in the City that has a speed limit
of 35 mph or less, regardless of whether the City has jurisdiction over
the road.
C. LSV headlights shall be on when operated on a public roadway.
§ 615-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-33
1:541
Chapter 628
WELLS, PRIVATE
§ 628-1. General provisions.
All private wells located on any premises served by the public water system
of the City of Reedsburg shall be properly filled and capped by July 27, 1986.
Only those wells for which a well operation permit has been granted by the
Superintendent of the Utility may be exempted from this requirement as
long as the operation conditions set forth below.
§ 628-2. When suitable public water supply available.
When a suitable public water supply has been certified as being available to
a lot or premises:
§ 628-3. Permit for well.
The City may issue a permit for the construction and operation of a new
private well or retention and operation of an existing well, provided that the
use of the private well is in compliance with § 628-2 and:
A. No new private well shall be permitted to be constructed or put in
operation on any lot or parcel to which the Reedsburg Utility
Commission has certified that a suitable public water supply exists
except as provided in §§ 628-3 and 628-4 below.
B. No existing private well shall be permitted to provide water for human
consumption to any lot or premises for which the Reedsburg Utility
Commission has certified that suitable public water supply exists except
as provided in §§ 628-3 and 628-4 below.
A. A new well may be drilled and placed in operation only for the purpose
of facilitating the operation of a groundwater heat pump system and
provided that a valid permit has been issued by the City.
B. An existing well may be retained in operation only for the purpose of
facilitating the use of a heat pump or for outdoor, nonpotable use (e.g.,
car washing, watering lawns and gardens, filling swimming pools, etc.)
and provided that a valid permit has been issued. At any time that an
existing well shall require substantial repair or reconstruction, the well
shall be abandoned.
A. The owner has made application to the City for the permit providing all
the information required.
B. The well and pump installation meet the requirements of Ch. NR 812,
Wis. Adm. Code, as evidenced by an inspection report signed by a
licensed well driller or pump installer. A copy of such certification shall
be provided to the City.
§ 615-33 REEDSBURG CODE § 628-3
1:542
§ 628-4. Permit term.
When issued, a private well permit shall be valid for a period of five years.
A permit may be reissued, provided that the conditions in § 628-3 are met.
§ 628-5. Abandonment.
When a private well is abandoned, the abandonment shall be in compliance
with the requirements of the applicable sections of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code. The City shall be notified that the well has been
abandoned.
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 650
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
C. The well has a history of producing safe water and presently produces
bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by three samplings two weeks
apart. Copies of the laboratory analysis shall be provided to the City.
D. The Reedsburg Utility Commission has certified that no crossconnection
exists between the public water supply system and the
private well system.
E. No known health or environmental hazards will be created or occur due
to the construction or operation of the private well.
F. A well permit fee has been paid.
§ 628-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 628-5
1:543

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authority; Finding of Fact; Statement of Purpose; Title;
General Provisions
§ 650-1. Statutory authority. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in § 62.23, Wis. Stats.,
and the requirements in § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 650-2. Finding of fact.
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this
municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general
welfare and tax base.
§ 650-3. Statement of purpose.
This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
§ 650-4. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Ordinance" for the
City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin.
§ 650-5. General provisions.
A. Protect life, health and property;
B. Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
C. Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
D. Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
F. Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
G. Discourage the victimization of unwary land buyers and home buyers;
H. Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and
result in conflicts between property owners; and
I. Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
A. Areas to be regulated. This chapter regulates all areas that would be
covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR. Base
flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the Flood
§ 650-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-5
1:545
Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH Zones on
the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO Zones.
Regional flood elevations (RFE) may be derived from other studies.
If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive
information shall apply.
B. Official Maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts
are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood
elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or
floodway in the FIS or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be
reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA through the letter of
map change process (see Article VIII, Amendments) before it is
effective. No changes to RFEs on non-FEMA maps shall be effective
until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the
office of the Zoning Administrator, City of Reedsburg. If more than one
map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall
apply.
(1) Official Maps. FIRM panel numbers 55111C0191F, 55111C0192F,
55111C0194F, 55111C0212F, 55111C0213F, and 55111C0214F,
effective November 20, 2013. Panels 55111C0193E and
55111C0215E, effective December 18, 2009. Panel 55111C0211F,
effective October 2, 2015. And with corresponding profiles that are
based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS): 55111CV001C,
55111CV002C, effective October 2, 2015.
(2) Official Maps based on other studies. Sauk County, City of
Reedsburg, Village of Rock Springs, Flood Storage District, Panel 3
of 4, sources of study: WDNR, effective November 20, 2013.
C. Establishment of districts.
(1) The "floodway district" (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to
carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE Zones
as shown on the FIRM.
(2) The "flood-fringe district" (FF) is that portion between the regional
flood limits and the floodway and displayed as AE Zones on the
FIRM.
(3) The "general floodplain district" (GFP) is those areas that may be
covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does not have
a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH and AO
Zones, on the FIRM.
(4) The "flood storage district" (FSD) is that area of the floodplain
where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional
flood discharge.
§ 650-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-5
1:546
D. Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on
the Official Floodplain Zoning Map and actual field conditions shall be
resolved using the criteria in Subsection D(1) or (2) below. If a
significant difference exists, the Map shall be amended according to
Article VIII, Amendments. The Zoning Administrator can rely on a
boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use
permit, whether or not a Map amendment is required. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual
predevelopment field conditions and the basis upon which the district
boundary was determined and for initiating any Map amendments
required under this section. Disputes between the Zoning
Administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be
settled according to § 650-28C and the criteria in Subsection D(1) and
(2) below.
(1) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall
determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood
elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(2) Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, the location of the
boundary shall be determined by the map scale.
E. Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain
unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood
elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the
Map is amended pursuant to Article VIII, Amendments.
F. Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this
chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
G. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to
comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt
when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
H. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(1) This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under § 62.23, Wis. Stats., for cities or § 87.30,
Wis. Stats., which relate to floodplains. A more restrictive
ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the
greater restrictions, but not otherwise. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter
§ 650-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-5
1:547
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail.
I. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor
of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other
powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this chapter,
required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall
be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the
adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this chapter.
J. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in
this chapter are based on engineering experience and research. Larger
floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply or guarantee that
nonfloodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from
flooding and flood damages. This chapter does not create liability on the
part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on
this chapter.
K. Severability. Should any portion of this chapter be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected.
L. Annexed areas for cities and villages. The Sauk County floodplain
zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in
effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas
until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets
the requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code and 44 CFR 59 to 72,
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are
described on the municipality's Official Zoning Map. County floodplain
zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of
administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal
Zoning Administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the
regional flood elevation and the floodway location.
§ 650-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-5
1:548
ARTICLE II
General Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts
§ 650-6. General development standards.
The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed
building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials; and be
constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and
mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of
flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above
standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks)
shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any
development that meets the subdivision definition of this chapter and all
other requirements in § 650-26B. Adequate drainage shall be provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such
as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damages.
§ 650-7. Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
§ 650-8. Watercourse alterations.
A. No floodplain development shall:
(1) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development,
causing any increase in the regional flood height; or
(2) Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain
storage area lost.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the
proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the
regional flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other
adopted map, unless the provisions of Article VIII, Amendments, are
met.
A. No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped
floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified, in writing,
all adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices,
and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal
permits. The standards of § 650-6 must be met and the flood-carrying
capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
B. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of
the watercourse alteration or relocation, and pursuant to Article VIII,
§ 650-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-8
1:549
§ 650-9. Compliance with statutory provisions.
Development which requires a permit from the Department, under Chs.
30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts,
dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are
obtained and amendments to this chapter are made according to Article
VIII, Amendments.
§ 650-10. Public or private campgrounds.
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall meet the following provisions:
Amendments, the community shall apply for a letter of map revision
(LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and
approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process.
A. The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services;
B. A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator;
C. The character of the river system and the campground elevation are
such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an impending flood can be
given to all campground occupants;
D. There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that
offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in
the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement
between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government
coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the
flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible
for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used
and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and
personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation;
E. This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which
time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the officials
identified in Subsection D to remain in compliance with all applicable
regulations, including those of the state Department of Health Services
and all other applicable regulations;
F. Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for
highway use are allowed;
G. The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more
than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be
removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours;
H. All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be
issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written
copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization
§ 650-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-10
1:550
shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180
days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section;
I. The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the
campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this
section;
J. All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive
days must meet the applicable requirements in either Article III, IV or V
for the floodplain district in which the structure is located;
K. The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a
flood warning is issued; and
L. All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection,
electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells,
shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation.
§ 650-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-10
1:551

ARTICLE III
Floodway District (FW)
§ 650-11. Applicability.
This section applies to all floodway areas on the Floodplain Zoning Maps
and those identified pursuant to § 650-19D.
§ 650-12. Permitted uses.
The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the
floodway areas of the general floodplain district if:
§ 650-13. Standards for developments in floodway areas.
A. They are not prohibited by any other ordinance;
B. They meet the standards in §§ 650-13 and 650-14 ; and
C. All permits or certificates have been issued according to § 650-26:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading
areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis
courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing
areas and hiking and horseback-riding trails, subject to the fill
limitations of § 650-13D .
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as
historic structures that comply with §§ 650-13 and 650-14 .
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that complies with
§ 650-13D .
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or
wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river
crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Chs.
30 and 31, Wis. Stats.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with § 650-13C.
A. General.
(1) Any development in floodway areas shall comply with Article II and
have a low flood damage potential.
(2) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects
of the proposal according to §§ 650-6 and 650-26B(3):
§ 650-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-13
1:553
(a) A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular
to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will
obstruct flow; or
(b) An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional
flood height.
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if the
project will increase flood elevations upstream or downstream,
based on the data submitted for Subsection A(2) above.
B. Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or
functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by
permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
(1) Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood
damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage;
(2) Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a
total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area and the bottom of all such openings being no higher
than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with
screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters;
(3) Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
(4) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed
to or above the flood protection elevation; and
(5) It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
C. Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges
may be allowed by permit, if:
(1) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
(2) Construction meets the development standards of § 650-6.
D. Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be
allowed by permit, if:
(1) The requirements of § 650-6 are met;
(2) No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is
issued by the Department pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a
permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, has been
issued, if applicable, and all other requirements are met;
§ 650-13 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-13
1:554
§ 650-14. Prohibited uses.
All uses not listed as permitted uses in § 650-12 are prohibited, including
the following uses:
(3) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
(4) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
A. Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or
those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
B. Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to
property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic
life;
C. Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
D. Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are
removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational
areas and Department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable
provisions of local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code;
E. Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local
ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
F. Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
G. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted
under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code;
H. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which
complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
§ 650-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-14
1:555

ARTICLE IV
Flood-Fringe District (FF)
§ 650-15. Applicability.
This section applies to all flood-fringe areas shown on the floodplain Zoning
Maps and those identified pursuant to § 650-19D.
§ 650-16. Permitted uses.
Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the flood-fringe
district if the standards in § 650-17 are met, the use is not prohibited by this
or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified
in § 650-26 have been issued.
§ 650-17. Standards for development in flood-fringe areas.
Section 650-6 shall apply in addition to the following requirements
according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the flood-fringe
must meet the requirements of Article VI, Nonconforming Uses:
A. Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which
is to be newly constructed or moved into the flood-fringe shall meet or
exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in the floodfringe
must meet the requirements of Article VI, Nonconforming Uses:
(1) The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of § 650-17A(2)
can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional
flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the
structure.
(2) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood
elevation if it is dry-floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood
elevation.
(3) Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to
land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in Subsection
A(4).
(4) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection A(3) impractical, the
municipality may permit new development and substantial
improvements where roads are below the regional flood elevation
if:
(a) The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to
the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood
event; or
§ 650-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-17
1:557
(b) The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation
plan.
B. Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed
on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation.
C. Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered
or moved into the flood-fringe area shall meet the requirements of
§ 650-17A. Subject to the requirements of § 650-17E, storage yards,
surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and
property.
D. Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial
structure which is erected, altered or moved into the flood-fringe shall
have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation
or meet the floodproofing standards in § 650-30. Subject to the
requirements of § 650-17E, storage yards, surface parking lots and
other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate
warning system exists to protect life and property.
E. Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive,
or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or
aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or
floodproofed in compliance with § 650-30. Adequate measures shall be
taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during
flooding.
F. Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans; and
(1) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger
public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed
essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be
permitted if they are designed to comply with § 650-30.
(2) Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower
elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the
regional flood elevation.
G. Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system,
pursuant to § 650-30C, to the flood protection elevation and meet the
provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
H. Wells. All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to § 650-30C, to the
flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Chs. NR 811
and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
I. Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood-fringe areas.
§ 650-17 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-17
1:558
J. Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this chapter.
K. Manufactured homes.
(1) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize
flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation
plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local
emergency management authorities.
(2) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement
homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation; and
(b) Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
(3) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing
parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved
manufactured homes shall meet the residential development
standards for the flood-fringe in § 650-17A.
L. Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are
on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and
ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring
requirements in § 650-17K(2) and (3). A mobile recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and
has no permanently attached additions.
§ 650-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-17
1:559

ARTICLE V
Other Floodplain Districts
§ 650-18. Establishment.
Other floodplain districts may be established under this chapter and
reflected on the Floodplain Zoning Map. These districts may include general
floodplain districts and flood storage districts.
§ 650-19. General floodplain district (GFP).
A. Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains
mapped as A, AO or AH Zones.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Pursuant to § 650-19D, it shall be determined whether the
proposed use is located within a floodway or flood-fringe area.
(2) Those uses permitted in the floodway (§ 650-12 ) and flood-fringe
(§ 650-16) districts are allowed within the general floodplain
district, according to the standards of § 650-19C, provided that all
permits or certificates required under § 650-26 have been issued.
C. Standards for development in the general floodplain district. Article III
applies to floodway areas; Article IV applies to flood-fringe areas. The
rest of this chapter applies to either district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones, the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the
conditions listed below, whichever is higher:
(a) At or above the flood protection elevation; or
(b) Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the
structure; or
(c) The depth as shown on the FIRM.
(2) In AO/AH Zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to
guide floodwaters around structures.
D. Determining floodway and flood-fringe limits. Upon receiving an
application for development within the general floodplain district, the
Zoning Administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph
or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to
the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the
property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and
floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the
§ 650-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-19
1:561
§ 650-20. Flood storage district.
The flood storage district delineates that portion of the floodplain where
storage of floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to
reduce the regional flood discharge. The district protects the flood storage
areas and assures that any development in the storage areas will not
decrease the effective flood storage capacity which would cause higher
flood elevations.
proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation
and to determine floodway boundaries.
(a) A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in § 650-26B(3).
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on
the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information.
(c) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the
flood storage district (FSD), as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning
Maps.
B. Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a flood storage
district must meet the applicable requirements in § 650-17.
C. Standards for development in flood storage districts.
(1) Development in a flood storage district shall not cause an increase
equal to or greater than 0.00 of a foot in the height of the regional
flood.
(2) No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage
volume unless an equal volume of storage, as defined by the
predevelopment ground surface and the regional flood elevation,
shall be provided in the immediate area of the proposed
development to compensate for the volume of storage which is lost
(compensatory storage). Excavation below the groundwater table
is not considered to provide an equal volume of storage.
(3) If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be
developed unless the entire area zoned as flood storage district, on
this waterway, is rezoned to the flood-fringe district. This must
include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the
waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge
calculated without floodplain storage, as per Article VIII,
Amendments, of this chapter.
§ 650-19 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-20
1:562
(4) No area may be removed from the flood storage district unless it
can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the
floodplain.
§ 650-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-20
1:563

ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Uses
§ 650-21. General.
A. Applicability. If these standards conform with § 59.69(10), Wis. Stats.,
for counties, or § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., for cities and villages, they
shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or
structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage of this chapter or any amendment thereto.
B. The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue subject to
the following conditions:
(1) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure
shall be permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The words
"modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any
alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or
replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory
structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this
includes painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural
components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of
existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to
public utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged
structure are not considered maintenance.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet
and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is
not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure
may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe
ingress and egress to the principal structure.
(2) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted,
and any future use of the property, and any structure or building
thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this
chapter;
(3) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming
uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized
assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have
been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current
value those modifications represent;
(4) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, which, over the life of the
structure, would equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized
assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is
permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming
use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
§ 650-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-21
1:565
Contiguous dryland access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with § 650-17A. The costs of
elevating the lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a building
with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are
excluded from the 50% provisions of this subsection;
(5) No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed
50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed
unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming
structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be
provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with
§ 650-17A.
(6) If on a per-event basis the total value of the work being done under
Subsection B(4) and (5) equals or exceeds 50% of the present
equalized assessed value the work shall not be permitted unless the
entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure
with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dryland access must be
provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance
with§ 650-17A.
(7) Except as provided in Subsection B(8), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed
or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or
rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance
requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if
the total cost to restore the structure to its predamaged condition
equals or exceeds 50% of the structure's present equalized
assessed value.
(8) For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of
any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to
restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event,
provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are
met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of
construction.
(a) Residential structures:
[1] Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings,
columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must
meet the requirements of § 650-30B.
[2] Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy,
§ 650-21 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-21
1:566
§ 650-22. Floodway district.
and shall be constructed with methods and materials
resistant to flood damage.
[3] Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
[4] In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
[5] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in
§ 650-19C(1).
[6] In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from the structure.
(b) Nonresidential structures:
[1] Shall meet the requirements of § 650-21.
[2] Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
meet the standards in § 650-30A or B.
[3] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in
§ 650-19C(1).
(9) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure, the alteration will comply with § 650-13A, floodresistant
materials are used, and construction practices and
floodproofing methods that comply with § 650-30 are used. Repair
or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the
development standards of § 650-21B(8)(a) if it is determined that
the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure and is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the floodway
district unless such modification or addition:
(1) Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance
requirements;
§ 650-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-22
1:567
§ 650-23. Flood-fringe district.
(2) Meets the requirements of § 650-21B(1) through (6);
(3) Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood
height;
(4) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to § 650-30, by means other than the use of fill, to the
flood protection elevation; and
(5) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is
enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
(a) The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect
or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of
floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two
openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least
one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area.
The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches
above the adjacent grade;
(b) The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
(c) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
(d) The use must be limited to parking or limited storage.
B. No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing onsite
sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been
ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health,
shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair or
maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a
floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal
ordinances, § 650-30C and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable
water shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair
or maintenance of an existing well in the floodway district shall meet
the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, § 650-30C and
Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the
municipality, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the
standards for that particular use in § 650-17, except where § 650-23B is
applicable.
§ 650-22 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-23
1:568
§ 650-24. Flood storage district.
No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure in a flood storage area unless the standards outlined in § 650-20C
are met.
B. Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection A would result in
unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for
human habitation or be associated with a high flood-damage potential,
the Zoning Board of Appeals, using the procedures established in
§ 650-28, may grant a variance from those provisions of Subsection A
for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below.
Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than
the flood protection elevation may be permitted if:
(1) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential
or commercial structures;
(2) Human lives are not endangered;
(3) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
(4) Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
(5) Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
(6) The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described
in § 650-17E.
C. All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement,
repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system, shall meet
all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, § 650-30C and Ch.
SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
D. All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a
well, shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter, § 650-30C and
Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 650-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-24
1:569

ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 650-25. Designated officials.
Where a Zoning Administrator, planning agency or a Zoning Board of
Appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance
adopted under §§ 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., these officials shall
also administer this chapter.
§ 650-26. Zoning Administrator.
A. Duties and powers. The City Zoning Administrator is authorized to
administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) Advise applicants of this chapter's provisions, assist in preparing
permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood
elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit
applications.
(2) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this chapter, and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate.
(3) Inspect all damaged floodplain structures, and perform a
substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage
to the structures has occurred.
(4) Keep records of all official actions such as:
(a) All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
(b) Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations for floodplain development;
(c) Floodproofing certificates;
(d) Water surface profiles, floodplain Zoning Maps and ordinances,
nonconforming uses and structures, including changes,
appeals, variances and amendments;
(e) All substantial-damage-assessment reports for floodplain
structures;
(f) List of nonconforming structures and uses.
(5) Submit copies of the following items to the Department regional
office:
(a) Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or
text amendments;
§ 650-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:571
(b) Copies of any case-by-case analyses and any other required
information, including an annual summary of the floodplain
zoning actions taken.
(c) Copies of substantial-damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments.
(6) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter
to the municipal Plan Commission and attorney for prosecution.
Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the Department regional
office.
(7) Submit copies of amendments to the FEMA regional office.
B. Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new
development; repair, modification or addition to an existing structure;
or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and
water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the Zoning
Administrator shall include:
(1) General information.
(a) Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor;
(b) Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification;
(2) Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
(a) Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
(b) Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
(c) Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and street center lines;
(d) Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
(e) Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
(f) Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps;
(g) The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study; either
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD);
(h) Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to
§ 650-26 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-26
1:572
determine whether or not the requirements of Article III or IV
are met; and
(i) Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to § 650-6. This may include any of the
information noted in § 650-13A).
(3) Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All
hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the
state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical
adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved
by the Department.
(a) Zone A floodplains:
[1] Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the
standards in § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis–Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis–Determination of the Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
[a] Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic
model shall be based on detailed study information for
downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to
determine adequate starting WSEL for the study.
[b] Channel sections must be surveyed.
[c] Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall
be used for the development of cross-section overbank
and floodplain mapping.
[d] A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross
sections is allowed in developed areas with additional
intermediate cross sections required at transitions in
channel bottom slope, including a survey of the
channel at each location.
[e] The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used.
[f] A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of
road is required at each structure.
[g] Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach, if greater
than 500 feet.
§ 650-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:573
[h] Standard accepted engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters for the base model
such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and
contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The
base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data,
such as high-water marks, to determine the
reasonableness of the model results. If no historical
data is available, adequate justification shall be
provided for any parameters outside standard
accepted engineering practices.
[i] The model must extend past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles
in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The
height difference between the proposed flood profile
and the existing study profiles shall be no more than
0.00 feet.
[3] Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross-section locations, floodway/
floodplain limits based on best available topographic data,
geographic limits of the proposed development and
whether the proposed development is located in the
floodway.
[a] If the proposed development is located outside of the
floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on
the regional flood elevation.
[b] If any part of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to show
the difference between existing and proposed
conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients
remain the same as in the existing model, unless
adequate justification based on standard accepted
engineering practices is provided.
(b) Zone AE floodplains.
[1] Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be
based on § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis–Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis–Determination of the Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
[a] Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be
reproduced to ensure correct transference of the
model data and to allow integration of the revised data
§ 650-26 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-26
1:574
to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised reach. If data from the
effective model is available, models shall be generated
that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to
within 0.1 foot.
[b] Corrected effective model. The corrected effective
model shall not include any man-made physical
changes since the effective model date, but shall
import the model into the most current version of
HEC-RAS for Department review.
[c] Existing (preproject conditions) model. The existing
model shall be required to support conclusions about
the actual impacts of the project associated with the
revised (post-project) model or to establish more upto-
date models on which to base the revised (postproject)
model.
[d] Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised
(post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the
existing model and any proposed changes to the
topography caused by the proposed development. This
model shall reflect proposed conditions.
[e] All changes to the duplicate effective model and
subsequent models must be supported by certified
topographic information, bridge plans, construction
plans and survey notes.
[f] Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to
the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream
of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the
effective model and result in water surface elevations
and top widths computed by the revised models
matching those in the effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised reach as required. The
effective model shall not be truncated.
[3] Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be
submitted to the Department for review which meet the
following conditions:
[a] Consistency between the revised hydraulic models,
the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the
revised flood profiles, topographic work map,
annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway
Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, and bridge plans.
§ 650-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:575
[b] Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour
interval, and a planimetric map showing the
applicable items. If a digital version of the map is
available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM
may be more easily revised.
[c] Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and
0.2% annual-chance floodplains and floodway
boundaries.
[d] If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all
supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission, along with the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and
state plane coordinate system in accordance with
FEMA mapping specifications.
[e] The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the
effective floodplain boundaries.
[f] All cross sections from the effective model shall be
labeled in accordance with the effective map, and a
cross section lookup table shall be included to relate
to the model input numbering scheme.
[g] Both the current and proposed floodways shall be
shown on the map.
[h] The stream center line, or profile baseline used to
measure stream distances in the model, shall be
visible on the map.
[4] Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this
chapter shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance.
The permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days
for good and sufficient cause.
C. Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no
building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified,
repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied, until a certificate of
compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator except where no
permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the
provisions of this chapter;
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit;
§ 650-26 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-26
1:576
§ 650-27. Plan Commission.
§ 650-28. Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, created under § 59.694, Wis. Stats., for
counties or § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., for cities or villages, is hereby
authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this chapter. The
Board shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt
rules for the conduct of business. The Zoning Administrator shall not be the
secretary of the Board.
(3) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance
shall be issued within 10 days after written notification that the
permitted work is completed;
(4) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill,
lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with
the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the requirements of § 650-30 are met.
D. Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit, the
applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and
local agencies, including but not limited to those required by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
A. The Plan Commission shall:
(1) Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator; and
(2) Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments
to this chapter, maps and text.
B. The Plan Commission shall not:
(1) Grant variances to the terms of this chapter in place of action by
the Zoning Board of Appeals; or
(2) Amend the text or Zoning Maps in place of official action by the
governing body.
A. Powers and duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
(1) Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
(2) Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the official floodplain Zoning Map.
§ 650-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-28
1:577
(3) Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from this
chapter's standards.
B. Appeals to the Board.
(1) Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by
any officer or department of the municipality affected, by any
decision of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise
provided by the rules of the Board by filing with the official whose
decision is in question and, with the Board, a notice of appeal
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is
in question shall transmit to the Board all records regarding the
matter appealed.
(2) Notice and hearing for appeals, including variances.
(a) Notice. The Board shall:
[1] Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
[2] Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing;
[3] Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the Department regional office at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing.
(b) Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Board shall:
[1] Resolve boundary disputes according to § 650-28C.
[2] Decide variance applications according to § 650-28D.
[3] Decide appeals of permit denials according to § 650-29.
(3) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
(a) Be made within a reasonable time;
(b) Be sent to the Department regional office within 10 days of the
decision;
(c) Be a written determination signed by the Chairman or
Secretary of the Board;
(d) State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's
decision;
(e) Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part,
dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the
variance application;
§ 650-28 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-28
1:578
(f) Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Board
proceedings.
C. Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board
in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries:
(1) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or
detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall
prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may
be examined.
(2) The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical
evidence to the Board.
(3) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the
zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location
to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to
Article VIII, Amendments.
D. Variance.
(1) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards
of this chapter if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
(a) Literal enforcement of this chapter's provisions will cause
unnecessary hardship;
(b) The hardship is due to adoption of this chapter and unique
property conditions not common to adjacent lots or premises.
In such case, this chapter or Map must be amended;
(c) The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
(d) The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter in
§ 650-3.
(2) In addition to the criteria in Subsection D(1), to qualify for a
variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be
met:
(a) The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
(b) Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than 1/2
acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed
below the RFE; and
(c) Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall
not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall
§ 650-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-28
1:579
§ 650-29. Review of appeals of permit denials.
not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of this chapter.
(3) A variance shall not:
(a) Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district;
(b) Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or
loss;
(c) Be granted for a hardship that is self-created;
(d) Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the
area;
(e) Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or
Map(s) required in Article VIII, Amendments; and
(f) Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use,
which would preclude its continued designation as an historic
structure.
(4) When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that it may increase risks to life and property
and flood insurance premiums could increase up to $25 per $100 of
coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record.
A. The Plan Commission (§ 650-27) or Board shall review all data related
to the appeal. This may include:
(1) Permit application data listed in § 650-26B;
(2) Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 650-19D;
(3) Data listed in § 650-13A(2), where the applicant has not submitted
this information to the Zoning Administrator; and
(4) Other data submitted with the application or submitted to the
Board with the appeal.
B. For appeals of all denied permits, the Board shall:
(1) Follow the procedures of § 650-28;
(2) Consider Plan Commission recommendations; and
(3) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
C. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the Board
shall:
§ 650-28 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-29
1:580
§ 650-30. Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or
uses.
§ 650-31. Public information.
(1) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing
an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after
amending the flood profile and Map and all appropriate legal
arrangements are made with all adversely affected property
owners as per the requirements of Article VIII, Amendments; and
(2) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly
demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase, provided
no other reasons for denial exist.
A. No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the
applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure
or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA
floodproofing certificate.
B. For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or
variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
(1) Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(2) Meets or exceeds the following standards:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(1) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
(2) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(3) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement;
(4) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and
(5) Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters.
§ 650-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-31
1:581
A. Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
B. All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
C. Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real
property is in.
§ 650-31 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-31
1:582
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ 650-32. When required.
Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made
to this chapter, the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and
water surface profiles, in accordance with § 650-33.
§ 650-33. General.
The governing body shall change or supplement the floodplain zoning
district boundaries and this chapter in the manner outlined in § 650-34
below. Actions which require an amendment to this chapter and/or
submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to,
the following:
A. In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall
be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map
revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the
Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and water surface
profiles in accordance with § 650-33. Any such alterations must be
reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
B. In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision
from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the Official
Floodplain Maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles in
accordance with § 650-33.
A. Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow, causing any
increase in the regional flood height;
B. Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations
on the FIRM;
C. Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in
§ 650-5B;
D. Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height
at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying
outside the floodplain;
E. Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
floodplain maps;
F. Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by § NR
116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by
the municipality; and
G. All channel relocations and changes to the Maps to alter floodway lines
or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood-fringe that is based
on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
§ 650-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-34
1:583
§ 650-34. Procedures.
Chapter 650, Floodplain Zoning, amendments may be made upon petition of
any party according to the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats., for cities and
villages, or § 59.69, Wis. Stats., for counties. The petitions shall include all
data required by § 650-19D and § 650-26B. The land use permit shall not
be issued until a letter of map revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed
changes.
A. The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan Commission for
a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The
amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the
Department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The
amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of § 62.23, Wis.
Stats., for cities and villages or § 59.69, Wis. Stats., for counties.
B. No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by
the Department.
C. All persons petitioning for a Map amendment that obstructs flow,
causing any increase in the regional flood height shall obtain flooding
easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely
affected property owners and notify local units of government before
the amendment can be approved by the governing body.
§ 650-34 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-34
1:584
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 650-35. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be
unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney, who shall
expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction,
forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not more $50, together with a
taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute
a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance, and
the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action
at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to
§ 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 650-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-35
1:585

ARTICLE X
Terminology
§ 650-36. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this chapter shall have
their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their
common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the
singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the
singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary.
§ 650-37. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A facility, structure, building or use
which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure
or building.
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
ALTERATION — An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or
modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other systems within a
structure.
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH,
or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1%
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one feet to
three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given
area.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of an FIS and depicted on
a FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade,
i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited filling
§ 650-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-37
1:587
between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this
chapter.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in
area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping
trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if
required, and ready for highway use.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction and
the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAYS or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first usable
floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has
a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of
any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of
buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the
storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the
installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems
or water supply facilities.
DRYLAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land
outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood
elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in
the floodway.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which is
determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood
§ 650-37 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-37
1:588
event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified
number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year.
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood, and associated
with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate flood
hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones
and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map
forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood
Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be
amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides
maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides
both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide
floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that accompany the
Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the
following conditions:
FLOODPLAIN — Land which has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood-fringe, and
may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
A. The overflow or rise of inland waters;
B. The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior; or
C.
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
D.
§ 650-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-37
1:589
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to ensure wise use
of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education,
and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of
land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of freeboard
above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood
(also see "freeboard").
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters
has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number
of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any
factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice
jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas
due to development and aggregation of the riverbed or streambed.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements
of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at
least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning
ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each
week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing.
Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice exceeding these
minimums.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is either:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
§ 650-37 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-37
1:590
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise in
the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison
of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable
to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of
mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and
contraction coefficients and discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real
estate (also see "development.")
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — Elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original soundness,
including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the
replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent
fixtures, systems or structures.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does
not include a mobile recreational vehicle.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING —
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This
includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by
an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior, or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
D.
§ 650-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-37
1:591
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING —
A parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this
would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by
a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is
required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land
but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model
homes, do not fall within the definition of mobile recreational vehicles.
MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model that
corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any
additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates
more detailed topographic information than that used in the current
effective model.
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis used
in the effective FIS and referred to as the "effective model."
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was used to
produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
MODEL, EXISTING (PREPROJECT) — A modification of the duplicate
effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the
effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the
revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date
of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected
effective model or duplicate effective model.
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the existing or
preproject conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected
effective model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL — The county, city or village governmental
units enacting, administering and enforcing this chapter.
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations referenced
to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations
adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to
§ 650-37 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-37
1:592
such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it
includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
(For example, an existing residential structure in the flood-fringe district
is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood
protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use or accessory use of a
structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies (such as a residence
in the floodway).
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters such that this development, alone or together with any future
development, will cause an increase in regional flood height.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — That map, adopted and made
part of this chapter, as described in § 650-5B, which has been approved by
the Department and FEMA.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
PERSON — An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located
on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage
system approved by the Department of Safety and Professional Services,
including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding
tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a
different parcel than the structure.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines, such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems, such as water, sanitary sewer and storm
sewer.
§ 650-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-37
1:593
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain
and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage
existing or proposed buildings.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with
a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted
on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement
of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
an alteration, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
streambed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning given in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure
has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the work performed. The term does not,
however, include either any project for the improvement of a building
required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations
identified by the Building Official and that are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of an historic structure,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure.
§ 650-37 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-37
1:594
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or
density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes
of this chapter.
VARIANCE — An authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the
construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which
is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without
required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a
reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of
the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods to obtain groundwater, regardless of its
intended use.
§ 650-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-37
1:595
Chapter 665
SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING
§ 650-37 REEDSBURG CODE § 650-37
1:596
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact, Statement of Purpose and
Title
§ 665-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in §§ 62.23, 62.231,
87.30 and 281.31, Wis. Stats.
§ 665-2. Findings of fact and purpose.
Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and the pollution of the
navigable waters of the City of Reedsburg would adversely affect the public
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base.
The Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all
municipalities to:
§ 665-3. Title.
"Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Ordinance for the City of Reedsburg,
Wisconsin."
A. Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
B. Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands;
C. Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter
or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that
would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
D. Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by
preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitat;
E. Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
F. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of
natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation,
filling and other earthmoving activities.
§ 665-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-3
1:597

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 665-4. Compliance.
The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland
area of the City of Reedsburg shall be in full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable local, state or federal standards applicable
to nonconforming uses. All permitted development shall require the
issuance of a zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a
provision of this chapter.
§ 665-5. Municipalities and state agencies regulated.
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties
are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits.
State agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies.
The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt
when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
§ 665-6. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
§ 665-7. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of
this chapter is required by a standard in Ch. NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and
where this chapter provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in
light of the Ch. NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of
this chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to
this chapter.
A. This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under § 62.23 or 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate to
the floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another
municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than this chapter, that
ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the
greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
B. This otherwise is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants, or easements. However, where
this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter
shall prevail.
§ 665-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-8
1:599
§ 665-8. Severability.
Should any portion of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not
be affected.
§ 665-8 REEDSBURG CODE § 665-8
1:600
ARTICLE III
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District
§ 665-9. Shoreland-wetland zoning maps. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The following maps are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter and
are on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin:
§ 665-10. District boundaries.
A. Wetlands are delineated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources. The most current maps can be accessed through the City of
Reedsburg and Sauk County GIS systems and the WDNR Surface Water
Data Viewer.
B. United States Geological Quadrangles, 7 1/2 Minute Series, Reedsburg
East and Reedsburg West.
C. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map and FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map, City of
Reedsburg, both dated October 2, 2015.
A. The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the City
of Reedsburg, Wisconsin which are five acres or more and are shown on
the final Wetland Inventory Map that has been adopted and made a part
of this chapter and which are:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable
lakes, pond or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the City of
Reedsburg shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in
the Department publication "Surface Water Resources of Sauk
County" or are shown on the United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been
incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter.
(2) Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers
or streams, or the landward side of the floodplain, whichever
distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as either "continuous" or
"intermittent" waterways on the United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been
incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter.
Floodplain Zoning Maps adopted in § 665-9C shall be used to
determine the extent of floodplain areas.
B. Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark location
shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions
arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district
office of the Department for a final determination of navigability or
ordinary high-water mark.
§ 665-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-10
1:601
§ 665-11. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted, subject to the provisions of Chs. 30 and
31, Wis. Stats., and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if
applicable.
C. When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland
district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Maps and actual field
conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Zoning
Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the
Department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary, as
mapped, is in error. If Department staff concur with the Zoning
Administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a
wetland, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to
immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the
regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct
wetland mapping errors shown on the Official Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning Maps, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for
initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period.
A. Activities and uses that do not require the issuance of a zoning/building
permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
(1) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and
boating;
(2) The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild
rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not
injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops;
(3) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and
harvesting of timber;
(4) The pasturing of livestock;
(5) The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
(6) The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
B. Uses which do not require the issuance of zoning or building permits
and which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent
specifically provided below:
(1) The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level
stabilization measures that are necessary to alleviate abnormally
wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the
conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected;
(2) The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland
alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting
cranberries;
§ 665-10 REEDSBURG CODE § 665-11
1:602
(3) The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore
preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of
filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the
filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on
existing spoil banks where possible;
(4) The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of
livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for
such construction or maintenance;
(5) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways,
observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or
maintenance;
(6) The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of
draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district,
provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner
designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of
the shoreland-wetland listed in § 665-27C; and
(7) The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of
existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and
filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or
reconstruction.
C. Uses that are allowed upon the issuance of a zoning/building permit and
which may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically
provided below:
(1) The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for
the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of
essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to
uses permitted under § 665-11, provided that:
(a) The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
(b) The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse
impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in
§ 665-27C;
(c) The road is designed and constructed with the minimum crosssectional
area practical to serve the intended use;
(d) Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate
area of the roadbed only; and
(e) Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction
or maintenance of the road.
(2) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings,
provided that:
§ 665-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-11
1:603
§ 665-12. Prohibited uses.
(a) The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted
in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of
waterfowl, minnows, or other wetland or aquatic animals;
(b) The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland;
(c) The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
(d) Only limited filling and excavation necessary to provide
structural support for the building is allowed.
(3) The establishment and development of public and private parks
and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural
and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that:
(a) Any private development allowed under this subsection shall
be used exclusively for the permitted purpose;
(b) Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat launching ramps, swimming
beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar
structures is allowed;
(c) The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the
uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only where
such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in
§ 665-11C(1)of this chapter; and
(d) Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, game birds and animal
farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of
improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland
values.
(4) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines and sewage
collection lines and related facilities and the construction and
maintenance of railroad lines, provided that:
(a) The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad
lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
(b) Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such
construction or maintenance is allowed; and
(c) Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner
designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural
functions of the wetland listed in § 665-27C.
§ 665-11 REEDSBURG CODE § 665-12
1:604
A. Any use not listed in § 665-11 of this chapter is prohibited, unless the
wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of
this chapter in accordance with Article VI of this chapter.
B. The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or
placement of a boathouse or fixed boathouse below the ordinary highwater
mark of any navigable waters is prohibited.
§ 665-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-12
1:605

ARTICLE IV
Nonconforming Structures and Uses
§ 665-13. Continuance of use.
The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the
time this chapter, or an applicable amendment to this chapter, took effect,
and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, including
the routine maintenance of such building or structure, may be continued
subject to the following conditions.
§ 665-14. Nonconforming structures.
Notwithstanding § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., the repair, reconstruction,
renovation, remodeling or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure
in existence at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment of this
chapter adopted under § 62.231, Wis. Stats., or of an environmental control
facility in existence on May 7, 1982, related to that structure, is permitted
under § 62.231(5), Wis. Stats. Section 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., applies to any
environmental control facility that was not in existence on May 7, 1982, but
was in existence on the effective date of this chapter or amendment.
§ 665-15. Discontinuance of use or structure.
If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building,
structure or property shall conform to this chapter.
§ 665-16. Nonconforming uses.
Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use
of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent
amendment of this chapter adopted under § 62.231 or 61.351, Wis. Stats.,
may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions
of this chapter. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended.
§ 665-17. Nonconforming boathouses.
The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are
located below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters shall
comply with the requirements of § 30.01, Wis. Stats.
§ 665-18. Nuisance uses prohibited.
Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to
continue as nonconforming uses.
§ 665-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-18
1:607

ARTICLE V
Administrative Provisions
§ 665-19. Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and powers:
§ 665-20. Zoning permits.
A. Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter and assist them in
preparing permit applications and appeal forms.
B. Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for
compliance with this chapter.
C. Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved
and other official actions.
D. Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties.
E. Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits,
appeals for a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments
within 10 days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate
district office of the Department.
F. Investigate and report violations of this chapter to the appropriate
municipal planning agency and the district attorney, corporation
counsel or municipal attorney.
A. When required. Unless another section of this chapter specifically
exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning
or building permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator
before any new development, as defined in § 665-30 of this chapter, or
any change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated.
B. Application. An application for a zoning and building permit shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the
municipality and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of
these regulations, the following information:
(1) General information.
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, property
owner and contractor, where applicable.
(b) Legal description of the property and a general description of
the proposed use or development.
(c) Whether or not a private water supply or sewage system is to
be installed.
§ 665-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-20
1:609
§ 665-21. Certificates of compliance.
(2) Site development plan. The site development plan shall be
submitted as a part of the permit application and shall contain the
following information drawn to scale:
(a) Dimensions and area of the lot;
(b) Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and center line of all abutting streets or highways;
(c) Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems
or private water supply systems;
(d) Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
(e) Boundaries of all wetlands;
(f) Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and
vegetative cover;
(g) Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as
determined from floodplain Zoning Maps;
(h) Location of existing or future access roads; and
(i) Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland
alteration.
C. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall
expire six months from the date of issuance.
A. Except where no zoning or building permit or conditional use permit is
required, no land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is
hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced
shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the
Zoning Administrator subject to the following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, conform to
the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a zoning, building or conditional use permit.
(3) The certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 days after
notification of the completion of the work specified in the zoning,
building or conditional use permit, providing the building or
premises and proposed use thereof conform with all the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 665-20 REEDSBURG CODE § 665-21
1:610
§ 665-22. Conditional use permits.
Note: This section is only applicable if the municipality chooses to require
a conditional use permit for all or some of the permitted uses listed under
§ 665-11 of this chapter.
§ 665-23. Fees.
The municipal governing body may, by resolution, adopt fees for the
following:
B. The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of
compliance for a building, premises, or part thereof pursuant to rules
and regulations established by the municipal governing body.
C. Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall
issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at
the time of ordinance adoption, certifying after inspection, the extent
and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not
such use conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Application. Any use listed as a conditional use in this chapter shall be
permitted only after an application has been submitted to the Zoning
Administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the
Board of Appeals following the procedures in § 665-26C, D and E of this
chapter.
B. Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the
standards applicable to the permitted uses in § 665-11C of this chapter,
the Board of Appeals shall attach such conditions to a conditional use
permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter, as are
necessary to further the purpose of this chapter as listed in § 665-2.
Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation
because of specific enumeration, type of shore cover; erosion controls;
increased setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply
facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period operation;
operational control; sureties, deed restrictions; location of piers, docks,
parking areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure
information upon which to base its determination, the Board of Appeals
may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information
required for a zoning or building permit, other pertinent information
which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with
the purpose of this chapter.
A. Zoning and building permits.
B. Certificates of compliance.
C. Public hearings.
D. Legal notice publications.
§ 665-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-23
1:611
§ 665-24. Recording.
Where a zoning and building permit or conditional use permit is approved,
an appropriate record shall be made by the Zoning Administrator of the land
use and structures permitted.
§ 665-25. Revocation.
Where the conditions of zoning and building permit or conditional use
permit are violated, the permit shall be revoked by the Board of Appeals.
§ 665-26. Board of Appeals.
E. Conditional use permits.
F. Rezoning petitions.
A. The City Mayor shall appoint a Board of Appeals under § 62.23(7)(e),
Wis. Stats., consisting of five members subject to confirmation by the
municipal governing body. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for
the conduct of its business as required by § 63.23(7)(e)3. Wis. Stats.
B. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals:
(1) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
(2) Shall hear and decide applications for conditional use permits.
(3) May authorize upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from
the dimensional terms of this chapter as shall not be contrary to the
public interest, where owning to special conditions unique to a
property, a literal enforcement of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship as defined in § 665-30. In the issuance of a
variance, the purpose of this chapter shall be observed and
substantial justice done. The granting of a variance shall not have
the effect of granting or extending any use of property that is
prohibited in the zoning district by this chapter.
C. Appeals to the Board. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of
the community affected by an order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
official. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time as
provided by the rules of the Board by filing with the official whose
decision is in question, and with the Board of Appeals, a notice of
appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The Zoning Administrator
or other official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record on the matter appealed.
§ 665-23 REEDSBURG CODE § 665-26
1:612
D. Public hearing.
(1) Before making a decision on an appeal or application, the Board of
Appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a public
hearing. The Board shall give public notice of the hearing by
publishing a Class 2 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., specifying
the date, time and place of the hearing and matters to come before
the Board. At the public hearing, any party may present testimony
in person, by agent or by attorney.
(2) A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and
the appropriate district office of the Department at least 10 days
prior to all public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland
zoning.
E. Decisions.
(1) The final disposition of an appeal, or application for a conditional
use permit, before the Board of Appeals shall be in the form of a
written decision, made within a reasonable time after the public
hearing and signed by the Board chairperson. Such decisions shall
state the specific facts which are the basis of the Board's
determination and shall either affirm, reverse, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in
part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution, or
grant the application for a conditional use.
(2) A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and
the appropriate district office of the Department within 10 days
after the decision is issued.
§ 665-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-26
1:613

ARTICLE VI
Amending Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Regulations
§ 665-27. Amendment procedure.
The municipal governing body may alter, supplement or change the district
boundaries and the regulations contained in this chapter in accordance with
the requirements of § 62.23(7)(d)2., Wis. Stats., Ch. NR 117, Wis. Adm.
Code, and the following:
A. A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to
the appropriate district office of the Department within five days of the
submission of the proposed amendment to the municipal planning
agency;
B. All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland
zoning regulations shall be referred to the municipal planning agency,
and a public hearing shall be held as required by § 62.23(7)(d), Wis.
Stats. The appropriate district office of the Department shall be
provided with written notice of the public hearing at least 10 days prior
to such hearing.
C. In order to ensure that this chapter will remain consistent with the
shoreland protection objectives of § 281.65, Wis. Stats., the municipal
governing body may not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland
zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning
may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following
wetland functions:
(1) Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity;
(2) Maintenance of dry-season stream flow or the discharge of
groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a
wetland or another area or the flow of groundwater through a
wetland;
(3) Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable
waters;
(4) Shoreland protection against erosion;
(5) Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
(6) Wildlife habitat; or
(7) Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including
scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
D. Where the district office of the Department determines that a proposed
rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria
listed in Subsection C of this section, the Department shall notify the
§ 665-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-27
1:615
municipality of its determination either prior to or during the public
hearing held on the proposed amendment.
E. The appropriate district office of the Department shall be provided
with:
(1) A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the municipal
planning agency on a proposed text or map amendment, within 10
days after the submission of those recommendations to the
municipal governing body.
(2) Written notice of the action of the proposed text or map
amendment within 10 days after the action is taken.
F. If the Department notifies the municipal planning agency, in writing,
that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact
upon any of the criteria listed in § 665-27C, that proposed amendment,
if approved by the municipal governing body, shall not become effective
until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the
municipal approval was mailed to the Department, as required by
Subsection E(2) of this chapter. If within the thirty-day period the
Department notifies the municipality that the Department intends to
adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the
municipality as provided by § 62.231(6), Wis. Stats., the proposed
amendment shall not become effective until this chapter adoption
procedure under § 62.231(6), Wis. Stats., is completed or otherwise
determined.
§ 665-27 REEDSBURG CODE § 665-27
1:616
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 665-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any development, building or structure or accessory building or structure
constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use
of accessory use established after the effective date of this chapter in
violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person, firm, association,
corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed
a violation. The Zoning Administrator shall refer violations to the municipal
planning agency and the district attorney, corporation counsel or municipal
attorney who shall prosecute such violations. Any person, firm, association,
or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $30 nor
more than $50 per offense, together with the taxable costs of such action.
Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every
violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may
be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit
of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to § 87.30(2),
Wis. Stats.
§ 665-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-28
1:617

ARTICLE VIII
Terminology
§ 665-29. Word use.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, the terms or
words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present
tense include the future; words used in the singular number include the
plural number; words in the plural number include the singular number. The
word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive. All distances, unless otherwise
specified, shall be measured horizontally.
§ 665-30. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A detached subordinate structure or
a use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection
with, the principle structure or use to which it is related and which is
located on the same lot as that of the principle structure or use.
BOATHOUSE — As defined in § 30.01(1d), Wis. Stats., a permanent
structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and
includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any
combination of structural parts.
CLASS 2 PUBLIC NOTICE — Publication of a public hearing notice under
Chapter 985, Wis. Stats., in a newspaper of circulation in the affected area.
Publication is required on two consecutive weeks, the last at least seven
days prior to the hearing.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is permitted by this chapter, provided
that certain conditions specified in this chapter are met and that a permit is
granted by the Board of Appeals or, where appropriate, the planning agency
designated by the municipal governing body.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additional or
substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the
placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or
extraction of earthen materials.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — One or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar
devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point
of discharge.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL FACILITY — Any facility, temporary or
permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the
prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water
§ 665-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-30
1:619
pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants,
including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing
property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable
pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by
other pollution control facilities.
FIXED HOUSEBOAT — As defined in § 30.01(1r), Wis. Stats., a structure not
actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary high-water
mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables
to the shoreline or by anchors or spud poles attached to the bed of the
waterway.
NAVIGABLE WATERS — Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland
lakes within Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other
waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin
portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this
state. Under § 281.31(2)(d), Wis. Stats., not withstanding any other
provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland
ordinances required under § 61.351 or 62.231, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR
117, Wis. Adm. Code, do not apply to land adjacent to farm drainage ditches
if:
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
PLANNING AGENCY — The municipal plan commission created under
§ 62.23(1), Wis. Stats., a board of public land Commissioners or a committee
of the municipality's governing body which acts on matters pertaining to
planning and zoning.
SHORELANDS — Lands within the following distances from the ordinary
high-water mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or
A. Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river;
Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not
navigable streams before ditching; and
B.
Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
"Wisconsin's Supreme Court has declared navigable bodies of water
that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or
flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the
shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis (Muench v. Public
Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952) and DeGaynor and Co., Inc.,
v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d(1975). For example, a
stream which is navigable by skiff or canoe during normal spring high
water is navigable, in fact, under the laws of this state though it may
be dry during other seasons."
C.
§ 665-30 REEDSBURG CODE § 665-30
1:620
flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
SHORELAND-WETLAND DISTRICT — The zoning district created in this
chapter, comprised of shorelands that are designated as "wetlands" on the
wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a part of this
chapter.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — That circumstance where special conditions,
which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict
conformity with restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage height or
density unnecessarily burdensome or reasonable in light of the purposes of
this chapter.
VARIANCE — An authorization granted by the Board of Appeals to construct
or alter a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the
dimensional standards of this chapter.
WETLAND ALTERATION — Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging,
ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or
dike and dam construction in a wetland area.
WETLANDS — Those areas where water is at, near or above the land
surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and
which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
§ 665-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 665-30
1:621
Chapter 674
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
§ 674-1. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to regulate and control the subdivision
of land within the corporate limits and extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction of the City of Reedsburg in order to promote the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare. The regulations are designed to
lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to foster the orderly layout
and use of land; to ensure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
to provide optimum light and air; to discourage overcrowding of land; to
lessen considerations of population; to facilitate adequate provision for
transportation, public water and sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and
other public necessities; and to facilitate the further division of large tracts
of land into smaller parcels. The regulations are made with reasonable
consideration for, but not limited to, the present character of the City and
its environs, with the objectives of conserving the value of the land and
improvements placed thereon, providing the most appropriate environment
for human habitation, encouraging commerce and industry, and providing
for the most appropriate use of land in the City.
§ 674-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP — A map of land division to create not more than
four parcels of land regardless of size over a period of five years. Certified
survey maps in the plat approval jurisdiction of the City shall, in addition to
the provisions of § 236.34, Wis. Stats., bear a certificate of approval of the
Council, certified by the City Clerk-Treasurer.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The comprehensive plan (aka "master plan")
for guiding and shaping the growth and development of the City, including
all of its component parts, as adopted and certified to by the Plan
Commission.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
DIVISION OF LAND — Any splitting up of a recorded tract of land, except
as provided by § 674-3D of this chapter.
FINAL PLAT — A map of land division creating more than four parcels
of land regardless of size over a period of five years, complete with all
necessary text, certificates, and affidavits required by statute or ordinance
to qualify it for recording in the office of the Register of Deeds. All plats,
regardless of lot size, shall be reviewed in accordance with Ch. 236, Wis.
Stats.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map indicating the location, width, and/or extent of
existing and proposed streets, highways, parkways, parks, and playgrounds
§ 665-30 REEDSBURG CODE § 674-2
1:622
as adopted and amended by the Council pursuant to Chapter 537, Streets
and Sidewalks, Article I, of the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
OWNER — Includes the plural as well as the singular, and may mean either
a natural person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public
or quasi-public corporation, or combination of any of these.
PLAN COMMISSION — The City Plan Commission established by ordinance
in conformity with § 62.23(1), Wis. Stats.
PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTION — Includes all the corporate limits of the
City, plus the unincorporated area outside the City which is within 1 1/2
miles of the corporate boundaries of the City as adjusted by the provisions
of § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
PRELIMINARY ACT — A map or sketch of a proposed subdivision or division
of land.
REEDSBURG AREA DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL — The planning group
established pursuant to § 62.23(7a), Wis. Stats., and consisting of
representatives of the City of Reedsburg, Town of Reedsburg and Town of
Winfield.
STREET — A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property.
MAJOR STREET — One designed for heavy through traffic and provides
access to the major employment, business and education areas or
through-City traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — One which carries traffic from minor streets
to the system of major streets, including the principal entrance streets
of a residential development, and provides for circulation within such
development.
B.
MINOR STREET — One which is used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — One which is parallel and adjacent
to major streets and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic on the major streets.
D.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare and/or right-of-way which affords only
a secondary means of access to abutting properties.
E.
PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY — A public thoroughfare and/or right-of-way
usually running at right angles to streets, which is intended for the
convenience of pedestrians only; it may also provide public right-of-way
for utilities.
F.
EASEMENT — The area of land set aside or over or through which a
liberty, privilege, or advantage in land, distinct from ownership of land,
is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public.
G.
§ 674-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 674-2
1:623
SUBDIVISION — As defined in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats., and as amended in
the definition of "final plat" in this section.[Amended 7-22-2013]
TENTATIVE APPROVAL — An approval with or without recommended
alterations given to the preliminary plat or preliminary certified survey by
the Plan Commission. It shall constitute the necessary authority to proceed
with the preparation and presentation of the final plat or final certified
survey map for the consideration of the Council.
§ 674-3. Jurisdiction and approval.
§ 674-4. Procedure.
A. No land within the corporate limits of the City or within the
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction thereof shall be divided by a
subdivision plat or certified map, nor may such documents be entitled
to be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds, nor may any
streets be laid out, nor may any improvements be made to the land,
until the provisions of this chapter and Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., are met,
and the plat or certified survey map and the plan or plans of the
subdivision shall have been approved by the Plan Commission and
Council and certified thereto by the City Clerk-Treasurer.
B. Any division of land, other than a subdivision, shall be surveyed and a
certified survey map prepared as provided in § 236.34, Wis. Stats., and
this chapter. Any division of land which shall create a remaining parcel
less than 10 acres of area shall include the remaining parcel as a lot in
the subdivision plat or certified survey map.
C. No building permit shall be issued by the City authorizing the building
on or improvement of any parcel of land not of record as of the effective
date of this chapter until the provisions and requirements of this
chapter have been met.
D. Minor land divisions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
the following but shall be submitted to the City for verification: [Added
1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 1820-16]
(1) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order.
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements.
(3) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the
lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by
this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances.
A. Preapplication procedure. Prior to the filing of an application for
approval of a plat or a certified survey map, a subdivider may consult
the staff of the City Engineer or the Plan Commission for advice and
assistance for the purpose of reviewing the procedures and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances and any plans or
§ 674-2 REEDSBURG CODE § 674-4
1:624
data which may affect the proposed development. Fees for plat and
certified survey review are set forth in the current City Fee Schedule on
file in the City’s offices or available on the City’s website.. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
B. Compliance. Any owner of land, or his agent, who wishes to divide a
parcel of land shall comply with the general principles of design and
minimum layout requirements as set forth in §§ 674-6 through 674-12 of
this chapter, and the procedure shall in every case be as follows:
C. Preliminary plat or preliminary certified survey map.
(1) The owner of land, or his agent, shall provide a preliminary plat or
preliminary certified survey map when any final plat or certified
survey map will require the dedication of streets, parks or the
extension of public services such as sanitary and storm sewer,
water or street improvements.
(2) The owner of land, or his agent, shall provide a certified plat or
preliminary survey map if the Plan Commission, after review of the
application, determines a preliminary plat or preliminary survey
map is necessary before the final plat or map may be submitted for
approval. The plat or map shall be filed within 21 days after the
Plan Commission makes its demand with the City Clerk-Treasurer,
who shall distribute the plat or map to all agencies, commissions,
and individuals who must approve the final plat.
(3) A preliminary plat, or preliminary certified survey map, shall be a
legible print made from a drawing at a scale not greater than 100
feet per one inch that shall show correctly the following:
(a) Proposed name of the subdivision, if a plat.
(b) Name and post office address of the owner or his agent.
(c) Date, scale and North point.
(d) Small-scale drawing showing the location of the land to be
divided, major streets referenced to the United States Public
Land Survey.
(e) Exterior boundaries of the land to be divided referenced to a
corner established in the United States Public Land Survey and
the total acreage encompassed thereby.
(f) Location and names of adjoining subdivision and the owners of
undivided lands.
(g) Present zoning of the land to be divided and adjoining lands;
proposed zoning.
§ 674-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 674-4
1:625
(h) Location, width, and names of all existing and platted streets,
alleys, or other public ways and easements; railroad and public
utility rights-of-way; parks; cemeteries; watercourses;
drainage ditches; permanent buildings; bridges; size, grade,
and invert elevations of all existing sanitary and storm sewers
and water mains; and other pertinent data within, adjacent to,
or affecting the proposed division of land or of property owned
or controlled by the owner.
(i) Water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
survey and the approximate high- and low-water levels thereof.
All elevations shall be referred to USGS Datum.
(j) Contour lines at a vertical interval of not more than two feet
where the ground slope is less than 10% or five feet in other
areas. Reference shall be to USGS Datum.
(k) Layout, width, approximate radii of all curves, and
approximate grades of all streets and rights-of-way, easements
for sewers, water mains, and other public utilities, provision
for stormwater drainage.
(l) Direction, distance and invert elevation of nearest water
mains, sanitary and storm sewers.
(m) Approximate dimensions and area of all lots and other parcels.
(n) Proposed building setback line, if different from that required
by the City or extraterritorial zoning ordinance.
(o) Location and approximate dimensions and acreage of any sites
to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds,
drainageways, or other public use of which are to be used for
church sites, schools, or other similar uses.
(p) Affidavit of the registered land surveyor affixed to the plat or
map certifying that it is a correct representation of all existing
divisions and features and that he has complied with all
applicable statutes and regulations.
(4) The preliminary plat or map shall be checked and reviewed as to its
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map and the
principal standards and requirements set forth in this chapter. The
City Engineer shall examine the plat or map for technical details
and shall certify, in writing to the Plan Commission, his objection or
nonobjection to the plat or map. Copies shall be referred by the
owner for review and recommendations to the state, county or
town agencies as required by § 236.12(2), Wis. Stats. [Amended
7-22-2013]
(5) After review of the preliminary plat or map, including by the
Reedsburg Area Development Council if in the extraterritorial area,
§ 674-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 674-4
1:626
consideration of comments received from reviewing agencies and
individuals, and conferences with the owner on any changes
deemed advisable and the kind and extent of public improvements
which will be required, the Plan Commission shall approve,
conditionally approve, or reject the plat or map with a written
statement setting forth the reasons for rejection.
(6) If the Plan Commission rejects the plat or map, it shall return it to
the owner. If it approves or conditionally approves the plat or map,
it shall notify the Council.
(7) The Common Council shall act on the plat or map, and the
recommendations of the Plan Commission as to the kind and extent
of public improvements which will be required, within 90 days of
the filing of said plat or map with the City Clerk-Treasurer, and
thereafter instruct the City Clerk-Treasurer of its approval or
rejection, who shall notify the owner of the action taken by the
Council. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. Final plat or final certified survey map.
(1) Final plats or final certified survey maps shall be submitted for
approval within 36 months of the filing or if within 36 months of the
approval of the preliminary plat, whichever time is greater, unless
otherwise extended. The Plan Commission and Council shall act
within 60 days of submission of a completed and proper final plat
unless extended by mutual agreement. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) Simultaneously with the filing of the final plat or map, the owner
shall file with the City Clerk-Treasurer four copies of such plat or
map and evidence of compliance with § 674-5 of this chapter.
(3) The City Clerk-Treasurer shall forward the plat or map to the Plan
Commission and to the Reedsburg Area Development Council if in
the extraterritorial area. The Reedsburg Area Development Council
shall advise the Plan Commission of any action it shall take on the
final plat or map.
(4) The Plan Commission shall refer the final plat or map to the City
Engineer for review. The City Engineer shall examine the plat or
map for technical details and shall certify, in writing to the Plan
Commission, his objection or acquiescence to the plat or map.
(5) If the plat or map is satisfactory to the Plan Commission, it shall so
certify in writing to the Council; if it is not satisfactory to the
Commission, it shall be rejected and returned to the owner with a
written statement setting forth the reasons for rejection.
(6) When the Council receives the approved plat or map and the owner
has complied with § 674-5 of this chapter, it shall signify its action
§ 674-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 674-4
1:627
§ 674-5. Construction of public improvements.
by motion or resolution. If they are rejected, the Clerk shall so
advise the owner, in writing; if approved, the Clerk shall endorse
the plat or map as required by Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., and return it to
the owner for recording.
(7) The approval of the final plat or map by the Council shall constitute
acceptance of the dedication of any public street, open space, or
other public area within the corporate limits of the City.
(8) A final plat or final certified survey map shall comply with all
applicable regulations of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.
A. Construction by owner. All of the public improvements required by the
Council to be constructed by the owner shall be constructed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the filing of the
final plat with the City Clerk-Treasurer for approval by the Common
Council. The owner shall provide a surety bond running to the City for a
period of one year after completion of construction in the amount of
20% of the cost of the improvements to guarantee workmanship and
materials of construction and to save the City harmless from any cost to
repair or replace the improvements, unless said improvements are
constructed by the City.
B. Performance. Construction of all required improvements shall be
completed within two years of the approval of the final plat by the
Common Council unless good cause can be shown for granting an
extension of time by the Council.
C. Plans, specifications, and inspection. Construction plans and
specifications for improvements required to be installed shall be
furnished in accordance with the City Comprehensive Plan, standards
and specifications established by the officials having jurisdiction and
shall receive approval of these officials before improvements are
installed. The following plans shall be required, where applicable:
(1) Street plans and profiles showing existing and proposed grades,
including extension for a reasonable distance beyond the
subdivision. Plans and profiles for curb, gutter and sidewalk
installation or, if in a rural area, typical cross sections showing
shoulders, ditches and side banks.
(2) Sanitary sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades,
sizes, elevations and materials.
(3) Storm sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades,
sizes, elevations and materials or methods of stormwater disposal
in lieu of sewers.
(4) Water main plans and profiles showing locations, sizes, elevations
and materials.
§ 674-4 REEDSBURG CODE § 674-5
1:628
(5) Such additional plans and specifications as required. The owner
shall be responsible for obtaining any state or county agency
approval that may be required. The City Engineer or other
designated representative shall inspect the construction of all
required improvements at the owner's expense.
D. Ownership or improvements. All public improvements required to be
constructed herein, such as streets, curb, gutter, sidewalk, sanitary and
storm sewers, water mains, etc., shall become the property of the City
or the township, if an extraterritorial area.
E. Where it shall appear to the satisfaction of the Common Council that
the whole of the plat and its subdivision cannot immediately be fully
improved with respect to the installation of all storm and sanitary
sewers and related facilities and street improvements by reason of
unavoidable delay in the acquisition of land necessary for such
improvements or by reason of an unavoidable delay in obtaining
necessary engineering data and information or for any other good
reason or cause, the Common Council may authorize the owner to
proceed with the installation of improvements required under this
chapter on a portion or part of such subdivision and, in such event, the
requirements of this chapter shall apply to that portion or part thereof
authorized for immediate improvement.
Only that portion of the approved preliminary plat for which a final plat
is being prepared need comply with this section.
F. Undeveloped parcels. Whenever street improvements or utilities
traverse an undeveloped parcel of land, the costs of installing said
improvements, utilities, public services, streets, curb and sidewalk will
be borne by the subdivider requiring installation of such improvements
or utilities. If the undeveloped parcel is developed within 10 years of
the installation of said street improvements of utility installation and if
the development utilizes the street improvements and utilities
previously installed, then the developer of said previously undeveloped
parcel shall be assessed the proportionate share of the actual cost
incurred during the original installation, and said amount shall be
reimbursed to the original owner and subdivider who was required to
construct and finance said improvements. There shall be no
consideration for interest or inflation.
G. Construction by the City. In lieu of the owner constructing all of the
required improvements (Subsection A), the owner may contract with
the City, if the City agrees, or with the Township, if in extraterritorial
area, for the installation of all of the required public improvements. The
owner shall post with the City cash, negotiable securities, or a surety
bond satisfactory to the City, running to the City, or the Township if in
extraterritorial area, in value sufficient to cover the full estimated cost,
as determined by the City Engineers, of the design, inspection and
construction of the required improvements or the cost established by
ordinance or contract. If any owner requests that any construction be
§ 674-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 674-5
1:629
performed by the City, or the Township if in the extraterritorial area,
before approval of the final plat, an easement shall be given the owner
to the City for the privilege of construction on proposed streets.
H. Required improvements. The following improvements shall be required
within the corporate City limits and may be required to the extent
applicable in the extraterritorial area:
(1) Street improvements. The owner shall be responsible for the total
improvement of the street, the culverts, and bridges, including
clearing and grading of the entire right-of-way, subbase, base, and
surface, and any other related expenses.
(2) Curb, gutter and sidewalk. The owner shall be responsible for the
installation of curb and gutter and sidewalk in all areas required by
the City, or Township if in extraterritorial area, or for the
construction of shoulders, ditches, driveway culverts, etc., if in
areas where curb and gutter are not required.
(3) Sanitary sewer. The owner shall be responsible for the installation
of a sanitary sewer system with design standards and sizings
acceptable to the City Engineer, including any oversizing that may
be necessary, inclusive of all lateral connections to each lot and lift
stations where required.
(4) Water main. The owner shall be responsible for the installation of a
water distribution system with design standards and sizings
acceptable to the City Engineer, including any oversizing that may
be necessary, inclusive of all lateral connections to each lot and
booster pumps where required.
(5) Storm sewer. The owner shall be responsible for the installation of
a storm sewer system with design standards and sizings acceptable
to the City Engineer, including any oversizing that may be
necessary, inclusive of curb inlets, catch basins, detention areas
(where required) and other appurtenant structures as called for by
the City Engineer.
(6) Electric/telephone/gas/cable TV. The owner shall be responsible for
the installation of electrical, telephone, gas and cable TV (if
desired) systems adequate to serve the subdivision and for
conformance to the rules and regulations of the entities thereof.
The owner shall be responsible for the coordination of the
installation of these facilities with the installation of the other
improvements. If the installation of any of these facilities is
deferred, the owner and subdivider shall make suitable provisions
to minimize disruption or damage to existing utilities or streets.
(7) Street signs. The developer shall pay for the initial street name and
traffic control signs. [Added 3-26-2007; amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 674-5 REEDSBURG CODE § 674-6
1:630
§ 674-6. Design of subdivisions.
In laying out a subdivision, the owner shall conform to the provisions of Ch.
236, Wis. Stats., the Comprehensive Plan and Official Map of the City, and
all applicable ordinances of the City. In all cases where the requirements
of the ordinance are different from the requirements of Ch. 236, the more
restrictive provisions shall apply.27
§ 674-7. Streets.
A. Streets shall be provided for convenient access to all parcels of land to
be created by the subdivision. The subdivision layout shall be such as to
provide each lot, by means of a public street, satisfactory access to an
existing public street. All streets shall be dedicated to the public, unless
in areas outside the corporate limits, where the town board may permit
private streets. The design of private streets shall be in full conformity
with this chapter.
B. The layout of the streets shall conform to the Official Map.
C. In areas not covered by the Official Map, the layout of the streets shall
conform to the plan for the most advantageous development of
adjoining areas of the neighborhood. The streets shall be designed and
located in relation to existing and officially planned streets, topography
and natural terrain, efficient provision for drainage, sanitary sewer,
water and other utilities, streams and lake and existing tree growth,
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. Minor streets
shall be designed to discourage use by through traffic.
D. Street classification.
(1) Major streets are those streets that have the greatest importance
to the development of the City and its environs. Major streets shall
have a width of right-of-way not less than 100 feet.
(2) Collector streets are streets of somewhat less importance than
major streets. Collector streets shall have a right-of-way of not less
than 66 feet.
(3) Minor streets are streets designed primarily for access to abutting
property and shall have a right-of-way of not less than 66 feet.
Temporary dead-end streets shall not be more than 1,000 feet long
and must be provided with a turnaround at the dead end of not less
than 120 feet in diameter. Appropriate provision shall be made for
those parts of the temporary turnaround to revert to the property
owners when the street is extended.
(4) Marginal access streets may not be less than 60 feet wide.
27.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 18.07, which immediately followed this section, of the former
Municipal Codebook was repealed 4-14-2003.
§ 674-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 674-7
1:631
(5) Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets are prohibited unless approved
under § 674-12. [Amended 7-22-2013]
E. Provision shall be made so that all proposed streets shall have a direct
connection with or be continuous and in line with existing, planned or
platted streets with which they are to connect.
F. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to
be subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions or unless, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, such
extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the
layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts.
G. Grades. The grade of major and collector streets shall not exceed 6%
unless necessitated by exceptional topography and approved by the
Plan Commission. The grade of minor streets shall not exceed 10%. The
minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.50% unless specifically
authorized by Council.
H. Horizontal curves. When a continuous street center line deflects at any
one point by more than 10°, a circular curve shall be introduced, having
a radius of curvature on said center line of not less than 300 feet for
major streets, 250 feet on collector streets and 150 feet for minor
streets.
I. Sight distance. A minimum sight distance with clear visibility measured
along the center line shall be provided with at least 300 feet on major
streets, 200 feet on collector streets and 120 feet on all other streets.
J. Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by
vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to 30 times the
algebraic difference in the rate of the grade for major streets and
equivalent to 20 times this difference for all other streets.
K. Tangents. A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be introduced between
reverse curves on major and collecting streets.
L. Street names. [Amended 3-12-2007]
(1) East-west collector and arterial streets shall use the numeric street
system that runs across Reedsburg, north of Main Street (i.e., 22nd
Street).
(2) North-south streets are divided by Main Street. East-west streets
are divided by the Baraboo River and Hay Creek (extended).
(3) The end of each street name shall be Street, Court, Avenue or
Drive.
(4) Streets in the Reedsburg Business Center and Industrial Park shall
have business-related names recommended by the Industrial
Development Commission.
§ 674-7 REEDSBURG CODE § 674-7
1:632
§ 674-8. Alleys. [Amended 1-12-2004]
(5) Street names shall continue even if interrupted by several blocks
(i.e., Willow).
(6) Developers have the opportunity to suggest street names for
subdivisions that must be reviewed by the Plan Commission as part
of plat approval.
(7) Names that sound alike or are duplicative of existing roads in the
extraterritorial area of the City are not allowed. There shall not be
Michael Court and Michael Avenue, for example.
(8) The City maintains a list of names of war veterans that are suitable
for street naming purposes. The names are alternated between
wars.
(9) This chapter gives the responsibility for street names to the Plan
Commission if they are established as part of the platting process.
(10) The use of first names as street names is prohibited, except for war
veterans, as referenced above, as the signs are too attractive to
thieves.
M. Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
encouraged where their control is definitely placed with the City under
conditions approved by the Plan Commission.
N. Half streets. Where a half street is adjacent to the subdivision, the other
half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider.
O. Intersection.
(1) Property lines at street intersections (street row line) shall be
rounded where the Plan Commission considers it necessary.
(2) Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment
shall be continuous.
(3) Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as
topography and other limiting factors of good design permit.
(4) The number of streets converging at one intersection shall be
reduced to a minimum. Wherever practicable, the distance
between intersections shall be not less than 1,200 feet.
A. Alleys shall be permitted in commercial, industrial and residential
districts except where topography and other circumstances make alleys
impractical to service the property.
B. No alley shall be less than 24 feet wide.
C. No alley shall have a dead end.
§ 674-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 674-9
1:633
§ 674-9. Block and lot layouts.
§ 674-10. General lot requirements.
A. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and type of development contemplated, but
block length in residential areas shall generally be at least 400 feet in
length and shall not exceed 1,200 feet nor have less than sufficient
width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth between
street lines, except where otherwise designed to separate residential
development from major streets.
B. Marked pedestrian crosswalks with ADA-compliant ramps may be
required by the Plan Commission through the center of blocks more
than 900 feet long or every 500 feet, whichever is less. [Amended
1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 1820-16]
A. Size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location
of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated, provided no lot shall contain less than the area required
by the applicable zoning code.
B. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 690,
Zoning.
C. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street
service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated as required by Chapter 690, Zoning.
D. Residential lots fronting on major streets and highways should be
platted with extra depth or designed with reverse frontage with screen
planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property
line, or a marginal access street shall be provided to alleviate the effect
of major street traffic on residential occupancy.
E. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit full
building setback from both streets as required by Chapter 690, Zoning.
F. Every lot in the corporate area of the City shall abut or face a public
street. Lots outside the corporate limits may abut or face a private
street if permitted by the town board.
G. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to abutting
street lines.
H. In case a tract is divided into larger lots, consideration shall be given to
designing such lots to permit redividing into parcels in accordance with
this chapter and Chapter 690, Zoning.
I. Lots shall not be divided by municipal or town boundary lines.
§ 674-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 674-10
1:634
§ 674-11. Easements.
§ 674-12. Variances.
J. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except
where necessary to provide separation of residential development from
traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
A. Utility easements shall be provided at the rear of all residential lots and
along the side lot lines where required. Such utility easement shall be at
least 10 feet wide and normally centered upon the rear of side lot line.
Evidence shall be furnished the Plan Commission prior to approval of
the final plat or final certified survey map that easements and any
easement provisions to be incorporated on the plat or in deeds have
been reviewed by the individual utility companies or the organizations
responsible for furnishing the service involved.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream:
(1) There shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage rightof-
way conforming substantially to the liens of such watercourse
and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate
for the purpose and may be necessary to comply with this section;
or
(2) The watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream may be
relocated in such a manner that maintenance of adequate drainage
right-of-way conforming to the lines of the relocated watercourse
and such further width or construction, or both, will be adequate
for the purpose and may be necessary to comply with this section;
or
(3) The Plan Commission may require area to be set aside for
stormwater detention if necessary to provide for an efficient
provision for stormwater drainage.
A. The Plan Commission may authorize a variance from the requirements
of this chapter when, in its judgment, strict application of this chapter
would result in unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty. The
Commission may, in conjunction with the granting of a variance, impose
conditions if those conditions bear a real and substantial relation to the
public health, safety, or general welfare and comply with applicable
laws.
B. Procedure for granting of variance.
(1) All applications for variance shall be submitted, in writing, by the
subdivider at the time when the preliminary survey is filed for
consideration by the Commission. The application shall state fully
and clearly the specific ordinance provision from which the
§ 674-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 674-12
1:635
Chapter 690
ZONING
variance is sought, the details of the variance sought, a description
of the land for which the variance is sought, the grounds for the
application, and all facts relied on by the applicant. The application
may be accompanied by maps, plans, or other additional material
that may aid the Commission in making its determination.
(2) The Commission shall not act on an application for variance unless
proper notice has been given. Proper notice shall include notice of
the meeting at which the Commission intends to act on the
application, published once in a newspaper meeting the
requirements of § 985.06, Wis. Stats., at least one week prior to the
proposed hearing date; as well as a written notice mailed to the
applicant or his or her agent and to adjoining property owners or
their agents at least 10 days prior to the proposed hearing date.
(3) In making its determination with respect to unnecessary hardship
or practical difficulty the Commission shall take into account the
nature of the proposed use of the land, the nature of existing land
use in the vicinity, and the considerations set forth in § 674-1 of this
chapter of the Code of the City of Reedsburg. No variance shall be
granted unless the Commission finds:
(a) That there are special circumstances uniquely affecting the
property such that strict application of the requirements of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of
his or her land.
(b) That the variance is necessary to preserve a substantial
property right of the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the area.
(4) Every decision of the Commission shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk-Treasurer, together with all documents pertaining to it.
§ 674-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 674-12
1:636
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 690-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as, referred to, or cited as the "Zoning
Ordinance, City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin."
§ 690-2. Authority.
These regulations are adopted under authority granted by § 62.23(7) and
(7a) of the Wisconsin Statutes. Therefore, the Common Council of the City
of Reedsburg, Wisconsin, ordains these zoning regulations.
§ 690-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, morals,
prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of this community.
§ 690-4. Intent.
It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate and restrict the use
of all structures, lands, and waters. It is also intended to regulate and
restrict lot coverage, population distribution and density, and the size and
location of all structures so as to lessen congestion in and promote the
safety and efficiency of the streets and highways, secure safety from fire,
flooding, panic and other dangers, provide adequate light, air, sanitation
and drainage, prevent overcrowding, avoid undue population concentration,
facilitate the adequate provision of public facilities and utilities, stabilize
and protect property values, further the appropriate use of land and
conservation of natural resources, preserve and promote the beauty of
the community, and implement the community's general plan or plan
components. It is further intended to provide for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter and to provide penalties for its violation.
§ 690-5. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety and welfare. To protect the public, among other
purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for adequate light, pure
air, safety from fire and other danger, undue concentration of population
and ample parking facilities.
§ 690-6. Scope.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this chapter, or with private
restrictions placed upon property by covenants running with the land to
which the City is a party. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
§ 690-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-6
1:637
upon land, buildings or structures than is imposed or required by such
existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
§ 690-7. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
§ 690-6 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-7
1:638
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 690-8. Word use.
§ 690-9. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — An accessory building or use is one
which:
A. In the constitution of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this article shall be observed and applied, except when the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
C. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural the singular.
D. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
E. The word "may" is permissive.
Is customary and clearly incidental to the principal building or principal
use;
A.
B. Serves exclusively the principal building or principal use;
Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or
principal use served;
C.
Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants or
the principal building or principal use served;
D.
Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or principal
use served, with the single exception of such accessory off-street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same
zoning lot as the building or use served.
E.
An accessory building or use includes, but is not limited to, the
following. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on
any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to
which it is accessory. [Amended 2-23-2009]
(1) A children's playhouse, garden house, private greenhouse or patio;
A garage, carport, shed or building of storage incidental to a
permitted use;
(2)
(3) Incinerators incidental to a permitted use;
F.
§ 690-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-9
1:639
Storage of goods used in or produced by permitted manufacturing
activities on the same zoning lot with such activities, unless such
storage is excluded by the district regulations;
(4)
The production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or
storage of merchandise normally incidental to a permitted retail
service or business use if conducted by the same ownership as the
principal use;
(5)
(6) Off-street motor vehicle parking areas and loading facilities;
Signs, as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated in
this chapter.
(7)
Dwellings over or behind other permitted uses in B1 and B2
Districts; and
(8)
(9) Home businesses, as defined and permitted in this chapter.
Hoop houses. A "hoop house" is a temporary membrane structure used
exclusively for the production or storage of live plants and shall be
exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter and Chapter
242, Building Construction, if it meets the following criteria: [Added
9-10-2012]
(1) There is no permanent anchoring system or foundation.
(2) All membrane structures shall not exceed 400 square feet.
The structure is located in the rear or side yards and is no closer
than five feet from all property lines.
(3)
(4) Shall not exceed duration of 120 days in a calendar year.
(5) Shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
G.
Portable membrane structures, such as those used for carports or
storage, shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter
and Chapter 242, Building Construction, if they meet the following
criteria: [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 1817-15]
Shall be temporarily and securely anchored to the ground to
prevent uplift.
(1)
(2) Shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(3) Shall not exceed 240 square feet and one per parcel.
(4) Shall meet zoning district setbacks.
(5) Shall be kept in good repair.
H.
Storage containers. Storage containers, such as those used to ship
cargo, are permitted for temporary uses up to six months in a calendar
year or associated with construction/remodeling projects. Containers
I.
§ 690-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-9
1:640
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING (NONHABITABLE) — Farm buildings and
structures accessory thereto not intended or used for human habitation or
dwelling purposes.
AIRPORT — Any area of land that is used or intended for the landing and
takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended
for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or hangars and other
related building and open spaces.
ALLEY — Any public space or thoroughfare which has been dedicated or
deeded to the public for public travel and which affords secondary access to
abutting property.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure is a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or
the moving from one location to another.
ANIMAL UNIT — A unit of measure used to determine the total number of
single animal types or combinations of animal types equivalent to one head
of cattle weighing over 800 pounds. The following table summarizes the
number of animals of varying types that are considered equivalent to one
head of cattle for purposes of this chapter.
Animal Type Category
Number Equivalent to One
Animal Unit
Cattle (above 800 lbs.) 1
Cattle (400 to 800 lbs.) 2
Calves (below 400 lbs.) 5
Horses 2
Sheep 10
Pigs (below 55 lbs.) 10
Pigs (above 55 lbs.) 2
Ducks 20
Animal Type Category
Number Equivalent to One
Animal Unit
Chickens 50
Turkeys 20
Alpaca 10
on the street shall have reflective tape or paint of at least 36 square
inches in an area on each side of each corner of the container.
Containers shall not be left on the street within 15 feet of an
intersection or within four feet of a driveway. Containers shall not
be left on the street for more than 30 consecutive days. [Added
3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1884-19]
§ 690-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-9
1:641
ANTENNA — Any structure intended for the receipt of VHF, UHF or other
high-frequency waves with a parabolic receiver width of less than 30 inches
or that uses any other method for reception than that which is typically used
by satellite dishes.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A multifamily dwelling for three or more families,
living independently of each other, and doing their cooking within the
premises.
AREA, BUILDING — See "floor area."
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A building or place of business where
gasoline, oil and greases, batteries, tires and automobile accessories are
supplies and dispensed directly to the motor vehicle trade, at retail, and
where minor repair service is rendered.
BASEMENT — That portion of any structure located partly below the
average adjoining lot grade.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A building that provides four
or fewer sleeping rooms for temporary occupancy for compensation by
transient guests who are traveling for business or pleasure and is the
owner's personal residence and occupied by the owner at the time of rental.
The partnership form of ownership shall be allowed under this definition.
BOARD — The Zoning Board of Appeals.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building arranged or used for lodging for
compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied as a single-family
unit.
BUILDING — A structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed
enclosure for persons, animals or property used for residential, business,
mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly,
educational, or recreational purposes.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean
elevation of the finished lot grade along the street yard face of the structure
to the highest point of flat roofs; to the mean height level between the
eaves and ridges of gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs; or to the deckline
of mansard roofs or as otherwise defined in this chapter.[Amended
1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 1822-16]
BUILDING, DETACHED — A detached building is a building surrounded by
open space on the same lot as another building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A principal building is a nonaccessory building in
which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL — A residential building is a building which is
arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for residential occupancy
by one or more families or lodgers, and which includes, but is not limited to,
the following types:
A. Single-family detached dwellings;
§ 690-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-9
1:642
BULK — The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and the location of such buildings or structures with respect to
one another, and include the following:
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable stream
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department of Natural Resources pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and
which allows complete filling on the landward side, except where floodway
regulations of this chapter would prohibit such filling.
CAPACITY IN PERSONS — The maximum number of persons that can avail
themselves of the services or goods of an establishment or use at any one
time, as determined by the required floor space per persons as established
in Chapter 242, Building Construction.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water. "Channel flow," thus, is that water which is flowing within the
limits of the defined channel.
COLLECTOR SURFACE — Any part of a solar collector that absorbs solar
energy for use in the collector's energy transformation process. Collector
surface does not include frames, supports and mounting hardware.
COLLECTOR USE PERIOD — 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. standard daily time.
COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS — Any facility licensed or
operated or permitted under the authority of the Wisconsin Department of
Health Services.
COMPLEX — Two or more business occupancies on the same or adjoining
parcels that are owned and/or managed as a unit. For sign code purposes,
they are a single premise regardless of the existence of individual parcels
or businesses.
B. Two-family detached dwellings;
C. Multiple-family dwellings (including apartment hotels);
Lodging houses.
For the purpose of this chapter, any building containing any of the
above uses together with other uses shall be considered a residential
building.
D.
A. Size and height of buildings;
Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets or
to other buildings;
B.
C. Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area ratio);
D. All open spaces allocated to buildings; and
E. Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit or lodging room.
§ 690-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-9
1:643
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official land use plan of the City of
Reedsburg.
CONDITIONAL USES — Uses of a special nature as to make impractical
their predetermination as a principal use in a district. "Conditional uses" in
this chapter shall have the same meaning as special exceptions as used in
§ 62.23, Wis. Stats.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any building or structure
which:
CONVALESCENT HOME and NURSING HOME — A convalescent home or a
nursing home is a home for the aged, infirm, chronically ill or incurably ill in
which five or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or
provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including
hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis
and treatment of disease or injury, maternity cases or mental illness.
CORNER LOT — A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection,
provided that the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of 135° or
less, measured on the lot side.
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such
buildings.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, construction of or additions or
substantial improvements to buildings or structures and the mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or deposition of materials.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment that accommodates the
patrons' motor vehicles, from which the occupants may obtain or receive a
service or obtain a product that may be used or consumed in the vehicle
on the same premises. However, any restaurant or food establishment at
which facilities are provided for patrons to consume the products therefrom
in motor vehicle while on the premises or any such establishment which
permits patrons to consume the products therefrom in motor vehicles while
on the premises shall be considered a drive-in establishment.
DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms for occupancy by
one family that includes facilities for residential living, cooking, sanitation
and sleeping, but does not include boardinghouses or lodging houses,
motels, hotels, tents, cabins, or mobile homes.[Amended 5-11-2009]
ENTRANCE, MAIN — The entrance which faces the front lot or is closest to
the front lot line and which entrance provides direct access to the principal
use.
Complies with all the regulations of this chapter or any amendment
thereto governing the bulk of the zoning district in which such building
or structure is located; or
A.
B. Is designed or intended for a conforming use.
§ 690-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-9
1:644
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — The erection, construction, alteration, or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of
underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or
distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems,
including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not including
buildings reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by
such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions or for the
public health or safety or general welfare.
FAMILY — Any number of persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage,
or not to exceed four persons not so related, living together in one dwelling
as a single housekeeping entity.
FENCE — A structure providing enclosure or serving as a barrier, but not
protecting against the elements (as distinguished from "building").
FLOOR AREA (FOR DETERMINING LOT COVERAGE RATIOS) — The
square footage area of all building footprints. A "building footprint" is the
gross horizontal area on the ground floor of a building.
FLOOR AREA (FOR DETERMINING OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
REQUIREMENTS) — When prescribed as the basis of measurement for offstreet
parking spaces and loading berths for any use, shall mean the sum
of the areas of the several floors of the buildings devoted to such use,
including accessory storage areas located with selling or working space,
such as counters, racks or closets, and any basement floor area devoted to
retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business
or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The floor area of the building or buildings on
the zoning lot divided by the area of such zoning lot. The floor area ratio
requirements, as set forth under each zoning district, shall determine the
maximum floor area allowable for the building or buildings (total floor area
of both principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the area of the
zoning lot.
FRONTAGE — The smallest dimensions of a lot abutting a public street
measured along the street line.
FRONT YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing
or proposed street or highway line and a line parallel thereto through the
nearest point of the principal structure. Corner lots shall have two such
yards.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or part thereof accessory to a main
building and providing for the storage of automobiles and in which no
occupation or business for profit is carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC OR STORAGE — A building or part thereof, other than
a private garage, for the storage of motor vehicles and in which servicestation
activities may be carried on.
§ 690-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-9
1:645
HOTEL — A series of attached, semi-attached, or detached sleeping units
for the accommodation of transient guests.
IMPERMISSIBLE INTERFERENCE — The blockage of solar energy to a
collector surface or proposed collector surface for which a permit has been
granted under this chapter, during a collector use period, and such blockage
is by any structure or vegetation on property, an owner of which was
notified under § 690-59C. "Impermissible interference" does not include:
JUNK — Any worn-out, cast-off, or discarded article or material that is ready
for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion
to some use. Any article or material which, unaltered or unchanged and
without further reconditioning, can be used for its original purpose as
readily as when new shall not be considered junk.
JUNKYARD — The use of more than 500 square feet of the area of any lot,
whether inside or outside a building, or the use of any portion of that half
of any lot that joins any street, for the storage, keeping or abandonment of
junk.
LIVING ROOMS — All rooms within a dwelling except closets, foyers,
storage areas, utility rooms, and bathrooms.
LOADING AREA — A complete off-street space or berth of the same lot for
the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and
egress to a public street or alley.
LOT — A parcel of land having frontage on a public street, occupied or
intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size
to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area, and other
open space provisions of this chapter.
LOT LINES AND AREA — The peripheral boundaries of a parcel of land and
the total area lying within such boundaries.
LOT WIDTH — The measurement of the perpendicular distance between the
side lot lines. On an irregular, pie-, or flag-shaped lot, minimum lot width
is met when more than 50% of the lot's length has the required minimum
width or meets the average of the lengths of the combined front and rear
lot lines.[Amended 2-23-2009]
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection,
provided that the intersection angle of such intersection is less than 135°.
Blockage by a narrow protrusion, including but not limited to a pole
or wire, which does not substantially interfere with absorption of solar
energy by a solar collector.
A.
Blockage by any structure constructed, under construction or for which
a building permit has been applied for before the date the last notice is
mailed or delivered under § 690-59C.
B.
Blockage by any vegetation planted before the date the last notice is
mailed or delivered under § 690-59C.
C.
§ 690-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-9
1:646
MOBILE HOMES — Any structure originally designed to be capable of
transportation by any motor vehicle upon a public highway which is
intended for occupancy as a year-round residence and which does not
require substantial on-site fabrication.
NONCONFORMING USES OR STRUCTURES — Any structure, land, or
water lawfully used, occupied, or erected at the time of the effective date
of this chapter or amendments thereto which does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter or amendments thereto. Any such structure
conforming in respect to use but not in respect to frontage, width, height,
area, yard, parking, loading, or distance requirements shall be considered a
nonconforming structure and not a nonconforming use.
OUTLOT — A parcel of land, other than a lot or block, so designated on
the plat or survey. Outlots shall be created to correct previous survey/plat
errors or when a nonbuildable parcel is intended and approved through a
development agreement.[Amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 1870-18]
PARKING LOT — A structure or premises containing five or more parking
spaces.
PARKING SPACE — A graded and surfaced area of not less than 180 square
feet, in area either enclosed or open, for the parking of a motor vehicle,
having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Includes all abutting property owners, all
property owners within 150 feet, and all property owners of opposite
frontages.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: DWELLING — A parcel or tract
of land having an area as required in the district regulations under common
management, single ownership, and which is the site for two or more
principal residential buildings and where regulations governing yard
requirements as required by district regulations may be modified as
regulated in this chapter. The issuance of a permit for a planned residential
development dwelling shall require approval as provided in this chapter.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: MOBILE HOME PARK — A
parcel or tract of land having an area as required in the district regulations
under common management, single ownership, and which is the site for
mobile homes and where yard requirements as required by district
regulations may be modified as regulated in this chapter. This issuance
of a permit for a planned residential development dwelling shall require
approval as provided in this chapter.
PREMISES — Land and the building upon it.
PROFESSIONAL HOME OFFICES — See "home enterprises."
PUBLIC WAY — Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public
thoroughfare.
REAR YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal
§ 690-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-9
1:647
structure. This yard shall be opposite the front yard or one of the front yards
on a corner lot.
RESTAURANT — Any building, room or place wherein meals or lunches
are prepared or served or sold to transients or the general public, and all
places used in connection therewith. "Meals or lunches" shall not include
soft drinks, ice cream, milk, milk drinks, ices and confections. The serving
in taverns of free lunches consisting of popcorn, cheese, crackers, pretzels,
cold sausage, cured fish or bread and butter shall not constitute such
taverns to be restaurants. The term "restaurant" does not apply to churches,
religious, fraternal, youth's or patriotic organizations, service clubs and
civic or union organizations which occasionally prepare or serve or sell
meals or lunches to transients or the general public, nor shall it include any
public or private school lunchroom or private individual selling foods from
a movable or temporary stand at public farm sales.
SATELLITE DISH — Any structure intended for the receipt of VHF, UHF or
other high-frequency waves with a parabolic receiving area in excess of 30
inches.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ADULT BUSINESS — As defined in § 176-3 of the
Code of Ordinances, and includes adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, adult viewing facility, nude model studios or
other adult, sexually oriented business.[Added 10-22-2007]
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of three or more commercial
establishments that are planned, developed, owned and/or managed as
a unit. A shopping center has shared off-street parking provided on the
property, joint-use access from adjoining streets and is related in its
location, size and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves.
SIDE YARD — A yard extending from the street yard to the rear yard of
the lot, width of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between
the side lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the
principal structure.
SIGNS — Any words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences,
emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks by which everything
is made known and which are used to advertise or promote an individual,
firm, association, corporation, profession, business, commodity or product
and which is visible from any public way.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A device, structure or a part of a device or
structure, a substantial purpose of which is to transform solar energy into
thermal, mechanical, chemical or electric energy.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — See "conditional use."
STREET — A roadway or highway not otherwise defined lying with a
recorded subdivision with a right-of-way not less than 50 feet wide
providing primary access to abutting properties.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members of
a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
§ 690-9 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-9
1:648
STRUCTURE — Any erection or construction, such as buildings, towers,
masts, poles, booms, signs, decorations, carports, machinery and
equipment.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS — A business where pigment is inserted under
the surface of the skin of an individual by pricking a needle or other
instrument, and includes body piercing.[Added 11-26-2007]
TOWNHOUSE — Single-family building having one or more walls in
common with another single-family building, oriented so all exits open
directly to the outside.
TRAILER — Any unpowered vehicle towed by another and used for purposes
such as camping, transport, and temporary construction offices.[Amended
9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 1815-15]
USE — The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
occupied or maintained.
USE, CONDITIONAL — A use which, because of its unique or varying
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district. After due consideration, as provided for in this chapter,
of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for
the particular use at a particular location, such conditional use may or may
not be granted.
USE, PERMITTED — A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements and
regulations of such district in which such use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
a subordinate or accessory use.
UTILITIES — Public and private facilities such as water wells, water and
sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, power and communication
transmission lines, electrical power substations, static transformer stations,
telephone and telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays, and gas
regulation stations, but not including sewage disposal plants, municipal
incinerators, warehouses, shops, and storage yards.
VARIANCE — A situation where strict application of this chapter would
result in a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; an exception may be
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway.
YARD — An open space on a zoning lot which is unoccupied or unobstructed
from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 690-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-9
1:649

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 690-10. General provisions.
§ 690-11. Enforcement and administration.
A. Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands and
waters within the territorial and extraterritorial boundaries of the City
of Reedsburg, Wisconsin.
B. Compliance. No structure, land, or water shall hereafter be used and no
structure or part thereof except minor structures shall hereafter be
located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted
or structurally altered without a zoning permit and without full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
local, county, and state regulations.
A. Administrative official. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the
Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce this chapter,
including the receiving of applications, the inspection of premises and
the issuing of building permits and certificates of compliance. No
building permit or certificate of compliance shall be issued by him
except where the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
B. Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as provided for in
§ 690-12, shall interpret this chapter and hear and review request for
variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals is also referred to as the
"Zoning Board" in this chapter.
C. Plan Commission. The City Plan Commission shall have the following
duties and powers:
(1) Recommend to the Common Council proposed amendments to this
chapter and proposed rezoning as provided for in § 690-13.
(2) Review and approve all permits and licenses before issued to any
property which has been issued a certificate of nonconforming use.
Fees for certificates of nonconforming use are per the current City
Fee Schedule on file in the City’s offices or available on the City’s
website. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) Review and approve conditional use.
(4) Conduct public hearing for a solar access permit, if requested, and
approve permits.
(5) Review and approve planned development groups.
(6) Review and approve other matters regarding zoning as provided
for in this chapter.
§ 690-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-11
1:651
D. Common Council. The Common Council shall have the responsibility to
approve amendments to this chapter and approve property to be
rezoned. See § 690-13.
E. Building permit required. Subject to all other provisions of the Code of
the City of Reedsburg, no building or structure shall be erected, added
to, or structurally altered until a building permit therefor has been
issued by the Zoning Administrator. All applications for such permits
shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and, unless
upon written order of the Zoning Board of Appeals, no such building
permit or certificate of compliance shall be issued for any building
where said construction, addition, or alteration or use thereof would be
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(1) Matter accompanying application. There shall be submitted with all
applications for building permits two copies of a layout or plot plan
drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the building and
accessory buildings to be erected and such other information as
may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of
this chapter. The Zoning Administrator may require a survey by a
registered surveyor if necessary, in his opinion, to determine
compliance.
(2) Payment of fee. One copy of such layout or plot plan shall be
returned when approved by the Zoning Administrator together
with such permit to the applicant upon the payment of a fee as
provided for in Chapter 242, Building Construction.
F. Certificate of compliance.
(1) No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter
erected, altered or extended shall be used or changed in use until a
certificate of compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator, stating that the building or proposed use thereof
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) No nonconforming use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or
extended without a certificate of compliance having first been
issued by the Zoning Administrator therefor.
(3) All certificates of compliance shall be applied for coincident with
the application for a building permit. Said certificate shall be
issued within 30 days after the erection or alteration shall have
been approved.
(4) The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all certificates,
and copies shall be furnished, upon request, to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
§ 690-11 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-11
1:652
§ 690-12. Zoning Board of Appeals. [Amended 11-10-2008]
The hearing and review of variance proposals shall be within the power and
duty of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The procedures and conditions for
granting a variance to this chapter shall be as provided in this § 690-12.
(5) No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of or
repairs to, any building shall be issued until an application has
been made for a certificate of compliance.
(6) Under such rules and regulations as may be established by the
Zoning Board of Appeals and filed with the Zoning Administrator, a
temporary certificate of compliance for not more than 30 days for a
part of a building may be issued by him.
G. Violations. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land,
or water in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. In case of
any violations, the Common Council, the Zoning Administrator, the Plan
Commission, or any property owner who would be especially damaged
by such violation may institute appropriate action or proceeding to
enjoin a violation of this chapter.
H. Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less
than $50 nor more than $500, and costs of prosecution, for each
violation and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be
imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding
30 days. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. Creation, appointment and organization.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals is created pursuant to § 62.23(7)(e),
Wis. Stats. The Board shall consist of five members appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the Common Council, for
terms of three years. The members of the Board shall be removable
by the Mayor for cause upon written charges and after public
hearing. The Board may employ a secretary and other employees.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of members whose
terms become vacant. The Mayor may appoint, for staggered terms
of three years, two alternate members of such Board, in addition to
the five members as provided for above. Annually, the Mayor shall
designate one of the alternate members as first alternate and the
other as second alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full
power, only when a member of the Board refuses to vote because of
interest or when a member is absent. The second alternate shall so
act only when the first alternate so refuses or is absent or when
more than one member of the Board so refuses or is absent. The
above provisions, with regard to removal and filling of vacancies,
shall apply to such alternates. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 690-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-12
1:653
(2) The Joint Extraterritorial Board of Appeals shall consist of four
members appointed by the Mayor. The Mayor shall consider
nominations from each town board. The members shall serve
without compensation and shall be removable by the Mayor for
cause upon written charges and after public hearing. The Mayor
shall designate one of the members Chairperson. The Mayor shall
appoint an alternate member who shall act with full power only
when a member of the Joint Board of Appeals is absent or refuses to
vote because of an interest. The Joint Board shall consist of:
(a) One member who is a resident of the Town of Reedsburg.
(b) One member who is a resident of the Town of Winfield.
(c) One member who is a resident of the Town of Excelsior.
(d) One member who is a resident of the City of Reedsburg.
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals (hereinafter referring to the City
Zoning Board of Appeals and the Joint Extraterritorial Board of
Appeals) shall adopt rules for its government and procedure.
Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson and at such other times as the Zoning Board of
Appeals may determine. The Chairperson may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open
to the public.
(4) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Zoning Board of Appeals and
shall be a public record.
(5) Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any
persons aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau
of the City, affected by any decisions of the administrative officers.
Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by
the rules of the Zoning Board of Appeals, by filing with the officers
from whom the Zoning Board of Appeals is taken and with the
Zoning Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The officers from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
appeals and give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the
parties in interest and shall decide the same within a reasonable
time. Fees for an appeal are set forth in the current City Fees
Schedule.
B. Powers and duties. The City of Reedsburg Zoning Board of Appeals
shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by law and by this
§ 690-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-12
1:654
chapter, within the territorial limits of the City. The Joint
Extraterritorial Board of Appeals shall have all the power and duties
prescribed by law and by this chapter within the extraterritorial limits.
(1) Interpretation. Upon appeal from a decision by an administrative
official to decide any question involving the interpretation of any
provision of this chapter, including determination of the exact
location of any district boundary if there is uncertainty with respect
thereto.
(2) Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized under
current law to authorize a variance from the terms of this chapter.
A use variance grants permission for a use that is not permitted by
this chapter, and an area variance relaxes restrictions on
dimensions, such as setback, frontage, height, bulk, density, and
area. To grant a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals must find
four things: [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1861-18]
(a) The variance will not be contrary to the public interest.
(b) Substantial justice will be done by granting the variance.
(c) The variance is needed so that the spirit of this chapter is
observed.
(d) Due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship.
(3) Variance hardship. A property owner bears the burden of proving
unnecessary hardship by demonstrating either of the following:
[Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1861-18]
(a) For an area variance, that strict compliance with this chapter
would unreasonably prevent the property owner from using
the property for a permitted purpose or would render
conformity with this chapter unnecessarily burdensome.
(b) For a use variance, that strict compliance with this chapter
would leave the property owner with no reasonable use of the
property in the absence of a variance. In both situations, the
property owner bears the burden of proving that the
unnecessary hardship is based on conditions unique to the
property, rather than personal considerations, and that the
unnecessary hardship was not created by the property owner.
(4) Prohibited use. Except as specifically provided, no action by the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the effect of permitting, in any
district, uses prohibited in such district.
(5) Expirations. An expiration date for a variance may be granted if
that date relates to a specific date by which the action authorized
by the variance must be commenced or completed. If no such
ordinance is in effect at the time a variance is granted, or if the
§ 690-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-12
1:655
Zoning Board of Appeals does not specify an expiration date for
the variance, a variance granted under this subsection does not
expire unless, at the time it is granted, the Zoning Board of Appeals
specifies in the variance a specific date by which the action
authorized by the variance must be commenced or completed. A
variance granted under this subsection runs with the land. [Added
11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 1819-15]
C. Procedure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act in strict accordance
with the procedure specified by law and by this chapter. All appeals and
applications made to the Board shall be in writing on forms prescribed
by the Board. Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific
provision of this chapter involved, and shall exactly set forth the
interpretation that is claimed, the use for which the special permit is
sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds
on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case
may be. Every decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be by
resolution, each of which shall contain a full record of the findings of
the Board in the particular case. Each such resolution shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, by case number, under one or
another of the following headings: Interpretations; Variances; together
with all documents pertaining thereto. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall notify the Common Council and the Plan Commission of the City of
Reedsburg or the Joint Extraterritorial Committee of each
interpretation and each variance granted under the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Notice and hearing. No action of the Board shall be taken on any case
until after proper notice has been given and public hearing has been
held. Proper notice of a hearing before the Board shall be, besides
public notice, written notice mailed to the owner or his agent and, so far
as it is practicable, written notice to parties of interest. If a quorum is
present, the Zoning Board of Appeals may take action by a majority vote
of the members present.
E. Rehearing. An owner of property, or his or her authorized agent, shall
not file an appeal for zoning variance affecting the same parcel more
often than once every 12 months. An exception to this rule may be made
in those cases where the Board of Appeals determines that:
(1) Conditions affecting the property have changed substantially;
(2) The nature of the request has changed substantially from the date
of the previous petition; or
(3) If the City attorney by a written opinion states that in the attorney's
professional opinion, the decision made by the Zoning Board of
Appeals or the procedure used in the matter was clearly erroneous.
F. Stay. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the
§ 690-12 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-12
1:656
§ 690-13. Amendments and rezoning.
Zoning Board of Appeals that by reason of facts a stay would, in
the Zoning Administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril of life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals or by a court of record on application and on due cause shown.
A. The Common Council may from time to time on its own motion, or on
petition, or on recommendation of the Plan Commission, amend,
supplement, or repeal the regulations and provisions of this chapter
and change the boundaries of zoning districts. In the event that the
proposed rezoning is not at the request of the municipality, the
petitioner shall pay the fee per the current City Fee Schedule on file in
the City's offices or available on the City's website. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Every such proposed amendment or change, whether initiated by the
Common Council or by petition, shall be referred to the Plan
Commission for report thereon before the public hearing hereinafter
provided for.
C. The Common Council, by resolution, adopted at a stated meeting shall
fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendments
and cause notice to be given as follows:
(1) By publishing a Class II notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats..
(2) By mailing a notice thereof to parties of interest.
(3) The notice shall state the general nature of the proposed
amendments as well as the text.28
28.Editor's Note: Original subsection (4) of the former Municipal Codebook, which contained
a statutory provision now removed from § 62.23, Wis. Stats., and which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 690-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-13
1:657

ARTICLE IV
Zoning Districts
§ 690-14. Establishment of districts. [Amended 6-10-2008; at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
For the purposes of this chapter, the City is hereby divided into 13 districts,
as follows:
R1 - Residential, one- and two-family
R2 - Residential, one- and two-family
R3 - Residential, multiple-family
B1 - Business, Central Business District
B2 - Business, General
B3 - Business, Local
I1 - Light Industrial
I2 - Heavy Industrial
I3 - Industrial Park
I4 - Business Center
A - Agriculture
C - Conservancy
RC - Resource Conservation
§ 690-15. Maps and boundaries.
The boundaries of these districts in the territorial limits and extraterritorial
limits of the City are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "City
of Reedsburg Official City and Extraterritorial Zoning Map." This map is on
file in the office of the Zoning Administrator and is hereby incorporated in
this chapter.
§ 690-16. Interpretation of district boundaries.
A. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules
shall apply:
(1) Where boundaries approximately follow street, alleys, or highways.
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the center line or street line of streets, the center line or alley line
of alleys, or the center line of right-of-way line of highways, such
lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries.
(2) Where boundaries parallel street lines, alley lines or highway rightof-
way lines. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they
are approximately parallel to the center lines or street lines of
streets, the center lines or alley lines of alleys, or the center lines of
§ 690-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-16
1:659
right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom
as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such
dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on
said Zoning Map.
(3) Where boundaries approximately follow lot lines. Where district
boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such
lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
(4) Where the boundary follows a railroad line. Where the boundary of
a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to
be located midway between the main tracks of said railroad line.
(5) Submerged areas not included in district. All areas within the
territorial and extraterritorial limits of the City which are
underwater and are not shown as included within any district shall
be subject to all of the regulations of the district which immediately
adjoins the water area. If the water area adjoins two or more
districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to
extend into the water area in a straight line until they meet the
other district.
(6) District regulations apply to schools, parks, etc. Any areas shown
on the Zoning Maps as park, playground, school, cemetery, water,
street, or right-of-way shall be subject to the zoning regulations of
the district in which they are located. In case of doubt, the zoning
regulations of the most restricted adjoining district shall govern.
(7) Where property has not been included in district. In every case
where property has not been specifically included within a district,
the same shall automatically be classed as lying and being in the R1
Residential District until such classifications shall have been
changed by an amendment to this chapter, as provided by law.
(8) Vacation of public ways. Whenever any street, alley, or other public
way is vacated in the manner authorized by the law, the zoning
district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall
be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all
area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject
to all regulations of the extended districts.
B. Zones. All zones established by this section are as shown on the
following maps which are attached hereto and adopted as part of this
chapter: [Added 6-23-2008]
(1) Map entitled "Height Limitation Zoning Map, Reedsburg Airport,
Sauk County, Wisconsin," dated June 23, 2008, and prepared by the
Wisconsin Bureau of Aeronautics. (Sheet 1 of 1).29
29.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the City offices.
§ 690-16 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-16
1:660
ARTICLE V
District Regulations
§ 690-17. Application of regulations.
Except as provided in this chapter:
§ 690-18. Zoning controls.
The purpose, principal permitted uses, conditional uses, and dimensional
requirements shall be as specified in Schedules 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.30
A. Conformity of building and land. No building, structure or premises
shall be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other
structure shall be erected, raised, moved, placed, reconstructed,
extended, enlarged, or altered except in conformity with the
regulations herein specified for the district, as shown on the Official
Map, in which it is located.
B. Conformity of buildings. No building, structure or premises shall be
erected, altered or used so as to produce greater heights, smaller yards
or less unoccupied area, and no building shall be occupied by more
families that prescribed for such building, structure or premises for the
district in which it is located.
C. Conformity of open spaces. No yard, court or open space, or part
thereof, shall be included as part of the yards, court or open space
similarly required for any other building, structure of dwelling under
this chapter.
30.Editor's Note: Said schedules are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 690-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-18
1:661

ARTICLE VI
Conditional Uses
[Amended 2-23-2009]
§ 690-19. Review and approval. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No.
1861-18; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provision,
Art. II)]
The Plan Commission shall review all proposed conditional uses. Upon
receipt of a conditional use permit application, and following publication
in the City of a Class 2 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., the City Plan
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application. In granting
a conditional use, the Plan Commission may prescribe conditions that it
deems to be necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter. Such
conditions may include special landscaping, architectural design, type of
construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties,
lighting, fencing, planting screens, operational control, deed restrictions,
highway access restrictions, increased yards, parking requirements or any
condition related to the standards below. Preapplication conferences,
amendments, expiration dates, and reapplications of conditional use
permits shall follow the same standards as site plan reviews. The City Plan
Commission must demonstrate that its decision to approve or deny the
permit is supported by substantial evidence. Public testimony alone is not
substantial evidence and cannot be the sole basis for the commission to
deny a conditional use permit. "Substantial evidence" means evidence of
such convincing power that reasonable persons would accept it in support
of a conclusion. Substantial evidence does not include public comment that
is based solely on personal opinion, uncorroborated hearsay, or speculation.
Once granted, a conditional use permit shall remain in effect as long as the
conditions upon which the permit was issued are followed, but the City Plan
Commission may impose conditions, such as the permit's duration, transfer,
or renewal, in addition to any other conditions specified in this chapter. In
determining its findings, the Plan Commission shall take into account:
A. Proposed operation. No conditional use shall be approved by the Plan
Commission unless it finds that the use for which such permit is sought
will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to
the public welfare and will be in harmony with the general purpose of
this chapter and will not place demands on fire, police, or other public
resources in excess of current capacity.
B. Architectural plans; existing and proposed structures. The proposed
conditional land use shall be designed, constructed, operated, and
maintained so as not to diminish the opportunity for surrounding
properties to be used and developed as zoned.
C. Character and use of adjoining buildings and those in the vicinity. The
proposed conditional land use shall not involve uses, activities,
processes, materials, or equipment that would create a substantially
§ 690-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-19
1:663
§ 690-20. Public and semipublic uses.
The following public and semipublic uses shall be conditional uses and may
be permitted as specified.
negative impact on other conforming properties in the area by reason
of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, and odors.
D. Traffic generation, circulation and parking areas. The arrangement of
public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall
respect the pattern of existing or planned streets and pedestrian or
bicycle pathways in the area.
E. Traffic generation and circulation, highway access and driveway
locations. The proposed conditional land use shall be adequately served
by public or private streets.
F. Sewerage and water systems. The proposed conditional land use will be
adequately served by water and sewer facilities and refuse collection
and disposal services.
A. Airports, airstrips, and landing fields in the A District or the I3 District,
providing that these facilities meet the regulations contained in
§§ 114.135 and 114.136, Wis. Stats.
B. Clubs, fraternities, lodges, and meeting places of noncommercial
nature in the agriculture and residential districts, provided all principal
structures and uses are not less than 25 feet from any lot line.
C. Governmental and cultural uses such as administrative offices, fire and
police stations, community centers, libraries, public emergency
shelters, parks, playgrounds, and museums in all residential,
agricultural, business and industrial districts. All principal uses within
parks and playgrounds shall be 10 feet from all residential districts.
D. "Employee housing" — A dwelling or lodging unit with overall living
accommodations for persons who are employed at the on-site or
connecting business. Employee housing is permitted as a conditional
use in I zoning districts, subject to the following standards: [Amended
2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 1826-16]
(1) That such dwellings are owned by the business.
(2) That such dwellings are managed by a resident manager employed
by the business which employs the residents.
(3) That residency is temporary and seasonal.
(4) That building design and landscaping matches the character of its
zoning district.
§ 690-19 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-20
1:664
(5) That the development of more than 12 units shall require inclusion
of recreation facilities and open space. Examples may include
children's play equipment, basketball, or horseshoes.
(6) That adequate provision is made to monitor and enforce
restrictions on noise, parking, garbage disposal, exterior lighting
and other conditions that may be imposed through the conditional
use permit process.
(7) That the housing is licensed and inspected by the state, when
applicable.
E. Public passenger transportation terminals such as heliports, bus and
rail depots, except airports, airstrips, and landing fields, in all business
and industrial districts, provided all principal structures and uses are
not less than 100 feet from any residential district boundary.
F. Public, parochial and private preschool, elementary and secondary
schools and churches in the residential and agricultural districts.
[Amended 6-28-2010]
G. Colleges, vocational schools, universities, hospitals, sanitariums,
religious, charitable, penal and correctional institutions, cemeteries
and crematories in the A and R Districts.
H. Bed-and-breakfast and boardinghouse establishments, provided that:
(1) The building is properly licensed under the laws of the State of
Wisconsin and/or Sauk County.
(2) All drives and parking areas shall be hard-surfaced.
(3) There shall be one off-street parking stall for each guest room. All
parking stalls shall be available on the premises or on adjoining
premises.
(4) Any signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the zoning
district where the establishment is located. Establishments in
Residential 1 Districts shall comply with the sign requirements for
home occupations.
(5) The building shall contain sufficient smoke alarms, fire
extinguishers and fire escapes as required by Wis. Adm. Code for
multiple-family dwellings.
I. All adult day-care centers and community and other living
arrangements as defined by state statute, provided that:
(1) Prior to issuance of a permit, a public hearing on that issuance is
held and notification of all property owners within 150 feet of the
exterior boundaries of the proposed site is provided to the property
owners by first class mail and a Class 1 notice.
(2) The proposed center is properly certified pursuant to state law.
§ 690-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-20
1:665
§ 690-21. Residential uses.
The following residential and quasi-residential uses shall be conditional
uses and may be permitted as specified.
§ 690-22. Mineral extraction.
Mineral extraction operations, including washing, crushing, or other
processing, are conditional uses and may be permitted in the I2 District,
provided:
(3) The center proposes to locate in an area permitted within its state
certification.
A. Planned residential developments such as cluster developments,
garden apartments, townhouses and group housing in the R1, R2 and
R3 Residential Districts are permitted. The proper preservation, care
and maintenance by the original and all subsequent owners (of the
exterior design) of all common structures, facilities, utilities, access and
open spaces shall be assured by deed restrictions enforceable by the
community. The following provisions shall be complied with:
Development Minimum 10 Acres
Lot Area Minimum of 2/3 of the minimum lot area for the
district in which located. Minimum 3,000
square feet for townhouses.
Width Minimum of 2/3 of the minimum lot width for
the district in which located. Minimum 20 feet
for townhouses.
Building Area Maximum lot coverage of 40%
Yards Street Minimum 20 feet
Rear Minimum 50 feet
Side Minimum 20 feet from street right-of-way
exterior property lines of the development and
other buildings.
B. Rest homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged and clinics in the R1 or
R2 Residential Districts.
A. The application for the conditional use permit shall include an adequate
description of the operation; a list of equipment, machinery, and
structures to be used; the source, quantity and disposition of water to
be used; a topographic map of the site showing existing contours with
minimum vertical contour interval of five feet, trees, proposed and
existing access roads, the depth of all existing and proposed
excavations; and a restoration plan.
B. The restoration plan provided by the applicant shall contain proposed
contours after filling, depth of the restored topsoil, type of fill, planting
§ 690-20 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-22
1:666
§ 690-23. Planned development groups.
or reforestation, restoration commencement and completion dates. The
applicant shall furnish the necessary fees to provide for the inspection
and administrative costs and the necessary sureties that will enable
the county to perform the planned restoration of the site in event of
default by the applicant. The amount of such sureties shall be based
upon cost estimates prepared by the engineer, and the form and type of
such sureties shall be approved by the county's legal counsel.
C. The conditional use permit shall be in effect for period not to exceed
two years and may be renewed upon application for renewal.
D. The zoning agency shall particularly consider the effect of the proposed
operation upon existing streets, neighboring development, proposed
land use, drainage, water supply, soil erosion, natural beauty, character,
and land value of the locality and shall also consider the practicality of
the proposed restoration plan for the site.
A. Planned development groups shall be permitted in appropriate zones
only after specific approval by the Plan Commission and the governing
body.
B. The application shall show the proposed use or uses, dimensions and
locations of proposed structures and of areas to be reserved for
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, parking, public uses such as schools,
and playgrounds, landscaping, other open spaces, architectural
drawings and sketches showing design structures and their
relationship, and such other information as may be requested by such
bodies for a determination that it is desirable to deviate from certain
other provisions of this chapter.
C. The following regulations shall apply:
(1) Spacing and orientation of building center. Exterior walls of
opposite building shall be located no closer than a distance equal to
the height of the taller building. A building group shall not be so
arranged that any permanently or temporarily occupied building is
inaccessible to emergency vehicles.
(2) Circulation. There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient
arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways,
driveways, off-street parking and loading space. There shall be an
adequate amount, in a suitable location, of pedestrian walks, malls
and landscape spaces to prevent pedestrian use of vehicular ways
and parking spaces and to separate pedestrian walks, malls and
public transportation loading places from general vehicular
circulation facilities. Buildings and vehicular circulation open
spaces shall be arranged so that pedestrians moving between
buildings are not unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic.
§ 690-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-23
1:667
§ 690-24. Mobile home parks.
Mobile home parks shall be designed in accordance with the Ch. SPS 326,
Wis. Adm. Code. In addition, the following requirements shall be complied
with.
(3) Paving and drainage. There shall be adequate design of grades,
paving, gutters, drainage and treatment of turf to handle
stormwaters and prevent erosion and formation of dust.
(4) Signs and lighting. Signs and lighting devices shall be properly
arranged with respect to traffic control devices and adjacent
residential districts.
A. The minimum size of a mobile home park shall be five acres.
B. The minimum size lot per mobile home shall be 3,000 square feet.
C. The minimum width of a mobile home site shall be 40 feet.
D. The minimum distance between mobile home trailers shall be 20 feet.
E. The minimum distance between mobile home and service road shall be
10 feet.
F. Each mobile home site shall be connected to a public water supply
system and a public sewage disposal system or a private sewage
disposal and water system, in accordance with Ch. SPS 326, Wis. Adm.
Code, approved by the State Department of Safety and Professional
Services.
G. All drives, parking areas and walkways shall be concrete or asphalt
surfaces. There shall be one parking space for each mobile home plus
additional parking spaces within the park for automotive vehicles, the
combined total of which shall be not less than 1 1/4 parking spaces for
each mobile home space.
H. The owner of a mobile home park or its agent may maintain a sales
office for new mobile home units. No more than two new units shall be
located within the park grounds. Laundries, washrooms, recreation
rooms, maintenance equipment storage and one office for the park are
also authorized. No other business or commercial use shall be located
within the site.
I. A minimum side yard setback of 40 feet at all front, side and rear lot
lines of the mobile home park is required.
J. Each mobile home park shall be completely enclosed, except for
permitted entrances and exits, by:
(1) A temporary plant with fast-growing characteristics, capable of
reach a height of 15 feet or more; or
§ 690-23 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-24
1:668
§ 690-25. Trailer camps.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no trailer shall be occupied
except in a federal, state or county camp or in a private campsite. Private
campsites shall meet the following conditions:
§ 690-26. Planned unit development (PUD).
(2) A permanent evergreen planting, the individual trees to be of such
a number and so arranged that, within 10 years, they will have
formed a dense screen. Such permanent planting shall be grown or
maintained to a height of not less than 15 feet.
K. All mobile homes shall meet the current construction standards of 42
U.S.C. §§ 5401 to 5426 (Title 42, Chapter 70, Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards). [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Each trailer site shall be plainly marked and surfaced.
B. Maximum number of trailer sites shall be 10 per acre.
C. All drives and parking areas other than those at individual trailer sites
shall be hard-surfaced.
D. Central toilet, shower and washing facilities shall be provided in
sufficient quantity, as determined by the State Department of Safety
and Professional Services requirements, in accordance with Ch. SPS
327, Wis. Adm. Code.
E. The water supply shall be approved by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
F. The manner of sewage disposal shall be approved by the State
Department of Safety and Professional Services.
G. No trailer shall be less than 50 feet from the front, side or rear lot lines
of the camp.
H. Marshland and shoreline areas shall not be altered.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these planned unit development (PUD)
provisions is to permit and encourage design flexibility within certain
zoning districts of this chapter through use of the conditional use
permit procedures. The PUD technique as described in this chapter will
enable both developers and City officials to propose, review and agree
upon site plans which integrate uses such as housing, circulation
networks, nonresidential facilities and open space/recreational areas
which are compatible with the natural environment.
B. Preapplication conference. Prior to the submittal of a PUD application,
the applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator and provide the
Zoning Administrator with a concept plan for the proposed PUD.
§ 690-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-26
1:669
Examples of information to include on a concept plan are types and
placement of structures, utilities and public facilities, recreational
facilities, lot sizes, densities, landscaping and environmental treatment,
pedestrian and auto circulation, the compatibility of the proposed
development with surrounding uses, financing of the project, and such
other information needed to gain a satisfactory understanding of the
proposed development.
C. Preliminary plan.
(1) Following a preapplication conference, the applicant shall submit a
preliminary plan for the PUD to the Plan Commission. The
preliminary plan must contain that information that is required of a
site plan as set forth in the site plan review article of this chapter as
well as in accordance with the following provisions:
(a) A statement of the objectives of the planned unit development,
including physical, social and economic considerations.
(b) A schedule of development, including phasing of residential,
public, and open space/recreation areas.
(c) A tabulation of the land area percentages (by land use type) for
residential, public, utility and open space/recreation areas.
(d) Any additional information that has been gathered by the
developer that would be useful in giving the Plan Commission a
description of the proposed project.
(2) The Plan Commission shall review the preliminary plan and advise
the applicant of any changes that are required. A formal written
response shall be given to the applicant within 10 days on the
preliminary plan, including all recommendations and comments of
the Plan Commission.
D. Final plan. Once the applicant has been advised of the comments on the
preliminary plan, he or she must submit a final plan to the Plan
Commission within nine months. The final plan shall include all
modifications from the preliminary plan, any additional necessary or
pertinent legal documents, and detailed drawings or plans of elements
that were presented in the preliminary plan. During this time, the
applicant must also submit an application for a conditional use permit
following the procedures outlined in this article and for a zoning
amendment, if necessary, following the procedures outlined in Section
§ 690-13.
E. Modification to final plan. If it becomes necessary, due to unforeseen
circumstances, to modify the approved final plan, the applicant shall
submit, in writing, reasons for modification and the specifications of the
proposed changes to the Zoning Administrator. The Plan Commission
shall then review the proposed changes and shall approve the
modifications, propose alternative changes or disapprove (adhere to
§ 690-26 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-26
1:670
approved final plan); in the case of a use change requiring a zoning
permit, shall be forwarded to the Common Council. The Plan
Commission must ensure that the standards set forth in this article are
not violated by the proposed changes to the final development plan.
F. Application requirements. The application shall show the proposed use
or uses, dimensions and locations of proposed structures and of areas
to be reserved for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, parking, utilities and
public facilities, landscaping, open spaces, architectural drawings and
sketches, and such other information determined during the
preapplication conference and as may be requested by such City
agencies for a determination that it is desirable to deviate from certain
provisions of this chapter.
G. Standards.
(1) Minimum development size. The total area in any given PUD shall
be a minimum of five acres.
(2) Design. All PUDs shall be planned and developed as a single
project.
(3) Exclusions from gross area. Identifiable floodplains, wetlands,
bodies of water and areas with slopes averaging 20% or more shall
be specifically excluded from all building improvements and shall
not be considered in determining the developable area of the PUD.
(4) Uses. PUD uses shall be the same as those listed as permitted and
conditional in the B3 Zone.
(5) Spacing and orientation of building center. While the traditional
front, side and rear yard setback requirements are not necessarily
required for planned unit developments, the Plan Commission shall
establish minimum spacing distances between structures to assure
adequate light, air, privacy and fire protection for all residents. A
building group shall not be so arranged that any permanently or
temporarily occupied building is inaccessible to emergency
vehicles.
(6) Circulation. There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient
arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways,
driveways, off-street parking and loading space. There shall be an
adequate amount, in a suitable location, of pedestrian walks, malls
and landscaped spaces to prevent pedestrian use of vehicular ways
and parking spaces and to separate pedestrian walks, malls and
public transportation loading places from general vehicular
circulation facilities. Buildings and vehicular circulation open
spaces shall be arranged so that pedestrians moving between
buildings are not unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic.
(7) Paving and drainage. There shall be adequate design of grades,
paving, gutters, drainage and treatment of turf to handle
§ 690-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-26
1:671
stormwaters and prevent erosion. Refer to Chapter 147,
Stormwater Utility.
(8) Signs and lighting. Signs and lighting devices shall be properly
arranged with respect to traffic control devices and adjacent
residential districts. Refer to Article XXI, Signs.
(9) Deed restrictions. The following deed restrictions shall be in place
prior to consideration for approval:
(a) Each dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied.
(b) All units must be new construction.
(10) Building heights. To ensure adequate light, ventilation, and open
space amenities in the PUD while allowing a variety of building
types and densities, building heights should be part of the review
process. However, to protect the character of the area, a maximum
building height of 35 feet shall be instituted.
(11) Building requirements:
(a) The minimum width shall be 14 feet.
(b) Each unit built to Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC) or
manufactured home (HUD) code shall be placed on one of the
following foundations:
[1] Floating slab (grade beam);
[2] Frost wall four feet minimum below grade; or
[3] Full basement.
(c) All running gear shall be removed from manufactured homes.
(12) A garage is required to be built prior to occupancy of the principal
residential structure. (Note the two-car off-street parking
requirement applies. If a one-car garage is built, a minimum space
of 10 feet by 20 feet must be provided for a second car.)
(13) Perimeter treatment. To provide adequate separation between the
PUD and incompatible surrounding land uses, a buffer zone may be
established on the perimeter of the development in which no
structures are to be located. The buffer zone shall be at least 20
feet deep and may extend up to 100 feet depending on the PUD's
compatibility with surrounding uses. Adequate screening and
landscaping or protection by natural features shall be included in
the buffer zone.
(14) Open space. "Open space," as defined by the Plan Commission for
the purposes of these PUD design requirements, refers to those
areas established specifically for common use by all residents or
homeowners of the planned unit development. In an effort to
§ 690-26 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-26
1:672
preserve and enhance open space and to provide adequate
recreational areas for residential developments, the designated
common open space shall comprise at least 20% of the total
developable area of the PUD to be used for recreational, park, or
environmental amenities for collective enjoyment by occupants of
the development but shall not include public or private streets,
driveways, or utility easements. Proposed open space shall connect
with existing open space as much as feasibly possible.
(15) Densities for residential development. Since the planned unit
development concept is designed to encourage flexible and
innovative building patterns, density requirements shall be based
on the number of dwelling units per acre rather than the traditional
minimum lot size requirements that would normally be applicable
to the zoning district in which the PUD is located. The density
requirements for residential uses in planned unit developments
shall be seven dwelling units per developable acre. Density
increases may be permitted by the Plan Commission for the
following reasons:
(a) The following formula shall be used in determining the
increase of total additional dwelling units to be allowed as an
incentive for designating additional open space within the
developable area of the PUD:
[1] For every unimproved acre of open space beyond the
minimum requirement, one additional dwelling unit per
three acres is allowed.
[2] For every improved acre of open space beyond the
minimum requirement, one additional dwelling unit per
two acres is allowed.
(b) For the development of a nature interpretive trail through the
nondeveloped lands of the PUD, including such improvements
as wood chip trails, wooden stairways or boardwalks,
interpretive signage for significant natural features or plant
and animal species, and other facilities designed to advance
the appreciation of the natural environment, the Plan
Commission may allow up to one additional dwelling unit per
every two acres of developable land.
(c) For the employment of unusually attractive or innovative
building design or grouping, such as clustering, sun
orientation, variation of building setbacks or other design
features determined to significantly improve the character of
the PUD, the Plan Commission may allow a density increase up
to one additional dwelling unit per every four acres of
developable land.
(d) For the use of additional or attractive landscaping, particularly
in the screening of parking areas, accessory buildings, public
§ 690-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-26
1:673
§ 690-27. Home businesses. [Amended 9-10-2012]
The City of Reedsburg recognizes the desire and/or need of some citizens to
use their residence for business activities in order to reduce trip generation
and to provide another economic development tool, but it also recognizes
the need to protect the surrounding areas from adverse impacts generated
by these business activities. This section is intended for those uses that are
the primary business of the homeowner and/or contain deliveries and/or
customer visits on a regular basis. It is not intended for infrequent uses or
gatherings that do not otherwise conflict with the intent of this chapter.
facilities, or utilities, the Plan Commission may allow for a
density increase up to one additional dwelling unit per every
four acres of developable land.
A. Administration.
(1) Home businesses require conditional use permits and are those
land uses involving any of the following:
(a) Requires an additional on-site, nonresident employee.
(b) Requires additional parking for or results in additional traffic
from customers and/or employees.
(c) Requires commercial deliveries or pickups of materials or
supplies used in the home occupation.
(d) Any other commercial-related activity the same as or similar to
those listed in Subsection B below.
(2) No home business shall be conducted until a conditional use permit
has been approved by the Plan Commission. The application shall
include:
(a) The type of business and business activities.
(b) The number of employees.
(c) The vehicles used in the home occupation.
(d) The number of expected customers per day.
(e) The number of expected deliveries/drop-offs per day.
B. Conditional uses. It is recognized that this list may not be all-inclusive.
The Plan Commission shall determine whether a request is similar to
the following listed uses as part of its decision.
(1) Home office, including architects, counselors, clergy, doctors,
dentists, engineers, attorneys, contractors and accountants.
(2) Home studios, including artists, sculptors, musicians,
photographers and authors.
§ 690-26 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-27
1:674
§ 690-28. Limited agricultural activity in residential districts.
[Added 11-22-2010]
(3) Personal services, including barbershops and beauty parlors.
(4) Instructional services, including music, dance, art and craft
classes.
(5) Repair services, including small appliances, small engines and
computers/electronics.
(6) Workrooms, including weaving and woodworking.
(7) Day-care homes with more than eight children.
C. Standards. All home business requests shall meet the following
standards for approval in addition to the conditional use permit
standards of this chapter:
(1) Uses permitted herein shall only be approved for parcels occupied
by the parcel owner and which shall contain the owner's primary
residence or in an R1-, R2-, or B3-zoned rental dwelling unit with
the owner's consent. [Amended 7-23-2018 by Ord. No.
1876-18]
(2) Home businesses shall be conducted within the principal
residential dwelling or permitted accessory building(s) and utilize
less than 50% of the total dwelling floor area.
(3) Excluding day-care homes, customer visits and delivery vehicles
are limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The Plan
Commission may allow additional operating hours if they determine
through findings of fact that the hours are necessary and would not
negatively affect surrounding properties.
(4) Delivery vehicles are limited to passenger vehicles, mail carriers
and express carriers.
(5) Nonresident employees on the premises are limited to one at any
one time. The Plan Commission may allow one additional employee
for day-care homes if it determines through findings of fact that
this would not negatively affect surrounding properties.
(6) Home occupations shall not create traffic, visible displays,
vibrations, heat, noise, odors, dust, glare or other similar nuisances
not normally found in the surrounding area.
(7) Home occupations shall not generate waste volumes and/or types
that are not normally associated with residential use.
D. Conditional approvals. The Plan Commission may impose reasonable
conditions with the approval of an application, pursuant to the
preceding Subsection C, Standards.
§ 690-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-28
1:675
§ 690-28.1. Zero lot line. [Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1883-19]
A. Definition. In this section, "limited agricultural activities" means the
growing and harvesting of fruits, vegetables, flowers, cover crops such
as oats or hay and other agricultural crops and other plants typically
grown on farming operations in this area.
B. Purpose. The City of Reedsburg acknowledges that in certain
circumstances, subject to site-specific conditions, limited agricultural
activities may be appropriate in residential districts.
C. Conditional use. Limited agricultural activities are conditionally
permitted in the R1, R2 and R3 Districts.
D. Standards. Conditional use permits for limited agricultural activities in
residential districts may be granted subject to the following:
(1) Permits shall be for one growing season with the right to reapply
annually.
(2) The permit shall specify the crop(s) to be grown, the manner and
frequency of harvest, setback from occupied lots, daytime hours of
agricultural activity, notice to occupied lots of harvest days and
such other reasonable conditions as deemed necessary by the City.
(3) A conditional use permit under this section may be issued only for
undeveloped areas larger than one acre.
A. Zero lot line. A lot created with no side yard setback on one side of the
lot to create a shared building envelope between the two lots. This
shared building envelope shall only be used to build or divide a duplex
where the common wall between the two units is built, or determined to
be, the common boundary line to create two separate attached singlefamily
dwelling units.
B. Zero lot line construction. A development approach in which a building
is sited on one or more lot lines. Two-family (duplex) construction is
permitted in R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts following site plan and
certified survey map or plat approval by the Plan Commission.
C. The standards of § 690-18, Schedule I shall apply. In addition the
following standards shall apply and may supersede any that conflict
with § 690-18.
(1) Lot width at minimum building setback line: The aggregate widths
of both lots that a duplex occupies shall total not less than 80 feet.
No single lot width shall be less than 40 feet.
(2) Lot area (each unit): Minimum 5,000 square feet for duplexes.
(3) Principal building setback—side yard: Zero feet on side yard(s) that
includes the common wall(s) of the structure; the opposite side
yard shall be the same as for other residences in the zoning district.
§ 690-28 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-28.1
1:676
§ 690-28.2. Townhouses. [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 1886-19]
(4) Each new unit shall have a separate water lateral connection,
meter and curb stop. Existing nonconforming units shall comply if
water or other utility service is altered in the future. The size, type,
and installation of water, sewer, electric and telecommunication
services shall be in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Reedsburg Utility Commission and Public Works
Department.
(5) The common wall between the units shall meet the requirements of
the current Wisconsin Building Code and shall extend from the
basement floor to the top of the roof. Compliance with such
standards shall be confirmed in writing before the building permit
shall be issued.
(6) The developer shall provide with the application a draft agreement
or covenant specifying:
(a) Maintenance standards for the common wall.
(b) Maintenance standards for any common lateral, utility service
and any other common features.
(c) Restrictions against construction of detached single-family
residences on any of the affected lots in the event either or all
sides of the zero lot line construction dwelling are destroyed.
(d) Such agreement shall provide that it may not be terminated,
amended or otherwise altered without the approval of the Plan
Commission.
(e) Such agreement shall be subject to Plan Commission approval,
and then recorded by the developer against all affected
properties and continually maintained by the property owners
before the building permit will be issued and the site plan
approval takes effect.
(f) When attached dwelling units are created, matters of mutual
concern to the adjacent property owners, due to construction,
catastrophe, and maintenance, shall be guarded against by
private covenants and deed restrictions and the approving
authorities shall not be held responsible for the same.
(7) Fees are based on the City's site plan, CSM and plat reviews plus
any additional review costs incurred by the City for associated
engineering, legal and administrative expenses.
A. Definition. Townhouses are three or more dwellings connected by
individual or common sidewalls and forming a continuous group.
B. Approval process. Townhouses are conditional in R-2 Zoning and
permitted in R-3 Zoning Districts following site plan and certified
§ 690-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-28.2
1:677
survey map or plat approval by the Plan Commission. Townhouses shall
be developed as a single project.
C. The standards of § 690-18, Schedule 1 shall apply. In addition the
following standards shall apply and may supersede any that conflict
with § 690-18:
(1) Maximum of 10 dwelling units shall be contiguous.
(2) Minimum lot width is 24 feet per unit.
(3) Minimum lot size of 2,000 square feet per unit.
(4) Minimum building setback:
(a) Side yard: zero feet on side yard(s) that includes the common
wall(s) of the structure.
(b) Front yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(d) All yard setbacks shall meet those of the zoning district where
adjacent to neighboring properties but no less than 10 feet.
D. Accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard only. An accessory
building shall not be located within 10 feet of the rear property line or
occupy more than 25% of the rear yard area.
E. Each new unit shall have a separate water lateral connection, meter
and curb stop. Existing nonconforming units shall comply if water or
other utility service is altered in the future. The size, type, and
installation of water, sewer, electric and telecommunication services
shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
Reedsburg Utility Commission and Public Works Dept.
F. The developer shall provide with the application a draft agreement or
covenant specifying:
(1) Maintenance standards for the common wall.
(2) Maintenance standards for any common lateral, utility service and
any other common features.
(3) Restrictions against construction of detached single-family
residences on any of the affected lots in the event either or all sides
of the zero lot line construction dwelling are destroyed.
(4) Such agreement shall provide that it may not be terminated,
amended or otherwise altered without the approval of the Plan
Commission and RUC.
(5) Such agreement shall be subject to Plan Commission approval, and
then recorded by the developer against all affected properties and
§ 690-28.2 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-28.2
1:678
§ 690-28.3. Bungalow courts. [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 1886-19]
continually maintained by the property owners before the building
permit will be issued and the site plan approval takes effect.
G. Fees are based on site plan, CSM and plat reviews plus any additional
review costs incurred by the City for associated engineering, legal and
administrative expenses.
A. Definition. Bungalow courts are multifamily housing developments
which contain four to 12 smaller, detached or attached housing units
arranged around a central court or green space.
B. Approval process. Bungalow courts are conditional in R-2 Zoning and
permitted in R-3 Zoning Districts following site plan approval by the
Plan Commission and shall be developed as a single project.
C. The standards of § 690-18, Schedule 1 shall apply. In addition the
following standards shall apply and may supersede any that conflict
with § 690-18:
(1) Maximum height is 20 feet or 1 1/2 stories.
(2) Minimum first floor area is 720 square feet; maximum first floor
area is 1,500 square feet.
(3) Maximum garage size is 400 square feet per unit.
(4) Maximum lot coverage for all buildings is 40%.
(5) Minimum building setback:
(a) Side yard: 10 feet.
(b) Front yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(d) All yard setbacks shall meet those of the zoning district where
adjacent to neighboring properties but no less than 10 feet.
D. Parking may be in or outside a structure, provided that:
(1) The parking is screened from direct street view by one or more
street facades by garage doors, fencing or landscaping.
(2) Parking shall be located to the rear of the principal structures and
served by an alley or private driveway and not located in the front
yard or common open space, as is feasible.
E. Each new unit shall have a separate water lateral connection, meter
and curb stop. Existing nonconforming units shall comply if water or
other utility service is altered in the future. The size, type, and
installation of water, sewer, electric and telecommunication services
§ 690-28.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-28.3
1:679
shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
Reedsburg Utility Commission and Public Works Dept.
F. The developer shall provide with the application a draft agreement or
covenant specifying:
(1) Maintenance standards for any common lateral, utility service and
any other common features.
(2) Such agreement shall provide that it may not be terminated,
amended or otherwise altered without the approval of the Plan
Commission and RUC.
(3) Such agreement shall be subject to Plan Commission approval, and
then recorded by the developer against all affected properties and
continually maintained by the property owners before the building
permit will be issued and the site plan approval takes effect.
G. Fees are based on site plan, CSM and plat reviews plus any additional
review costs incurred by the City for associated engineering, legal and
administrative expenses.
§ 690-28.3 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-28.3
1:680
ARTICLE VII
Site Plan Review
[Added 2-23-2009]
§ 690-29. Site plan review authorized.
The Plan Commission shall review and approve, review and approve with
conditions, or review and deny all site plans submitted under this chapter.
§ 690-30. Site plan review required.
Site plan review shall be required in the following situations:
§ 690-31. Preapplication conference.
If a prospective applicant of the Plan Commission requests a preapplication
conference, the prospective applicant shall provide a generalized site plan
for consideration of the overall idea of the development.
A. Any new industrial or commercial construction, or any expansion,
alteration or change of use that affects 2,000 square feet or more of
total floor area. [Amended 10-18-2012]
B. Any conditional use permit, planned development group, or planned
urban/unit development. [Amended 10-18-2012]
C. Multifamily residential developments per Article XXV.
D. Any other use as dictated in this chapter.
A. Basic questions of use, density, integration with existing development in
the area and impacts on and the availability of public infrastructure
shall be discussed.
B. A prospective applicant should schedule this conference with the
Zoning Administrator and such other City representatives as
appropriate.
C. At this conference, the applicant or his/her representative shall be
presented with the applicable procedures required by this chapter for
approval of the proposed development and with any special steps that
might have to be followed, such as requests to the Zoning Board of
Appeals, as well.
D. Any application requirements that are not applicable for the specific
proposed development should be identified; however, the Plan
Commission may require additional information that it later determines
appropriate.
E. There shall be no charge or fee to the applicant for this preapplication
conference.
§ 690-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-32
1:681
§ 690-32. Site plan requirements.
Each site plan shall depict the following, except for those items determined
during the preapplication conference to be not applicable or if the Plan
Commission grants a waiver. If the applicant fails to provide all the
information required by this chapter, then the site plan shall be deemed
incomplete and may be rejected by the Zoning Administrator on that basis.
§ 690-33. Standards for granting site plan approval.
The Plan Commission shall approve, or approve with conditions, an
application for a site plan upon a finding that the proposed site plan
complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter and the standards
A. North arrow.
B. Location of property lines, dimensions, and setbacks.
C. Location of existing and proposed public roads, rights-of-way and
private easements of record.
D. Location of existing water bodies, surface drainageways, stormwater
controls, floodplains, and wetlands.
E. Location of existing and proposed buildings.
F. Location of parking areas and all exterior lighting.
G. Location of all loading/unloading areas.
H. Location of all sidewalks, walkways, bicycle paths and areas for public
use.
I. Location of all utilities on the site.
J. Location and specifications for all fences, walls, and other screening
features.
K. Location and specifications for all existing and proposed perimeter and
internal landscaping.
L. Location and specifications for screening of all trash receptacles and
other solid waste disposal facilities.
M. Location and specifications for proposed signs.
N. Elevation drawings for proposed commercial structures.
O. Location and specifications for any existing or proposed above- or
below-ground storage facilities for any chemicals, salts, flammable
materials, or hazardous materials as well as any containment structures
or clear zones required by government authorities.
P. Floor plans, when needed to determine the number of parking spaces
required.
§ 690-32 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-33
1:682
listed below, unless the Plan Commission waives a particular standard upon
a finding that the standard is not applicable to the proposed development
under consideration and the waiver of that standard will not be significantly
detrimental to surrounding property or to the intent of this chapter. The
Plan Commission may impose reasonable conditions with the approval of a
final site plan pursuant to the following standards.
§ 690-34. Site plan amendments.
Amendments to an approved site plan shall be permitted under the
following circumstances:
A. The site plan shall be designed so that there is a limited amount of
change in the overall natural contours of the site and shall minimize
reshaping in favor of designing the project to respect existing features
of the site in relation to topography, the size and type of the lot, the
character of adjoining property, the minimization of tree and soil
removal and the type and size of buildings. The site shall be developed
so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or
improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this
chapter.
B. Special attention shall be given to proper site drainage so that removal
of stormwaters will not adversely affect neighboring properties.
C. All buildings or groups of buildings should be so arranged as to permit
emergency vehicle access by some practical means.
D. Exterior lighting shall be arranged as follows:
(1) It is deflected away from adjacent properties.
(2) It does not impede the vision of traffic along adjacent streets.
(3) It does not unnecessarily illuminate night skies.
E. The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and
pedestrian circulation shall respect the pattern of existing or planned
streets and pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the area. Streets and
drives which are part of an existing or planned street pattern which
serves adjacent development shall be of a width appropriate to the
traffic volume they will carry.
F. Site plans shall conform to all applicable requirements of City, state and
federal statutes and the City of Reedsburg Comprehensive Plan, and
approval may be conditioned on the applicant receiving necessary City,
state and federal permits.
A. Minor changes that still conform to the standards of this chapter may
be approved by the Zoning Administrator upon determining that the
proposed revision(s) will not alter the basic design and character of the
site plan nor any specified conditions imposed as part of the original
approval. Minor changes shall include the following:
§ 690-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-34
1:683
§ 690-35. Site plan expiration.
An approved site plan review shall expire one year following approval by
the Plan Commission, unless construction has begun pursuant to the permit,
and within two years if construction is not complete. Prior to the expiration,
the property owner may apply to the Plan Commission for an extension prior
to the expiration of the site plan review.
§ 690-36. Reapplication.
No application for a site plan review which has been denied, wholly or in
part, by the Plan Commission shall be resubmitted for a period of one year
from the date of such denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
changed conditions found by the Zoning Administrator to be valid or if the
City attorney by a written opinion states that in the attorney's professional
opinion, the decision made by the Plan Commission or the procedure used
in the matter was clearly erroneous. A reapplication shall be processed in
the same manner as the original application.
(1) Reduction in the size of any building.
(2) Movement of buildings by no more than 15 feet.
(3) Landscaping approved in the site plan that is replaced by similar
landscaping to an equal or greater extent.
(4) Changes in floor plans that do not exceed 10% of the total floor
area and which do not alter the character of the development.
(5) Internal rearrangement of a parking lot that does not affect the
number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design.
(6) Changes required by City, state, or federal regulatory agencies in
order to conform with other laws or regulations, provided the
extent of such changes does not alter the basic design and
character of the site plan, nor any specified conditions imposed as
part of the original approval.
B. All amendments to a site plan approved by the Zoning Administrator
shall be in writing. After approval by the Zoning Administrator, the
applicant shall submit a revised site plan showing the approved
amendment.
C. An amendment to an approved site plan that cannot be processed by
the Zoning Administrator under Subsection A shall be processed in the
same manner as the original site plan application.
§ 690-34 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-37
1:684
§ 690-37. Fees. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
Fees for a site plan review shall be the same as those for a conditional use
permit as per the current City Fee Schedule on file in the City's offices or
available on the City's website.
§ 690-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-37
1:685

ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 690-38. Nonconforming uses and structures.
The lawful use of any building, structure, or land existing at the time of
the enactment of this chapter may be continued, provided the following
conditions are met:
A. Nonconforming uses. The continued lawful use of a building, premises,
structure, or fixture existing at the time of the adoption or amendment
of this chapter may not be prohibited although the use does not
conform with the provisions of this chapter. The nonconforming use
may not be extended. The total structural repairs or alterations in such
a nonconforming building, premises, structure, or fixture shall not
during its life exceed 50% of the assessed value of the building,
premises, structure, or fixture unless permanently changed to a
conforming use. If the nonconforming use is discontinued for a period
of 12 months, any future use of the building, premises, structure, or
fixture shall conform to this chapter.
B. Nonconforming structures. A dwelling or other building that existed
lawfully before the current chapter was enacted or amended, but that
does not conform with one or more of the development regulations in
the current chapter.
(1) An ordinance enacted under this subsection may not prohibit, or
limit based on cost, the repair, maintenance, renovation, or
remodeling of a nonconforming structure.
(2) Damaged or destroyed nonconforming structures.
(a) Restrictions that are applicable to damaged or destroyed
nonconforming structures and that are contained in an
ordinance enacted under this subsection may not prohibit the
restoration of a nonconforming structure if the structure will
be restored to the size, location, and use that it had
immediately before the damage or destruction occurred, or
impose any limits on the costs of the repair, reconstruction, or
improvement if all of the following apply:
[1] The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed
on or after March 2, 2006.
[2] The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind,
vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation.
(b) An ordinance enacted under this subsection shall allow for the
size of a structure to be larger than the size it was immediately
before the damage or destruction if necessary for the structure
to comply with applicable state or federal requirements.
§ 690-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-38
1:687
§ 690-39. Substandard lots.
In any residential district, a one-family detached dwelling and its accessory
structures may be erected on any legal buildable lot or parcel of record in
the County Register of Deeds office before the effective date or amendment
of this chapter.
C. Changes. No nonconforming building, structure or use shall be changed
to another nonconforming use.
D. Abandonment. A nonconforming use of a building or premises which
has been abandoned shall not thereafter be returned to such
nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be considered
abandoned:
(1) When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; or
(2) When the characteristic equipment and the furnishings of the
nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have
not been replaced by similar equipment within one year, unless
other facts show intention to resume the nonconforming use; or
(3) When it has been replaced by a conforming use; or
(4) When the nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12
months.
E. Unlawful use not authorized. Nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted as authorization for or approval of the continuance of the
use of a structure or premises in violation of zoning regulations in effect
at the time of the effective date of this chapter.
F. District changes. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be
changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another district of
a different classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses existing therein.
§ 690-38 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-39
1:688
ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Zoning Provisions
§ 690-40. Essential services. [Amended 2-23-2009]
Essential services, as defined in this chapter, shall be permitted in all
districts following site plan review approval from the City Plan Commission.
See § 690-9 for definition. Essential services, utilities, electric power and
communication transmission lines are exempt from the yard and distance
requirements of this chapter.
§ 690-41. Site restrictions.
§ 690-42. Use restrictions.
The following use restrictions and regulations shall apply:
A. No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is held
unsuitable for such use or structure by the Plan Commission by reason
of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or
rock formation, unfavorable topography, lower percolation rate or
bearing strength, erosion susceptibility, or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare
of this community. The Plan Commission, in applying the provisions of
this section, shall in writing recite the particular facts upon which it
bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The
applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence contesting such
unsuitability if he so desires. Thereafter, the Plan Commission may
affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability. All lots
shall abut upon a public street, and each fan-shaped lot shall have a
minimum street frontage of 40 feet.
B. No building permits shall be issued for a lot which abuts a public street
dedicated to only a portion of its proposed width and located on that
side thereof from which the required dedication has not been secured.
C. Private sewer and water in any district where a public water supply or
public sewerage service is not available. The lot area shall be
determined in accordance with Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Principal uses as specified for a district, their essential services, and the
following uses shall be permitted in that district.
B. Accessory uses and structures are permitted in any district but not until
their principal structure is present or under construction.
C. Conditional uses and their accessory uses are considered as special
uses requiring review, public hearing, and approval by the Plan
Commission.
§ 690-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-42
1:689
§ 690-43. Reduction or joint use.
No lot, yard, parking area, building area, or other space shall be reduced in
area or dimension so as not to meet the provisions of this chapter. No part
of any lot, yard, parking area, or other space required for a structure or use
shall be used for any other structure or use.
§ 690-44. Limited number of buildings.
There shall be not more than one principal dwelling and two accessory
structures, including a private detached garage, in either R1 or R2 Zones.
§ 690-45. Accessory buildings.
§ 690-46. Bulk regulations. [Amended 2-23-2009]
D. Unclassified or unspecified uses may be permitted by the Plan
Commission after it has made a review, provided that such uses are
similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district.
E. Temporary uses, such as real estate sales field offices or shelters for
materials and equipment being used in the construction of a permanent
structure, may be permitted by the Zoning Commission.
F. Performance standards listed in Article XIX shall be complied with by
all uses in all districts. [Amended 2-23-2009]
G. All principal structures will be placed on permanent foundations.
A. Time of construction. No accessory building or structure shall be
constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory.31
B. Accessory buildings in R and A Zones of the extraterritorial area may be
installed before the main building with the following conditions:
[Added 11-11-2019 by Ord. No. 1895-19]
(1) Building is portable and a maximum 12 by 16 square feet.
(2) Building is intended for residential storage and excludes pods,
semitrailers, RVs and similar items.
(3) A fire number is approved for the property.
(4) There is a two-year time limit; a third year may be requested.
A. Continued conformity with bulk regulations. The maintenance of yards,
courts, usable open spaces, and other open spaces and minimum lot
area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of
the owner of such building or of the property on which it is located as
31.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (2), which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 2-23-2009.
§ 690-42 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-46
1:690
long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required
yards, courts, usable open spaces, other open spaces or minimum lot
area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership
or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, usable open
space, other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any
other building.
B. Division of improved zoning lots. No improved zoning lot shall hereafter
be divided into two or more zoning lots and no portion of any improved
zoning lot shall be sold, unless all improved zoning lots resulting from
each such division or sale shall conform with all the applicable bulk
regulations of the district in which the property is located.
C. Location of required open space. All yards, courts, usable open spaces
and other open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be
located on the same zoning lot as such building or dwelling group.
D. Required yards for existing buildings. No yards now or hereafter
provided for a building existing on the effective date of this chapter
shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced, if already less
than the minimum required by this chapter for equivalent new
construction.
E. Permitted obstruction in required yards. The following shall not be
considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards
specified:
(1) In all yards:
(a) Arbors and trellises.
(b) Awnings.
(c) Chimneys projecting 24 inches or less into the yard.
(d) Fences, walls and hedges subject to the provisions of Article X
hereinafter.
(e) Flagpoles and garden ornaments.
(f) Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting 24 inches or less
into the yard.
(g) Open porches, steps, and landings that are used for access to a
permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street or
alley. [Amended 6-28-2010]
(2) In front yards:
(a) Bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard.
(b) Open off-street vehicle parking on a paved driveway.
(3) In rear yards:
§ 690-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-46
1:691
(a) Accessory structures for storage.
(b) Air-conditioning equipment.
(c) Balconies or decks, open to the sky, projecting six feet or less
into the minimum required rear yard.
(d) Detached private garages, provided that in no case shall they
be located closer than five feet to a property line or three feet
to a public alley.
(e) Fire escapes projecting six feet or less into the yard.
(f) Laundry-drying equipment.
(g) Bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard.
(h) Accessory greenhouses and swimming pools.
(i) Recreational equipment, provided that all such equipment
shall be in condition for safe and effective performance of the
function for which it is designed.
(j) Satellite TV dishes.
(k) Patios open to the sky.
(4) Side yards.
(a) Fire escapes projecting not more than 1/3 of the width of the
side yard or not more than three feet in any case.
(b) Laundry-drying equipment.
(c) Open off-street vehicle parking spaces.
(d) Bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard
(e) Air-conditioning equipment.
(f) Detached private garages, provided that in no case shall they
be located closer than five feet to a property line or three feet
to a public alley.
(g) Satellite TV dishes.
F. Free little libraries. "Free little libraries" are defined as small
enclosures used solely as a means of the free exchange of literary
material and recorded performing arts. They are considered accessory
uses and may be established and maintained in the front yard setback
zone of all R, B and A Districts, subject to the following requirements:
(1) The primary structure may be no more than three feet wide by
three feet deep by three feet tall. The overall height of the structure
shall not exceed six feet, including the post;
§ 690-46 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-46
1:692
(2) The free little library primary structure and post must be located
entirely on property that is outside the right-of-way;
(3) There shall be no more than one free little library per property;
(4) Free little libraries shall be installed and maintained in a neat and
orderly fashion and so as to maintain their structural integrity and
safety of the public;
(5) Free little libraries shall not constitute a public nuisance;
(6) Free little libraries shall not obstruct the vision of pedestrians,
motorists, or bicyclists in a way that risks public health or safety;
(7) Free little libraries shall not impede drainage, snow removal or
other public works or utility functions, operations, or maintenance;
and
(8) The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to order the
removal of free little libraries that fail to comply with any of the
terms of this chapter following a thirty-day notice.
G. Chickens. Chickens may be raised in the R1, R2 and B3 Zoning Districts
as well as public or private school properties, provided the following
conditions are met: [Added 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1875-18]
(1) The chickens are raised by the property owner, or by a tenant with
permission from the owner.
(2) Roosters are prohibited.
(3) A maximum of four chickens is permitted.
(4) The chickens shall be provided with a covered coop to include a
run, fence enclosure of predator-proof material (no electric or
barbed wire) and adequate shade from the sun and warmth from
the cold weather. Feed and clean water shall be provided at all
times but unavailable to predators or rodents.
(5) Coops must be clean, dry, and odor-free, and kept in a neat and
sanitary condition at all times, in a manner that will not disturb the
use or enjoyment of neighboring lots due to noise, odor, or other
adverse impact.
(6) Provision must be made for the storage and removal of chicken
manure. All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed
structure with a lid. All other manure not used for composting or
fertilizing shall be removed from the premises. The coop and
surrounding area must be kept free of accumulated droppings, and
uneaten feed shall be removed as soon as possible.
(7) The property owner or tenant shall take necessary action to reduce
the attraction of predators and rodents and the potential
infestation of insects and parasites.
§ 690-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-46
1:693
§ 690-47. Zoning of annexed land.
All property annexed to the City of Reedsburg from the extraterritorial
zoning area shall continue to have the same zoning as it had in the
extraterritorial zoning area unless recommendation for alternative zoning
is made by the Plan Commission and approved by the Council. All property
annexed to the City of Reedsburg outside of the extraterritorial area may be
temporarily zoned as provided for in Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
(8) The coop shall be a minimum two square feet per chicken to a
maximum five square feet per chicken.
(9) Chickens shall be kept inside a fence enclosure or run at all time
and inside the coop during nondaylight hours.
(10) Slaughtering of chickens on a residential-use or school lot is
prohibited.
(11) Coops and runs shall be located in the rear yard and a minimum 10
feet from any lot line.
(12) The keeping of chickens shall require a permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator. A permit shall not be issued until the Police
Department has verified no pattern of previous animal-related
violations by the applicant. The fee shall be as set from time to time
by Common Council. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(13) Reedsburg Police Department personnel are authorized to catch
and impound animals at large, with such authorization to include
the pursuit of animals upon non-animal-owner private property. It
shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with the animal
control officer or the Police Department employee in the
performance of his or her duties.
(14) The standards of Article XIX shall apply to the keeping of chickens.
(15) In the event a permit holder accumulates three violations, the
permit may be revoked following a hearing with the Plan
Commission. The Plan Commission shall also review all appeals
under this subsection.
§ 690-46 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-47
1:694
ARTICLE X
Fences
[Amended 2-23-2009; 1-8-2018 by Ord. No. 1853-18]
§ 690-48. Permit required. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No person, firm or corporation, except on a farm and for farming purposes
and security fences at construction sites, shall hereafter construct or cause
to be constructed or erected within the City of Reedsburg territorial and
extraterritorial limits any fence without first obtaining a building permit
from the Building Inspector, paying the appropriate fee as per the current
City Fee Schedule on file in the City's offices or available on the City's
website and complying with the following minimum requirements:
A. Locations. All boundary line fences shall be located entirely on private
property of the person, firm or corporation constructing, or causing the
construction of such fence. In any case where the exact location of any
boundary line is in doubt, the applicant for a fence permit shall submit
to the Building Inspector a survey thereof prepared by a professional
land surveyor, before the fence permit is issued.
B. Construction and maintenance. Every fence shall be constructed in a
workmanlike manner and of substantial material reasonably suited for
the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. Every
boundary-line fence shall be maintained in good repair and shall not be
allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or constitute a
hazard or nuisance, public or private. Any fence which is dangerous to
the public safety, health, or welfare shall constitute a public nuisance
and the Building Inspector shall commence proper proceedings for the
abatement thereof.
C. Fences shall be erected so as to locate visible supports and other
structural components toward the subject property as applicable.
D. No fence shall be erected within two feet of any public right-of-way.
E. In-ground swimming pools shall be enclosed with a minimum four-foothigh
fence.
F. From the front setback line of the principal building toward the street,
the maximum height of a fence shall be four feet. In a case where a side
boundary fence is within 10 feet of a driveway, the fence shall have a
minimum fifteen-foot front setback.
G. Fences shall allow permanent, year-round access to utility meters.
H. Fences shall meet minimum setback distances from utility
infrastructure, as required by utility providers.
§ 690-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-48
1:695
§ 690-49. Electric and barbed-wire fences.
Electric fences shall only be permitted in any extraterritorial A District
and on extraterritorial farms in other districts when related to farming,
but not as boundary fences. Barbed-wire fences shall only be permitted on
extraterritorial farms, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 690-50. Residential district fences.
In all residential districts, fences are permitted, subject to the following
requirements and limitations:
§ 690-51. Business district fences.
Boundary line fences within all business districts shall not exceed six feet in
height except that the Plan Commission may grant a permit for a fence up
to eight feet in height, provided:
§ 690-52. Industrial district fences.
Boundary-line fences in all industrial districts shall not exceed eight feet in
height, except that:
I. Fences built within utility easements or within five feet of property lines
shall be removed at the property owner's expense should access be
required to utility infrastructure.
A. Fences on all corner lots shall not interfere with the vision of drivers or
bicyclists.
B. Fences may be constructed to a height of no more than six feet on a side
boundary line from the rear lot line to the front setback line of the
principal building.
C. Fences along any rear boundary line that is also the rear boundary line
of an abutting lot shall not exceed six feet in height.
D. Fences along a rear boundary line which line constitutes the side lot
line of an abutting lot shall not exceed six feet in height, and shall not
exceed four feet in height when abutting a front yard line.
A. The applicant has an approved open sales lot; or
B. An open sales lot classified as a nonconforming use; or
C. A commercial operation which has approved storage of equipment
outside the building; or
D. The use could be dangerous to the public; or
E. The use is for an unattractive nuisance and the applicant can show that,
for security reasons, a fence six feet in height will not be adequate.
§ 690-48 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-52
1:696
§ 690-53. Special purpose fence.
Fences for special purposes and fences differing in construction, height or
length may be permitted in any zoning district upon issuance of a variance
from the Zoning Board of Appeals. Finding shall be made by the Zoning
Board of Appeals that the fence is necessary to protect the property or the
public before a variance is issued.
A. Fences which are primarily erected as a security measure may have
arms projecting into the applicant's property on which barbed wire may
be fastened, commencing at a point at least seven feet above the
ground.
B. Fences erected within the required front yard shall not be over six feet
in height.
C. Any use required to be screened in accordance with this section shall be
contained within an opaque fence or wall six feet high or higher if
greater height is required to screen materials being stored.
§ 690-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-54
1:697
§ 690-54. Fence layout example:
§ 690-54 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-54
1:698
ARTICLE XI
Drainagecourses
§ 690-55. Statement of purpose.
This article is established to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community by regulating and restricting the development
of areas along or in drainageways, channels, streams and creeks. The
regulations that follow are intended to protect and to preserve the location,
character and extent of such drainageways, channels, streams and creeks,
and to protect persons and property from the hazards of development in
areas that may be subject to inundation.
§ 690-56. General regulations.
A. No building or structure shall be erected within any area herein
described as a "drainagecourse." For the purpose of this and the
following subsections, a drainagecourse shall include any area, such as
drainageways, channels, streams and creeks, designated as such on the
Zoning Map and shall further include any area designed or intended for
use for drainage purposes as shown in a recorded subdivision.
B. No permit shall be issued for filling of land within a drainagecourse, or
on any lands within 100 feet, or more than 100 feet when so designated
on the Zoning Map, of the center line of such drainagecourse, except
upon approval, in writing, by the City Engineer that such filling will not
obstruct the flow of water or otherwise reduce the water-carrying
capacity of such drainagecourse, or impair the design and character of
such drainagecourse.
C. No permit shall be issued for excavating of land within a
drainagecourse, or on any lands within 100 feet, or more than 100 feet
when so designated on the Zoning Map, of the center line of such
drainagecourse, except upon approval, in writing, by the City Engineer
that such excavating will not divert water from the established channel,
will not cause flooding of lands outside such drainagecourse, will not
cause any erosion, and will not otherwise impair the design and
character of such drainagecourse.
D. No relocation, enclosure or bridging of a drainagecourse shall be
permitted except upon approval, in writing, by the City Engineer that
the location, character and extent of such relocation, enclosure or
bridging of the drainagecourse shall be in the public interest.
E. The Zoning Administrator may require the submittal of any such
information which he and/or the City Engineer considers essential for
the proper enforcement of the above regulations.
§ 690-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-56
1:699

ARTICLE XII
Demolition
§ 690-57. Permit.
No building shall be razed, demolished, removed or wrecked without a
permit from the Building Inspector. Work shall be performed in
conformance with Chapter 242, Building Construction, Article IV, Moving of
Buildings; Razing, § 242-27, of the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
§ 690-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-57
1:701

ARTICLE XIII
Height, Towers and Solar Access
§ 690-58. Height/mobile towers.
A. Communication structures such as radio and television transmission
and relay towers, aerials, and observation towers shall not exceed in
height three times their distance from the nearest lot line.
B. Agricultural structures such as barns, silos, and windmills shall not
exceed in height their distance from the nearest lot line.
C. Public or semipublic facilities such as schools, churches, hospitals,
monuments, sanitariums, libraries, governmental offices and stations
may be erected to a height of 60 feet.
D. New construction or substantial modification of facilities and support
structures.
(1) Per § 66.0404, Wis. Stats., any of the following activities are
regulated under this section:
(a) The siting and construction of a new mobile service support
structure and facilities.
(b) With regard to a Class 1 collocation, the substantial
modification of an existing support structure and mobile
service facilities.
(2) If an activity described under Subsection D(1) is proposed, the
application shall be in writing and shall contain all of the following
information:
(a) The name and business address of, and the contact individual
for, the applicant.
(b) The location of the proposed or affected support structure.
(c) The location of the proposed mobile service facility.
(d) If the application is to substantially modify an existing support
structure, a construction plan which describes the proposed
modifications to the support structure and the equipment and
network components, including antennas, transmitters,
receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related
equipment associated with the proposed modifications.
(e) If the application is to construct a new mobile service support
structure, a construction plan which describes the proposed
mobile service support structure and the equipment and
network components, including antennas, transmitters,
receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related
§ 690-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-58
1:703
equipment to be placed on or around the new mobile service
support structure.
(f) If an application is to construct a new mobile service support
structure, an explanation as to why the applicant chose the
proposed location and why the applicant did not choose
collocation, including a sworn statement from an individual
who has responsibility over the placement of the mobile
service support structure attesting that collocation within the
applicant's search ring would not result in the same mobile
service functionality, coverage, and capacity; is technically
infeasible; or is economically burdensome to the mobile service
provider.
(3) If an applicant submits an application for a permit to engage in an
activity described under Subsection D(1) and which contains all of
the information required under Subsection D(2), the application is
considered complete. If the application is not complete, the City
shall notify the applicant, in writing, within 10 days of receiving the
application that the application is not complete. The written
notification shall specify in detail the required information that was
incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as often as
necessary until it is complete.
(4) Within 90 days of its receipt of a complete application, the City
shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider the
application approved, except that the applicant and the City may
agree, in writing, to an extension of the ninety-day period:
(a) Review the application by the Plan Commission to determine
whether it complies with all applicable aspects of Chapter 242,
Building Construction, and subject to the limitations in this
section of this chapter.
(b) Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the
application.
(c) Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision.
(d) If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the
written notification substantial evidence which supports the
decision.
(5) The Plan Commission may disapprove an application if an applicant
refuses to evaluate the feasibility of collocation within the
applicant's search ring and provide the sworn statement described
under Subsection D(2)(f).
(6) A party who is aggrieved by the final decision of the Plan
Commission under Subsection D(4)(b) may bring an action in the
Circuit Court of Sauk County.
§ 690-58 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-58
1:704
(7) If an applicant provides the Plan Commission with an engineering
certification showing that a mobile service support structure, or an
existing structure, is designed to collapse within a smaller area
than the setback or fall zone area required in this chapter, this
chapter does not apply to such a structure unless the Plan
Commission provides the applicant with substantial evidence that
the engineering certification is flawed.
(8) The City may regulate the activities described under Subsection
D(1) only as provided in this section.
E. Collocation of existing support structures.
(1) A Class 2 collocation is a permitted use and is subject to the same
requirements for the issuance of a building permit to which any
other type of commercial development or land use development is
subject.
(2) If an applicant submits an application for a permit to engage in a
Class 2 collocation, the application shall contain all of the
information required under Subsection D(2)(a) to (c), in which case
the City shall consider the application complete. If any of the
required information is not in the application, the City shall notify
the applicant, in writing, within five days of receiving the
application, that the application is not complete. The written
notification shall specify in detail the required information that was
incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as often as
necessary until it is complete.
(3) Within 45 days of its receipt of a complete application, the City
shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider the
application approved, except that the applicant and the City may
agree, in writing, to an extension of the forty-five-day period.
(a) Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the
application.
(b) Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision.
(c) If the application is approved, issue the applicant the relevant
permit.
(d) If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the
written notification substantial evidence which supports the
decision.
(4) A party who is aggrieved by the final decision of the Zoning
Administrator under Subsection E(3)(a) may bring an action in the
Circuit Court of Sauk County.
F. Limitations. With regard to an activity described in Subsection D(1) or a
Class 2 collocation, the City may not do any of the following:
§ 690-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-58
1:705
(1) Impose environmental testing, sampling, or monitoring
requirements, or other compliance measures for radio frequency
emissions, on mobile service facilities or mobile radio service
providers.
(2) Enact an ordinance imposing a moratorium on the permitting,
construction, or approval of any such activities.
(3) Enact an ordinance prohibiting the placement of a mobile service
support structure in particular locations within the City.
(4) Charge a mobile radio service provider a fee in excess of one of the
following amounts:
(a) For a permit for a Class 2 collocation, the lesser of $500 or the
amount charged by the City for a building permit for any other
type of commercial development or land use development.
(b) For a permit for an activity described in Subsection D(1),
$3,000.
(5) Charge a mobile radio service provider any recurring fee for an
activity described in Subsection D(1) or a Class 2 collocation.
(6) Permit third-party consultants to charge the applicant for any
travel expenses incurred in the consultant's review of mobile
service permits or applications.
(7) Disapprove an application to conduct an activity described under
Subsection D(1) or a Class 2 collocation based solely on aesthetic
concerns.
(8) Enact or enforce an ordinance related to radio frequency signal
strength or the adequacy of mobile service quality.
(9) Impose a surety requirement, unless the requirement is
competitively neutral, nondiscriminatory, and commensurate with
the historical record for surety requirements for other facilities and
structures in the City which fall into disuse. There is a rebuttable
presumption that a surety requirement of $20,000 or less complies
with this subsection.
(10) Prohibit the placement of emergency power systems.
(11) Require that a mobile service support structure be placed on
property owned by the City.
(12) Disapprove an application based solely on the height of the mobile
service support structure or on whether the structure requires
lighting.
(13) Condition approval of such activities on the agreement of the
structure or mobile service facility owner to provide space on or
near the structure for the use of or by the City at less than the
§ 690-58 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-58
1:706
§ 690-59. Solar and wind access.
market rate, or to provide the City other services via the structure
or facilities at less than the market rate.
(14) Limit the duration of any permit that is granted.
(15) Require an applicant to construct a distributed antenna system
instead of either constructing a new mobile service support
structure or engaging in collocation.
(16) Disapprove an application based on an assessment by the City of
the suitability of other locations for conducting the activity.
(17) Require that a mobile service support structure, existing structure,
or mobile service facilities have or be connected to backup battery
power.
(18) Impose a setback or fall zone requirement for a mobile service
support structure that is different from a requirement that is
imposed on other types of commercial structures.
(19) Consider an activity a substantial modification under
§ 66.0404(1)(s)1. or 2., Wis. Stats., if a greater height is necessary
to avoid interference with an existing antenna.
(20) Consider an activity a substantial modification under
§ 66.0404(1)(s)3., Wis. Stats., if a greater protrusion is necessary to
shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the
antenna to the existing structure by cable.
(21) Limit the height of a mobile service support structure to under 200
feet.
(22) Condition the approval of an application on, or otherwise require
the applicant's agreement to indemnify or insure the City in
connection with, the City's exercise of its authority to approve the
application.
(23) Condition the approval of an application on, or otherwise require
the applicant's agreement to permit the City to place at or collocate
with the applicant's support structure any mobile service facilities
provided or operated by, whether in whole or in part, the City or an
entity in which the City has a governance or competitive, economic,
financial or other interest.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a means for the City
of Reedsburg to guarantee solar and wind access rights pursuant to
§ 66.0403, Wis. Stats., and Ch. PSC 128, Wis. Adm. Code. The Zoning
Administrator or Plan Commission may waive any requirement of this
section for solar and wind energy systems that are intended for
personal use.
§ 690-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-59
1:707
B. General regulations.
(1) Any owner who has installed or intends to install a solar or wind
collector may apply to the Zoning Administrator for a solar or wind
access permit. Fees as per the current City Fee Schedule on file in
the City's offices or available on the City's website shall be paid
prior to the issuance of the permit. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) A permit may not affect any land except land that, at the time the
permit is granted, is within the territorial limits of the City or is
within the extraterritorial zoning area of the City.
C. Wind energy system notice requirements.
(1) Preapplication notice. At least 90 days before an owner files an
application to construct a wind energy system, an owner shall use
commercially reasonable methods to provide written notice of the
planned wind energy system to all of the following:
(a) Landowners within one mile of a planned wind turbine host
property.
(b) Political subdivisions within which the wind energy system may
be located.
(c) Emergency first responders and air ambulance service
providers serving a political subdivision within which the wind
energy system may be located.
(d) The Wisconsin Department of Transportation.
(e) Public Service Commission.
(f) The DNR.
(g) The Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection.
(h) The office of the Deputy Undersecretary of the United States
Department of Defense.
(2) Additional preapplication notice to commission. At least 180 days
before filing an application to construct a wind turbine with a
maximum blade tip height exceeding 600 feet, the owner shall
provide written notice of the planned wind energy system to the
commission.
(3) Preapplication notice requirements. The owner shall include all of
the following in a notice under Subsection C(1) and/or (2):
(a) A complete description of the wind energy system, including
the number and size of the planned wind turbines.
§ 690-59 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-59
1:708
(b) A map showing the planned location of all wind energy system
facilities.
(c) Contact information for the owner.
(d) A list of all potential permits or approvals the owner
anticipates may be necessary for construction of the wind
energy system.
(e) Whether the owner is requesting a joint application review
process under § PSC 128.30(7), Wis. Adm. Code, and the name
of each political subdivision that may participate in the joint
review process.
(4) Contents of an application. An owner shall complete and file with
the City an application that includes all of the following:
(a) Wind energy system description and maps showing the
locations of all proposed wind energy facilities.
(b) Time line and process for constructing the wind energy system.
(c) Information regarding noise anticipated.
(d) Information regarding shadow flicker anticipated.
(e) Information regarding the anticipated effects of the wind
energy system on existing land uses within 0.5 mile of the wind
energy system.
(f) Information regarding the anticipated effects on airports and
airspace.
(g) Information regarding the anticipated effects on line-of-sight
communications.
(h) A list of all state and federal permits required to construct and
operate the wind energy system.
(i) Information regarding the planned use and modification of
roads within the City or towns during the construction,
operation, and decommissioning of the wind energy system,
including a process for assessing road damage caused by wind
energy system activities and for conducting road repairs at the
owner's expense.
(j) A copy of all emergency plans developed in collaboration with
appropriate first responders.
(k) A decommissioning and site restoration plan providing
reasonable assurances that the owner will be able to comply
with § PSC 128.19.
§ 690-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-59
1:709
(l) Any other information necessary to understand the
construction, operation or decommissioning of the proposed
wind energy system.
D. Solar and wind access permit applications.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall determine if an application is
satisfactorily completed and shall notify the applicant of its
determination. If an applicant receives notice that an application
has been satisfactorily completed, the applicant shall deliver by
certified mail or by hand a notice to the owner of any property that
the applicant proposes to be restricted by the permit under
§ 690-59D(5). The applicant shall submit to the Zoning
Administrator a copy of a signed receipt for every notice delivered
under this subsection. The Zoning Administrator shall supply the
notice form. The information on the form may include, without
limitation because of enumeration:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, and the address of land
upon which the solar collector is or will be located.
(b) That an application has been filed by the applicant.
(c) That the permit, if granted, may affect the rights of the notified
owner to develop his or her property and to plant vegetation.
(d) The telephone number, address and office hours of the Zoning
Administrator.
(e) That any person may request a hearing under § 690-59D(2)
within 30 days after receipt of the notice, and the address and
procedure for filing the request.
(2) Hearing. Within 30 days after receipt of the notice under
§ 690-59D(1), any person who has received a notice may file a
request for a hearing on the granting of a permit or the Zoning
Administrator may determine that a hearing is necessary even if no
such request is filed. If a request is filed or if the Zoning
Administrator determines that a hearing is necessary, the Plan
Commission shall conduct a hearing on the application within 90
days after the last notice is delivered. At least 30 days prior to the
hearing date, the Plan Commission shall notify the applicant, all
owners notified under § 690-59D(1) and any other person filing a
request of the time and place of the hearing.
(3) Permit grant.
(a) The Plan Commission shall grant a permit if it determines that:
[1] The granting of a permit will not unreasonably interfere
with the orderly land use and development plans of the
municipality;
§ 690-59 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-59
1:710
[2] No person has demonstrated that she or he has present
plans to build a structure that would create an
impermissible interference by showing that she or he has
applied for a building permit prior to receipt of a notice
under § 690-59D(1), has expended at least $500 on
planning or designing such a structure or by submitting
any other credible evidence that she or he has made
substantial progress toward planning or constructing a
structure that would create an impermissible interference;
and
[3] The benefits to the applicant and the public will exceed
any burdens.
(b) The Plan Commission may grant a permit subject to any
condition or exemption it deems necessary to minimize the
possibility that the future development of nearby property will
create an impermissible interference or to minimize any other
burden on any person affected by granting the permit. Such
conditions or exemption may include but are not limited to
restriction on the location of the collector and requirements for
the compensation of persons affected by the granting of the
permit.
(c) The Plan Commission may deny an application for approval if
the proposed site of the wind energy system is in an area
primarily designated for future residential or commercial
development, as shown in a map that is adopted, as part of the
City's Comprehensive Plan, under § 66.1001(2)(b) and (f), Wis.
Stats., before June 2, 2009, or as shown in such maps after
December 31, 2015, as part of the Comprehensive Plan that is
updated as required under § 66.1001(2)(i), Wis. Stats.. This
subsection applies to a wind energy system that has a nominal
capacity of at least one megawatt.
(d) Wind energy system standards for siting, noise, shadow flicker,
signal interference, stray voltage, and construction and
operation shall comply with Ch. PSC 128, Subchapters II and V,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(e) Small wind energy systems shall comply with Ch. PSC 128,
Subchapter VI, Wis. Adm. Code.
(4) Record of permit. If the Plan Commission grants a permit:
(a) The Commission shall specify the property restricted by the
permit under § 690-59D(5) and shall prepare notice of the
granting of the permit. The notice shall include the
identification required under § 690-59D(1) for the owner and
the property upon which the solar collector is or will be located
and for any owner and property restricted by the permit under
§ 690-59D(5), and shall indicate that the property may not be
§ 690-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-59
1:711
developed and vegetation may not be planted on the property
so as to create an impermissible interference with the solar
collector which is the subject of the permit unless the permit
affecting the property is terminated under § 690-59D(7) or
unless an agreement affecting the property is filed under
§ 690-59D(8) .
(b) The applicant shall record with the Register of Deeds of the
county in which the property is located the notice under
Subsection D(4)(a) for each property specified under
Subsection D(4)(a) and for the property upon which the solar
collector is or will be located.
(c) For wind systems, a political subdivision shall provide its
written decision to the owner and to the Commission. If a
political subdivision approves an application for a wind energy
system, the political subdivision shall provide the owner with a
duplicate original of the decision.
(d) The owner shall record the duplicate original of a decision
approving an application with the Register of Deeds for the
county in which the wind energy system is located.
(5) Remedies for impermissible interference.
(a) Any person who uses property which he or she owns or permits
any other person to use the property in a way which creates an
impermissible interference under a permit which has been
granted or which is the subject of an application shall be liable
to the permit holder or applicant for damages, except as
provided under Subsection D(5)(b), for any loss due to the
impermissible interference, court costs and reasonable
attorney fees, unless:
[1] The building permit was applied for prior to receipt of a
notice under § 690-59D(1) or the Plan Commission
determines not to grant a permit after a hearing under
§ 690-59D(2).
[2] A permit affecting the property is terminated under
§ 690-59D(7).
[3] An agreement affecting the property is filed under
§ 690-59D(8).
(b) A permit holder is entitled to an injunction to require the
trimming of any vegetation that creates or would create an
impermissible interference as defined under § 690-59D(5). If
the court finds on behalf of the permit holder, the permit holder
shall be entitled to a permanent injunction, damages, court
costs, and reasonable attorney's fees.
§ 690-59 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-59
1:712
(6) Appeals and complaints.
(a) Appeals. A decision of the Plan Commission to determine that
an application is incomplete, or to approve, disapprove, or
impose a restriction upon a wind energy system, or an action of
the City to enforce a restriction on a wind energy system, may
be appealed as provided under § 66.0401(5), Wis. Stats.
(b) Complaints.
[1] An aggrieved person may make a complaint regarding
failure by an owner to comply with an obligation under this
chapter or an ordinance adopted under this chapter.
[2] A complaint under this subsection shall be made first to
the owner of the energy system pursuant to a complaint
resolution process developed by the owner. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
[3] A complainant may petition the City for review of a
complaint that is not resolved within 45 days of the day the
owner receives the original complaint.
[4] The City's decision under Subsection D(6)(b)[3] is subject
to review under § 66.0401(5), Wis. Stats.
(7) Termination of solar and wind access rights.
(a) Any right protected by a permit under this section shall
terminate if the Plan Commission determines that the solar or
wind collector who is the subject of the permit is:
[1] Permanently removed or is not used for two consecutive
years, excluding time spent on repairs or improvements.
[2] Not installed and functioning within two years after the
date of issuance of the permit.
(b) The Plan Commission shall give the permit holder written
notice and an opportunity for a hearing on a proposed
termination under Subsection D(1).
(c) If the Plan Commission terminates a permit, the Commission
may charge the permit holder for the cost of recording and
record a notice of termination with the Register of Deeds, who
shall record the notice with the notice recorded under
§ 690-59C and D(1) or indicate on any notice recorded under
Subsection D(2) that the permit has been terminated.
(d) Decommissioning of wind energy systems shall comply with
§ PSC 128.19, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 690-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-59
1:713
(8) Waiver. A permit holder by written agreement may waive all or part
of any right protected by a permit. A copy of such agreement shall
be recorded with the Register of Deeds, who shall record such copy
with the notice recorded under § 690-59D(4)(b).
(9) Preservation of rights. The transfer of title to any property shall not
change the rights and duties under this section.
(10) Construction.
(a) This section may not be construed to require that an owner
obtain a permit prior to installing a solar or wind collector.
(b) This section may not be construed to mean that acquisition of a
renewable energy resource easement under § 700.35, Wis.
Stats., is in any way contingent upon the granting of a permit
under this section.
§ 690-59 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-59
1:714
ARTICLE XIV
Airport Zoning
§ 690-60. Compliance and approval.
Prior to issuing any building permit, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine that the proposed project is in compliance with any requirements
related to the control and management of the City of Reedsburg Airport.
The Zoning Administrator shall obtain approval from the Airport
Commission, as established by Chapter 21, Article VI, of the Code of the City
of Reedsburg prior to issuing a building permit for projects located adjacent
to or within the space regulated by the airport.
§ 690-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-60
1:715

ARTICLE XV
Historic Districts
§ 690-61. Compliance and documentation.
Prior to issuing any building permit, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine that the proposed project is in compliance with Chapter VIII of
Title 36, Part 800, of the Federal Register which deals with the protection
of historic and cultural properties. The applicant shall provide to the Zoning
Administrator documentation to show the proposed activities will not
violate federal requirements dealing with the properties eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places.
§ 690-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-61
1:717

ARTICLE XVI
Traffic, Loading, Parking and Access
§ 690-62. Traffic visibility.
§ 690-63. Loading requirements.
In all districts, except Business B1, adequate loading areas shall be
provided so that all vehicles loading, maneuvering, or unloading are
completely off the public right-of-way and so that all vehicles need not back
onto any public right-of-way.
Size and location. Each loading space shall be not less than 12 feet in width,
35 feet in length, and have a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet, and
may occupy all or any part of any required yard.
Uses
Square Feet of Floor
Area*
Required Off-Street Loading
Spaces
School — 1
Hospital Under 10,000 1
From 10,000 to 30,000 1
For each additional 30,000
or major fraction thereof
1 additional
Funeral
Home
— 1
Office, hotel
retail,
service,
wholesale,
warehouse
manufacturing,
processing
or repairing
uses
Under 10,000 1
From 10,000 to 25,000 1
From 25,001 to 40,000 2
A. No obstructions such as signs, structures, parked vehicles, fences or
vegetation shall be permitted in any district between the heights of 2 1/
2 feet and 10 feet above the plane through the mean curb grades within
the triangular space formed by a fifteen-foot setback from the
intersection of the two street right-of-way lines, except for the B1
Central Business District.
B. For collector and arterial streets intersecting with other collector or
arterial streets or railways, the corner cutoff distances establishing the
triangular vision clearance space shall be increased to 50 feet.
§ 690-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-63
1:719
Uses
Square Feet of Floor
Area*
Required Off-Street Loading
Spaces
From 40,001 to 60,000 3
From 60,001 to 100,000 4
For each additional 50,000
or major fraction thereof
1 additional
NOTES:
* See § 690-9 for definitions.
§ 690-64. Parking requirements.
In all districts except B1 and in connection with every use, there shall be
provided, at the time any use of building is erected, enlarged, extended, or
increased, off-street parking stalls for all vehicles in accordance with the
following:
A. Size of each parking space shall be not less than 180 square feet
exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress. In no case shall
the stalls be less than nine feet wide or 18 feet long.
B. Location to be on the same lot as the principal use. No parking stall or
driveway except in a residential district shall be closer than 10 feet to a
residential district lot line or a street line opposite a residential district.
C. Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be hard-surfaced with either
hot mix or cold mix asphalt or concrete and shall be properly drained so
as not to create either a hazard or nuisance on either private or public
property. Any parking lot for five or more vehicles shall have the aisles
and spaces clearly marked. In the extraterritorial area, parking lots
may be excepted from these requirements if they do not contribute to
sedimentation of ditches, culverts and road surfaces or are otherwise
hazardous or a nuisance.
D. Number of parking stalls required are shown in the following table:
Use Minimum Parking Required*
Single-family dwellings
and mobile homes
2 stalls for each dwelling unit
Multifamily dwellings 1.5 stalls for each dwelling unit
Hotels, motels 1 stall for each guest room, plus
1 stall for each 3 employees
Hospitals, clubs, lodges,
dormitories, lodging
houses and
boardinghouses
1 stall for each 2 beds, plus
§ 690-63 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-64
1:720
Use Minimum Parking Required*
1 stall for each 3 employees
Sanitariums,
institutions, rest homes
and nursing homes
1 stall for each 5 beds, plus
1 stall for each 3 employees
Medical and dental
clinics
3 stalls for each doctor
Churches, theaters,
auditoriums, community
centers, vocational and
night schools, and other
places of public
assembly
1 stall for each 5 seats
Colleges, secondary and
elementary schools
years of age or more
1 stall for each 2 employees, plus
1 stall for each 10 students of 16
Commercial, retail,
restaurants, bars,
places of entertainment,
stores
1 stall for each 200 square feet of building
area accessible to the public
Manufacturing and
processing plants,
laboratories, and
warehouses
1 stall for each 2 employees
Financial institutions,
business, government
and professional offices
1 stall for each 300 square feet of floor area
Funeral homes 1 stall for each 4 seats
Bowling alleys 5 stalls for each alley
NOTES:
* See § 690-9 for definitions.
E. Uses not listed. In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the
provision for a use that is similar shall apply.
F. Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the total of the
number of stalls required for each individual use.
G. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be
arranged to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in any
residential district and streets.
§ 690-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-64
1:721
H. During a site plan review, parking waiver reductions shall be reviewed
by the Plan Commission as follows:
(1) The applicant made a good-faith effort to provide as many parking
spaces as possible on the site, on other property under the same
ownership, or through joint-use provisions; or
(2) That there is a surplus of on-street or public spaces in the area that
can accommodate the generated parking demand; or
(3) That the applicant can provide evidence that the minimum parking
required is excessive for the proposed business.
(4) The requested waiver is the smallest possible reduction of parking
spaces that would accommodate the proposed use.
(5) Adjacent or nearby properties will not be adversely affected.
(6) The applicant proposes to add bicycle and/or pedestrian walkway
facilities in lieu of some required auto parking spaces. [Added
12-31-2015 by Ord. No. 1821-16]
I. Parking lot landscaping. [Added 11-25-2019 by Ord. No. 1893-19]
(1) Parking lots or additions to existing parking lots, located in
residential, commercial, or industrial districts are to be landscaped
around the perimeter. Landscaping can be accomplished with a
variety of plants and berms. A variety of tree heights, shrubs and
planting materials shall be incorporated into the design to provide
visual interest, provided that said trees do not interfere with public
utilities.
(2) Tree islands, new parking lots. Tree islands, along with other
landscaping within open, off-street parking areas, shall be designed
to help control circulation of cars and pedestrians, identify
entrances and exits, provide reference points for locating cars in
large lots, give summer shade to people and cars, furnish open
ground for drainage and snow storage, camouflage, soften and
improve the appearance of large parking lots, provide
environmental and aesthetic benefits and be a positive asset to a
shopping area or a business establishment. Any parking lot or
parking lot addition constructed after this chapter's effective date
that contains all of the following: more than one aisle, two or more
rows of parking stalls, and an area of 15,000 square feet or more
shall provide and maintain in that area constructed after this
chapter's effective date, canopy-type shade trees hardy to this
region in tree islands totaling not less than 3% of the surfaced
parking area constructed after this chapter's effective date. The
minimum size of each tree island shall be not less than 162 square
feet. The Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission shall review a
drawing of the perimeter or islands indicating the size, type and
location of the islands, the plant materials, the protection afforded
§ 690-64 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-64
1:722
§ 690-65. Driveways. [Amended 1-8-2018 by Ord. No. 1857-18]
§ 690-66. Walkways. [Added 12-31-2015 by Ord. No. 1821-16]
All commercial, industrial, multifamily, and mixed-use developments that
require parking areas of 50 or more spaces shall provide an internal
pedestrian walkway(s). The walkway shall be marked, separated and/or
constructed of materials distinguishable from the driving surface with a
minimum width of five feet to and between or among the following areas,
unless modified by the Plan Commission:
the plantings, including curbing, staking and mulching, and
provisions for maintenance. Preserving existing trees is
encouraged and shall be a factor in considering the proposal.
A. Driveways for one- and two-family dwellings shall be a minimum of 10
feet wide and a maximum of 24 feet wide. Two-family residential
properties may have a single driveway up to 48 feet wide.
B. Driveways for commercial and industrial uses shall not exceed 35 feet
in width.
C. Driveways for commercial and industrial uses may exceed 35 feet in
width if approved by the Plan Commission. The applicant shall show
evidence of hardship, and the extended width shall be the minimum
needed.
D. Islands between driveway openings in new developments shall be
provided with a minimum of 12 feet between all driveways and six feet
at all lot lines.
E. All driveways shall be hard-surfaced with either hot mix or cold mix
asphalt or concrete and shall be properly drained so as not to create
either a hazard or nuisance on either private or public property. In the
extraterritorial area, driveways may be excepted from these
requirements if they do not contribute to sedimentation of ditches,
culverts and road surfaces or are otherwise hazardous or a nuisance.
A. Public entrances to each commercial, industrial, multifamily, mixed-use
building on the site.
B. Public sidewalks along the perimeter streets adjacent to the
development.
C. Adjacent land uses and developments.
D. Adjacent public parks or other public or civic uses.
§ 690-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-66
1:723

ARTICLE XVII
Business and Industrial Development
§ 690-67. Reedsburg business center, I4 Zoning District. [Amended
9-12-2005]
A. Purpose. These regulations are intended to facilitate a contemporary,
professional, and office-like setting within the business center. In
addition to office uses, the City encourages research, product
development, and associated retail development, thereby providing a
desirable location for those business types which are harmonious with
and do not constitute a hazard or a nuisance to surrounding
communities and lands. These regulations are further intended to
ensure that the architectural designs of both buildings and sites are
consistent with the standards necessary to maintain a quality mixed-use
business center that is attractive to all tenants and owners.
B. Permitted uses. No parcel in the business center may be built upon,
altered or occupied for any purpose or use unless said purpose or use
has been referred to the Reedsburg Industrial Development
Commission (RIDC) and Zoning Administrator. The kinds of uses
deemed appropriate by the City are set forth below and are for
illustrative purposes only.
(1) Business and professional offices.
(2) Computer, research and development facilities.
(a) Telecommunications.
(b) Telemarketing.
(c) Educational and scientific research.
(d) Laboratories, research and testing.
(e) Utilities.
(f) Product development.
(3) Light manufacturing activities.
(a) Assembly.
(b) Food products.
(c) Pharmaceuticals.
(d) Computers and communications equipment.
(e) Warehousing incidental to the primary use.
(4) Other uses expressly stated herein, provided that any such use is
closely related to those included in these regulations and provided
§ 690-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-67
1:725
further that the Reedsburg Plan Commission approves the use
conditionally or otherwise.
(5) Retail sales are permitted if such sales are incidental to a permitted
use.
C. Prohibited uses.
(1) The following uses are prohibited within the business center:
businesses or industries which, on the basis of actual physical and
operational characteristics, would be detrimental to the
surrounding area by reason of smoke, noise, dust, odor, traffic,
physical appearance, or similar factors relating to the public
health, welfare and safety or business center aesthetics and
environment.
(2) For illustrative purposes only, the kinds of uses deemed
inappropriate are set forth below:
(a) Heavy manufacturing.
(b) Warehousing that is not incidental to the primary use.
D. Parcel size. Parcels in the business center shall be one acre or more.
E. Performance standards. The following minimum standards shall apply
to all developments proposed within the business center.
F. Definitions. Unless the context otherwise specifies or requires, each
term defined herein shall, for all purposes of this section, have the
meaning herein respectively specified.
BUSINESS CENTER — The real property known as the "Reedsburg
business center" described herein and depicted on Exhibit 1 attached
hereto.32
DEVELOPED SITE — A site upon which permanent buildings necessary
for the actual operation of an industrial or commercial enterprise have
been completed.
IMPROVEMENTS — Buildings, outbuildings, underground
installations, slope alterations, roads, driveways, parking areas, fences,
screening walls and barriers, retaining walls, stairs, decks, windbreaks,
plantings, planted trees and shrubs, poles, signs, loading areas and all
other structures or landscaping improvements of every type and kind.
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION — The Reedsburg
Industrial Development Commission, aka "RIDC."
PROPERTY — The parcels of land within the business center.
32.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the City offices.
§ 690-67 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-67
1:726
SITE — All contiguous land in the business center under one common
ownership which has been, will or can ultimately be developed by an
owner, with a building or buildings and appurtenant structures.
G. General restrictions.
(1) Designation of sites. Each site shall be created through the
preparation and recording of an appropriate certified survey map
or business center subdivision plat.
(2) Land/building ratio. No more than 65% of any site shall be covered
surface pavement, buildings or other covering materials that are
impervious to surface water absorption.
(3) Building setbacks. The following yard or building setback
requirements shall apply to all parcels that are located in the
business center.
Summary
Front yard 25 feet
Side yard (interior of business
center)
20 feet
Rear yard 25 feet
Yard abutting residential property 40 feet
(a) All loading docks shall have a setback minimum of 60 feet from
parcel lines abutting any public street.
(b) All buildings shall have a setback minimum of 20 feet from any
parcel line shared in common with another parcel owner within
the property or adjoining properties. Corner lots maybe
exempted from some setback requirements, provided that
loading and maneuvering areas are screened from public view
by careful building orientation and landscaping. An adequate
vision triangle must be maintained at all street intersections
and driveway entrances.
(c) All buildings shall have a setback minimum of 25 feet from the
rear lot line.
(d) All buildings that are located on parcels that abut a residential
district shall have a forty-foot-buffer-zone-setback minimum.
(4) Building materials. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1862-18]
(a) The exterior walls of each principal building shall be
constructed of durable, permanent architectural materials that
are compatible with parklike standards established by the
existing buildings, detention ponds, decorative lighting and
other landscape features.
§ 690-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-67
1:727
(b) At least 25% of the front facade and street side(s) facades of
the office portion of the principal building shall incorporate
brick, stone, architectural block, architectural concrete panels,
architectural wood and/or glass into their design. Front facade
materials shall be continued for not less than 20 feet on each
side from the front surface. The nonoffice portion of the
building, such as light manufacturing, assembly, and storage,
shall consist of architectural metal block, tilt-up concrete
panels or similar materials designed to be compatible with the
color and design theme of the office portion of the building.
Unfaced concrete block, structural concrete and the like shall
not be permitted without the prior written approval of the
Industrial Development Commission.
(5) Building massing. Breaking up large building sections with such
elements as variable planes, projections, setbacks or changes in
the roofline is encouraged.
(6) Building elevations. All elevations of the building shall be designed
in a consistent and coherent architectural manner. Changes in
material, color and/or texture shall occur at points relating to the
massing and overall design concept of the building.
(7) Building color. Building colors shall be earth-toned in appearance.
Complementary colors, textures and materials are encouraged. All
exterior colors shall be subject to approval of the Industrial
Development Commission.
(8) Heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) units and
miscellaneous equipment. Cooling towers, rooftop and groundmounted
mechanical and electrical units and other miscellaneous
equipment shall either be integrated into the design of the building
or screened from view from the primary public street.
(9) Parking. All employee and visitor parking shall be provided on-site.
Parking shall not be permitted on any public street or access drive.
Property owners shall provide parking as required by this chapter.
Parking areas shall be located at least 10 feet from any parcel line.
All parking areas and driveways shall be hard-surface paved, dustfree
and properly marked. When curbs are desired, they shall be of
concrete.
(10) Landscaping:
(a) The setback area abutting streets shall be landscaped with a
combination of deciduous canopy trees, shrubbery and ground
cover. At least one tree at least six feet in height for each 50
feet of street frontage shall be planted in the setback area. Any
buffer zone, shall be a minimum of 40 feet wide and planted
with plant materials at least six feet in height of such variety
and growth habits as to provide a year-round, effective screen
for the abutting residential properties. All off-street parking
§ 690-67 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-67
1:728
areas that serve 20 vehicles or more shall be provided with
landscaped areas totaling not less than 5% of the surfaced
area.
(b) All landscaping shall be completed within 90 days of issuance
of a certificate of occupancy of allowing occupation and use of
such property by the Building Inspector. If the certificate of
occupancy is issued after October 1 of any given year, the
owner's or lessee's landscaping completion date shall be 90
days, beginning April 1 of the following year (July 1).
(c) All grass, trees and shrubbery shall be kept in good
appearance at all times.
(11) Lighting. Vehicular lighting shall be illuminated using high-cutoff
luminaires which keep off-site overspill and night-sky lighting to a
minimum. The size and scale of light and illumination should match
site and building scale, color and theme. Location of the fixtures
should match site and building scale, color and theme. Location of
the fixtures should emphasize intersections and pedestrians' access
routes, yet provide a uniform level of illumination. Scale of fixtures
should be lowered in pedestrian areas to emphasize walking
surfaces. All outdoor lighting or nonresidential uses shall be
designed, located and mounted so that the maximum illumination,
as measured horizontally at the lot line, does not exceed 9.6
footcandles.
(12) Accessory structures. Accessory structures are permitted with the
approval of the Industrial Development Commission. Such
structures shall be set back from the front building line and
otherwise meet the same setback requirements as the primary
structure. Colors and rooflines shall be consistent with the
principal building. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1862-18]
(13) Signs. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with this
chapter. In addition to the requirements contained therein, the
following requirements shall also apply:
(a) All identity signage not attached to the building shall be set
back a minimum of 15 feet from the property line. Signs shall
be incorporated into the landscape plan. Sign material shall be
compatible with the building and landscaping; wooden signs
are prohibited. Maximum overall height shall not exceed five
feet or a size of 50 square feet in area. All signs shall be
presented to the Commission for approval.
(b) All identity signage attached to the building shall be
incorporated into the building architecture and shall be
presented for approval with the architectural plans. Signs may
not exceed 10% of the square feet contained in the wall to
which they are affixed. In addition, signs may not extend above
§ 690-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-67
1:729
the roof parapet line or project more than 18 inches from the
face of the building.
(c) Traffic control and directional signage within individual lot
developments shall be consistent with the identity signage and
submitted for approval with the landscape design.
(d) Flashing signs and scrolling electronic reader board signs are
expressly prohibited.
(14) Temporary buildings. No building or structure of temporary
character shall be used on any lot at any time except for
construction trailers during the period of construction. The use of
cargo containers as a temporary storage facility is prohibited.
(15) Fencing. Fences shall not be allowed, except for screening of
service areas, without the prior written consent of the City except
as described below.
(16) Storage and loading areas:
(a) No loading doors or docks shall be constructed facing on any
public street or highway; provided, however, this restriction
may be modified or waived, in writing, by the City where
appropriate.
(b) Outdoor storage yards for materials, supplies, merchandise,
garbage dumpsters or equipment shall be screened from
public view behind a visual barrier for the purpose of screening
it from view from neighboring property and public streets
within the business center. Storage of finished manufactured
goods scheduled for delivery is permitted if the storage area is
screened from public view and upon approval by the City,
where appropriate.
(c) Limited outdoor storage of finished manufactured goods for
the purpose of sales or promotion display is permitted upon the
approval of the City.
(d) Outdoor storage areas and loading areas shall be hard-surfacepaved
and dust-free.
(17) Nuisances; pollution. No owner or lessee of property in the
business center shall create or allow to exist a nuisance, as defined
by Wisconsin Statutes now in effect or as amended, on the property
within the business center. In addition, no rubbish or debris of any
kind shall be placed or permitted to accumulate upon or adjacent to
any site and no odor(s) shall be permitted so as to render any site or
portion thereof unsanitary, unsightly or offensive. In addition, no
use or operation shall be conducted in the business center that is
noxious, harmful to public health, or unsightly or detrimental to
others.
§ 690-67 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-67
1:730
(18) Property use. The property and/or improvements as otherwise
provided in this declaration may be used for any use permitted
under the applicable zoning regulations of the City as the same now
exist or as the same may be hereafter be amended.
(19) Property maintenance. All real property in the business center,
whether occupied or unoccupied, and any buildings or other
improvements placed thereon, shall at all times be maintained in
such a manner as to prevent their becoming unsightly by reason of
unattractive growth or the accumulation of rubbish or debris
thereon, or unsightly condition of the improvements thereon. No
building or improvement in the business center shall be permitted
by its owner or lessee to fall into disrepair, and each such building
and improvement shall at all times be kept in good condition and
repair and adequately painted or otherwise finished. If, in the
opinion of the City, proper maintenance is not being undertaken,
the City, any time after 30 days of written notification to the owner,
may contract for the completion of such maintenance work. The
City shall have the right to bill the owner for such costs, plus 10%
for administration.
(20) Drainage control. No land shall be developed and no use shall be
permitted that results in flooding, erosion, or sedimentation to
adjacent properties. All runoff shall be properly channeled into a
storm drain, watercourse, storage area, or other stormwater
management facility. The City may, in its discretion, require on-site
detention or sedimentation.
(21) Outdoor storage. All materials or products stored outside buildings
must be behind the building setback line from the street and must
be screened from view from the street with solid fencing or
screening approved by the City. All trash must be enclosed by a
fence of solid material such as will provide a suitable visual screen.
Minimum height of such fence shall be six feet. The fence must be
kept painted or have such other finish as is generally accepted for
good appearance. Wire fence is not acceptable for this purpose.
(22)Waste incineration. No waste material shall be burned on the
premises except in an incinerator designed and constructed for
such purpose.
(23) Utility control. All utilities, including all electric power, telephone,
gas, water, storm and sanitary sewers, shall be located
underground.
H. Regulations of improvements:
(1) Commission review. All City approvals referenced herein shall first
be submitted to the Industrial Development Commission for its
written approval.
§ 690-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-67
1:731
(2) Approval of plans. No improvements shall be constructed, erected,
placed, altered, maintained or permitted to remain in the business
center until final plans and specifications showing the plot layout,
including all parking areas, all exterior elevations with materials
and colors therefor, and landscaping shall have been submitted to
and approved by the City. Such final plans and specifications shall
be submitted, in writing in duplicate, over the authorized signature
of the owner or lessee of the particular part of the business center
or his/her authorized agent. Changes in approved plans which
affect building size, placement or external appearance must be
submitted to and are subject to approval by the City.
(3) Timing. The City shall approve or disapprove plans, specifications
and details, in writing, within 30 days from the receipt thereof. If
the City fails either to post a letter of notification either approving
or disapproving final plans and specifications within the 30 day
period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the City has
disapproved said plans and specifications. One set of said plans and
specifications shall, with the approval or disapproval endorsed
thereon, be returned to the person submitting them, and the
remaining set shall be retained by the City for the City's permanent
files. Approval may be subject to specific conditions or
modifications. Plan approvals will be provided to the Building
Inspector by the Commission.
(4) Variances and regulatory flexibility. The Industrial Development
Commission is authorized to allow exceptions from any provision of
the standards where such exceptions will assist in carrying out the
intent and spirit of this code. Owners and lessees may seek a formal
variance to this code where strict application of the provision
would result in a particular hardship to the person seeking the
variance.
(5) Liability. Neither the City nor the City's assignees or successors, as
hereinafter provided, shall be liable for any damage, loss or
prejudice suffered or claimed by any owner, lessee, or by any such
owner's architect, engineer or contractor who submits such plan
for approval.
I. Protection of property interests:
(1) Division of parcels. No platted parcel located within the business
center shall be further divided into parcels smaller than one acre
without the prior written approval of the City. In no instance shall
such division create a parcel which is not developable in
compliance with this chapter or which would violate any applicable
state or local laws, ordinances or regulations regulating the
subdivision of lands.
(2) Cooperation for easements. All owners and occupants or parcels
within the business center shall cooperate with the City and other
§ 690-67 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-67
1:732
§ 690-68. Industrial park.
owners and occupants of lots within the business center in the
planning and granting of all necessary and reasonable easements
for gas, electric, telephone, communications, sewer, water, access
roads, railway spurs, drainage, and loading tracks to the extent
that such easements do not interfere with existing uses of the
land or unduly restrict future intended uses. Nothing contained in
this section shall be deemed to require the owner to grant any
specific easement, nor grant easements or rights-of-way, without
reasonable compensation therefor.
(3) Ordinance applies. If any of the City's other ordinances and land
use restrictions differ from those set forth in this section, then
compliance with the more restrictive provisions shall be required.
A. The intent of this industrial park code is to apply additional conditions
on development within the Park that will create and/or preserve a
parklike environment.
B. No building permit shall be issued for the erection, expansion,
placement or alteration of any building or improvement within the
industrial park until the plans for such building or improvement,
including site plans, paving and parking plans, landscape plans, and
first-floor elevations have been approved by the City of Reedsburg
Industrial Commission. The developer or his agent shall submit two
complete sets of the plans to the City Clerk-Treasurer. The Industrial
Commission shall review such plans with respect to harmony of
external design and land use as it affects property within and adjacent
to the industrial park. The Commission shall affix its mark of approval
or disapproval to the plan and return one set to the developer. Approval
by the Commission shall not relieve the developer of any responsibility
to adhere to other applicable regulations of the City or other
governmental agencies. Failure of the Commission to act upon such
building or improvement plans within 30 days after submission to the
City Clerk-Treasurer shall constitute the Commission's approval of such
plans.
C. No building shall be either so similar or so at variance with its neighbor
buildings that its appearance shall constitute a depreciation to the
neighborhood.
D. The front of all buildings and the sides of those buildings facing side
streets on corner lots shall be faced with decorative masonry, stone, or
finished in a similar architecturally attractive manner approved by the
Industrial Commission. The sides and rear of all buildings may be any
material compatible with the construction of the remainder of the
building and the building's intended use. Where concrete-block
masonry is used, it shall be tinted, stained or painted with two coats of
paint. All faces of all buildings must be kept in good repair and
appearance at all times.
§ 690-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-68
1:733
E. Trucks or semitrailers shall not be parked or stored within the front or
side setback areas, except that loading docks may be permitted when
approved by the Reedsburg Industrial Commission. Trucks or trailers
parked at loading docks shall not block or project into any public street.
F. The twenty-five-foot setback from the street property lines to the
building lines shall be entirely graded and landscaped with grasses,
sod, trees, bushes, and shrubs in any manner that will provide an
acceptable lawn, except only such areas as may be required for
driveways, visitor parking, or walks. All such areas shall be watered in
dry weather and kept in good appearance at all times. All grass shall be
cut when necessary. The owner shall control weed growth and keep
weeds cut as necessary.
G. Junk or abandoned equipment shall not be allowed to accumulate. No
rubbish may be burned on the premises except in an incinerator
specially constructed, designed, and approved for the purpose.
H. Private wells are not permitted unless expressly granted by the Board
of Public Works. All wastewaters shall be discharged in the municipal
sewer system subject to any pretreatment of industrial waste required
by the City of Reedsburg.
I. Cooling water that is not recycled shall be discharged only to municipal
stormwater facilities; cooling water ponds are not allowed.33
33.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 17.34, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 2-23-2009.
§ 690-68 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-68
1:734
ARTICLE XVIII
Enclosures
§ 690-69. Purpose.
This article is established to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community and maintain a desirable aesthetic appearance
within the community by regulating and restricting the use of property and
the storage of equipment and materials as they relate to enclosure. For
purposes of this section, "enclosure" may apply to screening and/or security
fencing. All enclosures shall meet the requirements of Article X.
§ 690-70. Residential districts. [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
1815-15]
Outside storage of items accessory to the principal permitted use which
do not constitute junk and are maintained in a clean, orderly manner is
permitted. For purposes of this section, woodpiles are considered accessory
to a residential use in an R1 and R2 District. All outside storage shall be
done in such a manner as to be compatible with the neighborhood and not
be a nuisance. Storage and handling of garbage, refuse and waste shall be
in compliance with Chapter 518, Solid Waste, of the Code of the City of
Reedsburg and shall not create a nuisance. In addition, the outside storage
or parking of recreational vehicles, trailers, boats and truck toppers is
permitted, provided they are stored or parked in the side or rear yard and
under the following conditions:
§ 690-71. Business districts.
All business, servicing or processing, except for display of merchandise and
equipment for sale to the public, establishments of the drive-in type and
outdoor-eating restaurants shall be conducted within enclosed buildings.
Off-street parking of employee, client and business vehicles and off-street
shipping and receiving shall not require enclosures. Outdoor storage of
equipment and materials, when actively used in conduct of a permitted
use, is allowed, provided the storage areas are located in the rear yard or
screened from the street. Any equipment or materials meeting the definition
of "junk" shall not be permitted to be stored outside unless completely
enclosed by an opaque fence and is of such size which does not constitute
a junkyard. Storage and handling of garbage, refuse and waste shall be
in compliance with Chapter 518, Solid Waste, of the Code of the City of
Reedsburg. The Plan Commission may review the location and enclosure of
A. Storage is permitted on a front-yard paved surface.
B. Corner lots may use the front yard that does not include the property's
address as a side yard.
C. Overnight stays by nonpaying friends or family in RVs and camping
trailers are permitted for up to 14 nights in a calendar year.
§ 690-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-71
1:735
garbage, refuse and waste and require measures to ensure public health,
safety and welfare and maintain desirable aesthetic appearance.
§ 690-72. Farm markets and special retail sales events.
Farm market activities and special retail sales events are allowed from time
to time as permitted by the Common Council.
§ 690-73. I1 Light industry.
All industrial processing, manufacturing, warehousing and business
operations shall be conducted within enclosed buildings. Off-street parking
of employee, client and business vehicles and off-street shipping and
receiving shall not require screening. Outdoor storage within 100 feet
of a residential district, arterial street or collector street, except for offstreet
parking and loading as described above, shall be screened from
view from the residential district, arterial street or collector street. The
Plan Commission may review and require appropriate enclosure for other
outdoor storage to ensure public health, safety and general welfare and to
maintain desirable aesthetic appearance. Security fencing may be required
if determined by the City to be necessary for public safety. Any equipment
or materials meeting the definition of "junk" shall not be permitted to be
stored outside unless completely enclosed by an opaque fence and is of such
size which does not constitute a junkyard. Storage and handling of garbage,
refuse and waste shall be in compliance with Chapter 518, Solid Waste of
the Code of the City of Reedsburg and shall not create a nuisance.
§ 690-74. I2 Heavy industry.
All industrial processing, manufacturing, warehousing and business
operations shall be conducted within enclosed buildings. Off-street parking
of employee, client and business vehicles and off-street shipping and
receiving shall not require screening. Outdoor storage within 100 feet
of a residential district, arterial street or collector street, except for offstreet
parking and loading as described above, shall be screened from
view from the residential district, arterial street or collector street. The
Plan Commission shall review and require appropriate enclosure for other
outdoor storage to ensure public health, safety and general welfare and to
maintain desirable aesthetic appearance. Security fencing may be required
if determined by the City to be necessary for public safety. Any equipment or
materials meeting the definition of "junk" shall not be permitted to be stored
outside unless completely enclosed by an opaque fence and is of such size
which does not constitute a junkyard unless a junkyard has been approved
as a conditional use. Storage and handling of garbage, refuse and waste
shall be in compliance with Chapter 518, Solid Waste, of the Code of the
City of Reedsburg and shall not create a nuisance.
§ 690-71 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-75
1:736
§ 690-75. Industrial park.
All industrial processing, manufacturing, warehousing and business
operations shall be conducted within enclosed buildings.
A. Off-street parking of employee, client and business vehicles and offstreet
shipping and receiving shall not require screening.
B. All equipment, materials or products stored outside shall be located
behind the building setback line and, if within 100 feet of a residential
district or within view of a street, shall be screened.
C. Any equipment or materials meeting the definition of "junk" shall not be
permitted to be stored outside unless completely enclosed by an opaque
fence and is of such size which does not constitute a junkyard.
D. Storage and handling of garbage, refuse and waste shall be in
compliance with Chapter 518, Solid Waste, of the Code of the City of
Reedsburg and shall not create a nuisance.
§ 690-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-75
1:737

ARTICLE XIX
Performance Standards
§ 690-76. Applicability.
This chapter permits specific uses in specific districts, and these
performance standards are designed to limit, restrict, and prohibit the
effects of those uses outside their premises or district. No structure, land,
or water shall hereafter be used except in compliance with its district
regulations and with the following performance standards.
§ 690-77. Sound.
The volume of sound inherently and recurrently generated shall not exceed
the following standards at any point along the boundaries of the zone in
which the use is located.
A. All noise shall be so muffled or otherwise controlled as not to become
objectionable due to intermittence, duration, beat frequency, impulse
character or shrillness.
B. Maximum sound pressure levels shall be measured with a sound level
meter and associated octave and analyzer conforming to standards
prescribed by the American Standards Association and shall not exceed
the values for octave bands lying with the several frequency limits given
in the following table after the application of appropriate corrections
beyond the property limits.
B Zones and I Zone
Frequency Ranges Containing
Standard Octave Bands in Cycles per
Second
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level in
Decibels
0 to 74 72
75 to 149 67
150 to 299 59
300 to 599 52
600 to 1,199 46
1,200 to 2,399 40
2,400 to 4,800 34
above 4,800 32
Type of Operation or Noise Correction in Decibels
Daytime operation only +5
Noise of impulsive character (e.g.,
hammering)
-5
§ 690-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-77
1:739
§ 690-78. Vibration.
There shall be no operation or activity which would cause groundtransmitted
vibrations at such a level as to be detrimental to or endanger
the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to
property or business.
§ 690-79. Radioactivity.
No operation shall be permitted which causes radioactivity in violation
Title 10, Chapter I, Part 20, Code of Federal Regulations, "Standards for
Protection Against Radiation," dated June 16, 1957, or any subsequent
revisions or amendments.
§ 690-80. Odor.
There shall be no operation or activity that would emit any odorous matter
of such nature or quantity as to be offensive, obnoxious or unhealthful
outside the premises.
§ 690-81. Toxic or noxious matter.
No discharge beyond lot lines of any toxic or noxious matter in such quantity
as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort
or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business shall be
permitted.
§ 690-82. Glare.
There shall be no operation or activity that produces glare of direct
illumination across a property line of an intensity as to be detrimental to
or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare of the public, or
that creates a nuisance or detracts from the use or enjoyment of adjacent
property.
Outside lights must be made up of a light source and reflector so that, acting
together, the light beam is controlled and not directed across a property
line.
§ 690-83. Heat.
There shall be no operation or activity that would cause heat at such a level
as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or
welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business.
Type of Operation or Noise Correction in Decibels
Noise of periodic character (e.g., hum,
screech)
-5
§ 690-77 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-84
1:740
§ 690-84. Air contaminants.
There shall be no operation or activity which would emit smoke, soot,
flash, dust, cinders, dirt, noxious or obnoxious acids, fumes, vapors, toxic
substance, waste, or particulate, solid, liquid or gaseous matter into the
outdoor atmosphere alone or in any combination, in such quantities and
of such duration that would be in violation of current state regulations or
would interfere with the safe and comfortable enjoyment of life in adjacent
properties.
§ 690-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-84
1:741

ARTICLE XX
Reedsburg Airport Height Regulations
§ 690-85. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRPORT — The Reedsburg airport located in the City of Reedsburg, Sauk
County, Wisconsin.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object of natural growth which
obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking
off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off.
HEIGHT — The overall height of the top of a structure, including any
appurtenance installed thereon, or the top of any object of natural growth.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any structure or tree that does not conform to
a regulation prescribed in this chapter or an amendment thereto, as of the
effective date of such regulation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association, or body politic, and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
RUNWAY — A level portion of an airport having a surface specifically
developed and maintained for the landing and takeoff of aircraft.
STRUCTURE — Any object constructed or installed by man.
TREES — Do not include shrubs, bushes or plants that do not grow to a
height of more than 20 feet.
§ 690-86. Height limitation zones.
All zones established by this section are as shown on the following map that
is attached hereto and adopted as part of this chapter: "Height Limitation
Zoning Map, Reedsburg Municipal Airport, Reedsburg, Wisconsin,"34 dated
May 16, 2007, and prepared by the Wisconsin Bureau of Aeronautics (sheet
1 of 1).
§ 690-87. Use restrictions.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be
constructed, altered, located or permitted to remain after such
construction, alteration or location and no trees shall be allowed to grow
to a height in excess of the height limit indicated on the map referred to in
§ 690-86 hereof.
34.Editor's Note: Said Map is on file in the City offices.
§ 690-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-88
1:743
§ 690-88. Exceptions.
Exceptions. The restrictions contained in § 690-87 shall not apply to objects
which are less than 35 feet in height above ground level at the object site
within 1/2 mile of the airport boundary or to structures less than 50 feet
in height above ground within the area beginning 1/2 mile from the airport
boundary and extending to three miles from the airport boundary.
§ 690-89. Nonconforming uses.
§ 690-90. Administration. [Amended 1-25-2010]
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to administer and enforce
the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances
shall be made to the Zoning Administrator upon a form furnished by him.
Applications for action by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be forthwith
transmitted by the Zoning Administrator to the Board for hearing and
decision following a review by the Airport Commission.
§ 690-91. Permits.
A. Not retroactive. The regulations prescribed in Sections §§ 690-86 and
690-87 of this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering or other change or alteration of any nonconforming use, or
otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use,
except as otherwise provided by § 690-91B.
B. Changes. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure if the
construction or alteration of such was begun prior to the effective date
of this chapter and if such is diligently prosecuted.
C. Removal. This section shall not interfere with the removal of
nonconforming uses by purchase or use of eminent domain.
A. Future uses. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected or
installed, or be permitted to remain in any zone created by § 690-86 of
this chapter until the owner or his agent shall have applied, in writing,
for a permit thereof and obtained such permit from the Zoning
Administrator. Said permit shall posted in a prominent place in the
premises prior to and during the period of construction, erection,
installation or establishment. Application for such permit shall indicate
the use for which the permit is desired and shall describe and locate the
use with sufficient particularity to permit the Zoning Administrator to
determine whether such use would conform to the regulations herein
prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the permit applied for. The City shall have the
right to trim, prune or remove at owner's expense any tree which was
planted after adoption of this chapter and found to be in violation of the
height restriction for the zone in which it is located. Permits shall not be
required for:
§ 690-88 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-91
1:744
§ 690-92. Zoning Board of Appeals, appeals and review.
All appeals shall be handled as provided by § 690-12 of this chapter.
§ 690-93. Violations and penalties.
Penalties shall be assessed as provided by Chapter 30, Citations, of the
Code of the City of Reedsburg.
(1) Structures less than 35 feet in height above the ground and within
1/2 mile of the airport boundary;
(2) Structures less than 50 feet in height above the ground within the
area beginning 1/2 mile from the airport boundary and extending to
three miles from the airport boundary; and
(3) Structures within the building limits set forth in the map
referenced in § 690-86, as long as documentation satisfactory to
the Zoning Administrator is provided which demonstrates that the
structure shall not exceed the final elevations authorized by those
maps.
B. Existing uses. Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced,
altered, or rebuilt, a permit shall be applied for and secured in the
manner prescribed by Subsection A authorizing such change,
replacement or repair. No such permit shall be denied if the structure
will not become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the
effective date of this chapter, or than it was when the application for
permit was made. This section shall not apply to any utility poles now
owned or hereafter constructed by the City of Reedsburg Utility as long
as those poles are replaced or repaired so as to be no higher than
originally constructed or subsequently permitted.
§ 690-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-93
1:745

ARTICLE XXI
Signs
[Amended 5-11-2009; 3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 1827-16]
§ 690-94. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the legal framework for a
comprehensive and balanced system of signage. This article will preserve
the right of free speech and expression, provide easy communication
between people and their environment, and avoid excessive levels of visual
clutter or distraction that are potentially harmful to traffic and pedestrian
safety, property values, business opportunities, and community appearance.
With these purposes in mind, it is this article's intent to authorize the use of
signs that are:
§ 690-95. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BANNER — A sign composed on a lightweight or fabric material that may
be secured or mounted on a building or pole(s).
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning or other
fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window,
or outdoor service area, excluding marquees.
ELECTRONIC SIGNS —
FLAG — A usually rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design,
attachable by one edge to a pole or rope.
GOVERNMENT SIGN — A public sign for control of traffic and other
regulatory purposes, danger or caution, public way finding, railroad
crossings, and public utilities.
A. Able to preserve the right of free speech and expression.
B. Compatible with their surroundings.
C. Appropriate for their activity.
D. Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.
E. Unlikely to distract drivers to a dangerous degree.
MULTIPLE-MESSAGE SIGN — A sign whose messages are on
triangular louvered facings and are changed by electronic rotation of
the louvers.
A.
VARIABLE-MESSAGE SIGN — A sign without moving parts whose
message is changed by electronic process through the use of moving or
intermittent light or lights.
B.
§ 690-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-95
1:747
GROUND SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports that is
intended to be permanently placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that
is independent from any building or other structure.
MARQUEE SIGN — A permanent, rooflike structure projecting over an
entrance.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign lawfully in existence that does not
conform to the requirements of this article.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign advertising goods, products, or services
not located or sold on the premises on which the sign is located.
PLAQUE — A sign which is intended to be permanent and is cut into a
masonry surface, inlaid so as to be part of a building, or as an inscribed
tablet usually made of metal or other noncombustible material.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, such as
those transported by means of wheels, excluding such vehicles used in the
day-to-day operations of the business. A portable sign may have changeable
lettering or electronic copy.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the
surface of the building or wall.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign located wholly on and over the roof structure.
SIGN — Any structure that has a display visible from a public right-of-way
and designed to identify, announce, direct or inform.
SIGN HEIGHT — The distance from the base of the sign at normal grade
to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. "Normal grade" is
the existing grade prior to construction or the newly established grade after
construction, not including any filling or mounding solely for the purpose of
locating the sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is used temporarily and not
permanently mounted.
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall,
painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of
an outside wall of, any building or structure which is supported by such wall
or building and which displays only one sign surface.
YARD SIGN — A freestanding ground sign that is intended for temporary
use that is located in a yard as defined in § 690-9.
§ 690-96. Permit/application.
No sign shall hereafter be altered, located, erected, moved, reconstructed,
extended, enlarged, or structurally altered without a permit except as
provided herein. A permit may be required for any sign type not specifically
covered in this chapter and will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the
Zoning Administrator to meet the spirit and intent of this chapter.
§ 690-95 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-97
1:748
§ 690-97. Application for permit.
Application for a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Zoning
Administrator and shall contain the following information:
§ 690-98. Issuance of permit.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator, upon the filing of an
application for a permit to erect a sign, to examine such plans,
specifications and other data submitted to the Zoning Administrator with
the application. If it shall appear that the proposed sign is in compliance
with all the requirements of this article and other laws and ordinances of
the City of Reedsburg, the Zoning Administrator shall then issue a permit
for the erection of the proposed sign or forward to the Plan Commission,
as required. If the sign authorized under any such permit has not been
completed within six months from the date of the issuance of such permit,
the permit shall become null and void.
§ 690-99. Revocation of permit.
No sign, whether new or existing, shall hereafter be erected or altered,
except in conformity with the provisions of the local law. However,
notwithstanding any provisions contained herein, the sign must be kept
clean, neatly painted and free from all hazards, such as, but not limited to,
faulty wiring and loose fastenings, and must be maintained at all times in
such safe condition so as not to be detrimental to the public health of safety.
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. Location of the building, structure, or land to which or upon which the
sign is to be erected.
C. A sketch, drawing or other blueprint showing a description of the
construction details of the sign, position of lighting or other extraneous
devices, a location plan showing the position of the sign on any building
or land, and its position in relation to nearby buildings or structures and
to any private or public street or highway.
D. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land which or
on which the sign is to be erected, in the event the applicant is not the
owner thereof.
E. A copy of any required or necessary electrical permit issued for said
sign or a copy of the application thereof.
F. Fees for permits are per the current City Fee Schedule on file in the
City's offices or available on the City's website. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 690-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-100
1:749
§ 690-100. Violations and penalties.
In the event of a violation of any of the foregoing provisions, the Zoning
Administrator shall give written or personal notice to the named owner of
the sign and the named owner of the land upon which the sign is erected,
sent to the addresses as stated in the application for the sign permit.
The notice shall specify the violation and direct the sign owner and/or
landowner to conform or remove such sign. The sign shall thereupon be
conformed by the owner of the sign and the owner of the land within 30
days from the date of said notice. In the event such sign shall not be so
conformed within 30 days, the Zoning Administrator shall thereupon revoke
the permit and such sign shall be removed by the named owner of the sign
and/or the named owner of the land.
§ 690-101. Exceptions to permit requirement.
The following signs may be located without a permit being issued unless
otherwise required.
A. Banners are permitted in business, government/institutional and
industrial zones, subject to the following:
(1) Size is limited to 32 square feet per banner.
(2) A maximum of three banners per on-premises business.
(3) Additional banners attached to light poles, such as in parking lots,
are limited to one per on-site light pole.
B. Directional and instructional signs intended for on-site traffic control
and safety which do not exceed eight square feet each in area.
C. Interior signs. Located within the interior of any building or structure,
which are not visible from the public right-of-way. This does not,
however, exempt such signs from the structural, electrical, or material
specifications of this chapter.
D. Flags in any zoning district.
E. Government signs in any zoning district or right-of-way.
F. Plaques in any zoning district.
G. Portable reader board signs in B1 and B2 Business Zones, one per
parcel and maximum 32 square feet in size.
H. Temporary window signs shall not be placed on door windows or other
windows which would negatively affect pedestrian safety.
I. Temporary signs.
(1) Temporary signs in B1 Commercial District. Temporary signs not
exceeding 12 square feet per face and having only two faces may
be placed upon the sidewalk in front of the associated business,
§ 690-100 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-101
1:750
§ 690-102. Signage in residential districts.
§ 690-103. Signage in business and industrial districts.
§ 690-104. Electronic signs.
provided that the sign does not obstruct pedestrian traffic and that
the sign is removed during nonbusiness hours.
(2) Temporary signs over a right-of-way. Temporary signs that span a
public right-of-way and are controlled by the City of Reedsburg.
(3) Temporary signs in the downtown right-of-way. Temporary banners
that are attached to public light posts on Main Street from Granite
Avenue to Locust Street and are controlled and approved by the
City of Reedsburg.
(4) Temporary ground or wall signs that comply with the standards of
§ 12.04, Wis. Stats., provided that such signs are not located in the
fifteen-foot vision triangle at a street intersection corner nor over
or in the public right-of-way.
J. Vehicle signs. Signs painted on or attached to a body of a truck, bus,
trailer or other vehicle while operating in the normal course of
business.
K. Yard signs are subject to the following:
(1) A total of 32 square feet for all yard signs in business and industrial
districts.
(2) A total of six square feet for all yard signs in other districts.
A. One ground sign and one wall sign for public, charitable or religious
institutions, not to exceed a combined total of 32 square feet in area.
B. One unlighted ground or wall sign, not to exceed two square feet in
area, shall be permissible on a residential property that contains a
conditional-use-approved, on-site home business.
C. Ground or wall signs in R3 Districts shall not exceed 20 square feet.
A. Except as provided herein, one ground sign is permitted for an
industrial park or shopping center, mall or office complex. The area of
this sign shall not exceed 150 square feet. If a shopping center has
frontage on more than one street, a second ground sign may be
permitted, for a maximum 100 square feet. Wall signs in shopping
centers shall not be more than 200 square feet per business.
B. Except as provided herein, ground signs on outlots may not be larger
than 32 square feet. Wall signs on outlots shall not exceed 200 square
feet per business.
§ 690-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-104
1:751
§ 690-105. Illumination.
§ 690-106. Existing/nonconforming signs.
A. Electronic signs are permitted in the B2 District or otherwise as
approved by the Plan Commission, subject to the following:
(1) Notice shall be given to parties of interest.
(2) The proposed electronic sign shall not create a substantially
negative impact on other properties in the area.
B. Electronic signs, or that portion of the overall sign, shall be a maximum
35 square feet or less, as permitted in this article, per zoning district;
signs with an electronic component of just time and temperature are
exempt from § 690-106.
C. The spacing between electronic signs shall be a minimum 100 feet.
D. Electronic signs may not be located in such a manner as to obscure, or
otherwise physically interfere with the effectiveness of, an official
traffic sign, signal or device; or obstruct or physically interfere with the
driver's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic.
E. No message may be displayed for less than 1/2 of a second.
F. No message may be repeated at intervals of less than two seconds.
G. No traveling message may travel at a rate slower than 16 light columns
per second or faster than 32 columns per second.
H. The louver rotation time to change a message shall be one second or
less and the time a message remains in a fixed position shall be six
seconds or more.
I. No variable-message sign may be illuminated to a degree of brightness
that is greater than necessary for adequate visibility.
J. Electronic signs may be used to advertise activities conducted on the
property on which the signs are located, to promote on- or off-premises
fund drives or events of civic, philanthropic, educational or religious
organizations, or to present public service information.
A. Internally or externally illuminated signs shall be located as to prevent
the light from being cast directly onto adjacent properties.
B. Signs that contain, include or are illuminated by any flashing,
intermittent or moving light or lights which create a hazard to vehicle
or pedestrian traffic are prohibited.
C. External lighting shall be shielded and directed downward so as not to
impair traffic or become a nuisance to adjacent properties.
§ 690-104 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-106
1:752
§ 690-107. Maintenance.
§ 690-108. Prohibited signs.
§ 690-109. Conflict with other provisions.
It is the intention of this chapter to create individual restrictions for
noncommercial speech, whether on or off premises. Noncommercial speech
is intended to be favored over commercial speech. No preference to types of
noncommercial speech is intended. To the extent that this chapter or future
A. No sign presently erected which is altered, damaged or destroyed
beyond 50% of its replacement cost shall be reconstructed, rebuilt, or
relocated unless it complies with all requirements of this article.
B. The only alterations allowed of nonconforming signs are minor repairs
and maintenance to keep it structurally safe and sound assuming the
costs do not exceed 50% of the sign's replacement cost.
C. Any sign that is moved to a new location either on the same or different
parcel shall be considered a new sign and must meet the requirements
of this article.
A. The owner of any sign shall keep it in good maintenance and repair.
B. If the owner of such sign or the owner of the premises on which such
sign is shall fail to comply with the orders of the Zoning Administrator
relative to the painting, repair, alteration, maintenance or removal of
said sign pursuant to written notice thereof and within 14 days after the
notice to said owner:
(1) The costs of such removal of said sign shall be assessed to the
owner of the property upon which said sign is erected and shall be
certified in the proper manner to have them levied as special
charges against such property, and proper officers of the City are
authorized and directed to enter such charges on to the tax roll.
A. Off-premises advertising by billboards, signboards, reader boards and
other advertising signs, signals and displays or devices except as may
be otherwise specifically provided for in this article of the Code.
B. Signs shall not resemble, imitate or approximate the shape, size, form
or color of railroad or traffic signs, signals or devices in order to help
protect traffic control and safety.
C. Signs shall not obstruct or interfere with the effectiveness of railroad or
traffic signs, signals or devices in order to help protect traffic control
and safety.
D. No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic
visibility.
E. Swinging signs that are constructed to not withstand wind pressures.
§ 690-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-109
1:753
amendments to this chapter create such a conflict, this chapter is to be
interpreted such that it will be in conformance with this section.
§ 690-110. Sign standards.
Overall sign standards, except as provided herein.
P — Allowed With Sign Permit
N — Not Allowed
R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 I1 I2 I3 I4 A
C/
RC
Ground
signs
* * * P P P P P P P P P
Other
signs
Canopy N N P P P P P P P N P P
Marquee N N N P P N N N N N N N
Projecting N N P P P P P P P P P P
Roof N N N P P N P P P N N N
Wall * * * P P P P P P P P P
Electronic N N N P P N P P N N N N
Ground Signs — 1 per premises, as permitted
R1 R2 R3 B3 I1 I2 I3 I4 A
C/
RC
Sign
area
(square
feet)
* * * 20 100 100 100 50 20 20
Height
(feet)
6 6 6 6 20 20 20 5 6 6
Front
setback
(feet)
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 15 2 2
Side
setback
(feet)
8 8 8 5 5 5 5 15 10 10
*See § 690-102
§ 690-109 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-110
1:754
Ground Signs — B1, B2
Lanes/Speed
Sign Area
(square feet)
Height
(feet)
Front
Setback
Side
Setback
2/0-34 35 12 2 5
2-3/35+* 35 20 2 5
4-5/0-34 35 12 2 5
4-5/0-34, B2
Zone only*
50 20 2 5
4-5/35-44* 50 20 2 5
4-5/45+* 100 25 2 5
To encourage higher quality of design and increased effectiveness of
graphics, the City seeks to reward this effort through an increase of sign
face area following a review by the Plan Commission. For those zones
marked (*), sign area may increase by up to 50% if constructed of natural
or decorative materials such as wood, logs, stone, brick, etc., or a synthetic
material that matches such appearance; has a front setback at least five
feet; and has a height of 15 feet or less.
§ 690-111. Building sign standards.
Building Signs
(Parcels may include signs from the following categories, as
permitted, up to 200 square feet total; 100 square feet in B3)
Standards Maximum Sign Area
Canopy 1 per business; minimum 30
inches from curblines, 7 feet
above a sidewalk and 15 feet
above a driveway or alley
200 square feet; B3, 100 square
feet
Marquee 1 per business; minimum 3 feet
side setbacks, 30 inches from
curblines, 10 feet above a
sidewalk and 15 feet above a
driveway or alley
100 square feet
Projecting1 per business; project up to 6
feet into public ROW; minimum
5 feet side setbacks, 30 inches
from curblines, 10 feet above a
sidewalk and 15 feet above a
driveway or alley
100 square feet
Roof 1 per business; maximum 10
feet above roof; meet district
height requirements
200 square feet total for all
sides
§ 690-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-111
1:755
Building Signs
(Parcels may include signs from the following categories, as
permitted, up to 200 square feet total; 100 square feet in B3)
Standards Maximum Sign Area
Wall Maximum 3 per business;
maximum 12 inches from
building's wall
200 square feet total; B3, 100
square feet
§ 690-112. Sign type examples.
§ 690-111 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-112
1:756
ARTICLE XXII
Wellhead Protection
[Amended 1-24-2011]
§ 690-113. Purpose.
§ 690-114. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words and terms have the following meanings:
AQUIFER — A saturated, permeable geologic formation that contains and
will yield significant quantities of water.
EXISTING FACILITIES WHICH MAY CAUSE OR THREATEN TO CAUSE
ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION — Existing facilities which may cause or
threaten to cause environmental pollution within the limits of the City's
wellfields' recharge areas, which include but are not limited to those sites
set forth in the contaminant inventory detail which was developed in
conjunction with the preparation of the City's wellhead protection plan and
A. City residents depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking
water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously
threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of this chapter is
to institute land use regulations and restrictions to protect the City's
municipal water supply and to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the City.
B. This article, which may be cited and referred to as the "City of
Reedsburg Wellhead Protection Ordinance," institutes land use
regulations and restrictions in the Groundwater Protection Overlay
District in order to protect the portion of the recharge area for the City
wells that lie within the City's limits. The recharge areas for the City
wells are those land areas which contribute water to the City wells by
infiltration of water into the subsurface and movement with
groundwater toward the wells.
C. It is further intended that the Groundwater Protection Overlay District
shall be operated in conjunction with the regulations governing the
underlying zoning districts and other overlay districts in the subject
area. Uses permitted by such other districts, but subject to the
provisions of this article, may not be undertaken unless they are also
permitted by the terms of this article. In the event of conflicting
standards between the underlying zoning and these groundwater
regulations, the more restrictive will apply. If conditional use permits
are required for both this overlay district and the underlying zoning
district for a proposed use, the processing of the two permits shall be
treated separately under the terms applicable to each district.
D. The boundaries of the Groundwater Protection Overlay District shall be
a 1,200-foot radius around all City wells and incorporated into and
shown on the City of Reedsburg Zoning Map.
§ 690-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-114
1:757
which is adopted by reference, and underground storage tanks which may
affect groundwater.
GROUNDWATER DIVIDE — A ridge in the water table, of the potentiometric
surface, from which groundwater flows away at right angles in both
directions. Line of highest hydraulic head in the water table or
potentiometric surface.
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS — Those lands
shown on the City of Reedsburg Zoning Map.
POWTS — A private on-site wastewater treatment system as defined at Ch.
SPS 381, Wis. Adm. Code.
RECHARGE AREA — An area in which water reaches the zone of saturation
by surface infiltration and encompasses all areas or features that supply
groundwater recharge to a well.
TIME OF TRAVEL — The determined or estimated time required for a
contaminant to move in the saturated zone from a specific point to a well.
WELL FIELD — A piece of land used primarily for the purpose of supplying
a location for construction of wells to supply the municipal water system.
§ 690-115. Principal permitted uses.
Uses within the Groundwater Protection Overlay District must be permitted
uses in the underlying zoning district as well as in this overlay district. The
following are permitted uses within the Groundwater Protection Overlay
District, provided the separation distances set forth in § 690-118 are
maintained.
A. Parks, provided there is no on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank
facilities associated with this use.
B. Playgrounds.
C. Wildlife areas.
D. Nonmotorized trails, such as bike, skiing, nature and fitness trails.
E. Municipally sewered residential development, free of:
(1) Underground storage tanks containing flammable and combustible
liquid; and
(2) Aboveground storage tanks larger than 20 gallons in size,
containing flammable and combustible liquid other than heating oil
or propane.
F. Agricultural uses in accordance with the county land conservation
department's best management practices guidelines.
§ 690-114 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-116
1:758
§ 690-116. Conditional uses.
Although these are conditional uses, the presumption is that these uses
are disfavored and that a conditional use permit will not be granted unless
conditions may be imposed that will ensure to a reasonable degree of
certainty to the City's satisfaction that the groundwater will be protected.
An application for a conditional use permit shall be processed in accordance
with Article VI of this chapter, as supplemented by the terms of this section,
and includes municipally sewered business development, zoned business or
industrial, except for the following uses:
§ 690-117. Prohibited uses.
All uses not expressly identified as "permitted" or "conditional" uses are
prohibited within the Groundwater Protection Overly District. No use
variances shall be granted.
§ 690-118. Separation distances from well.
Uses shall maintain the following minimum separation distances within the
Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
A. Aboveground storage tanks.
B. Asbestos product sales.
C. Automotive service and repair garages; body shops.
D. Blue printing and photocopying services.
E. Car washes.
F. Equipment repair services.
G. Laundromats and diaper services.
H. Dry-cleaning.
I. Gas stations.
J. Holding ponds or lagoons.
K. Infiltration ponds.
L. Nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores.
M. Small engine repair services.
N. Underground storage tanks.
O. Wells; private, production, injection or other.
P. Any other use determined by the Utility or Plan Commission to be
similar in nature to the above-listed items.
§ 690-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-118
1:759
A. Fifty feet between a well and a storm sewer main or a sanitary sewer
main where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main class
materials and joints.
B. Two hundred feet between a well and any sanitary sewer main not
constructed of water main class materials, sanitary sewer manhole, lift
station, one- or two-family residential heating fuel oil underground
storage tank or aboveground storage tank or private on-site wastewater
treatment system (POWTS) treatment tank or holding tank component
and associated piping.
C. Three hundred feet between a well and any farm underground storage
tank system or other underground storage tank system with double wall
and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means
the tank and any piping connected to it. These installations shall meet
the most restrictive installation requirements of § ATCP 93.260, Wis.
Adm. Code, and receive written approval from the Department of Safety
and Professional Services or its designated local program operator
under § ATCP 93.110, Wis. Adm. Code. These requirements apply to
tanks containing gasoline, diesel, biodiesel, ethanol, other alternative
fuel, fuel oil, petroleum products, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant,
waste oil, or hazardous substances.
D. Three hundred feet between a well and any farm aboveground storage
tank with double wall, or single-wall tank with other secondary
containment and under a canopy; other aboveground storage tank
system with double wall, or single-wall tank with secondary
containment and under a canopy and with electronic interstitial
monitoring for a double wall-tank or electronic leakage monitoring for a
single-wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations
shall meet the most restrictive installation requirements of § ATCP
93.260, Wis. Adm. Code, and receive written approval from the
Department of Safety and Professional Services or its designated local
program operator under § ATCP 93.110, Wis. Adm. Code. These
requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, biodiesel,
ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum products, motor fuel,
burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances.
E. Four hundred feet between a well and a POWTS dispersal component
with a design capacity of less than 12,000 gallons per day, a cemetery
or a stormwater retention or detention pond.
F. Six hundred feet between a well and any farm underground storage
tank system or other underground storage tank system with double wall
and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means
the tank and any piping connected to it; any farm aboveground storage
tank with double wall, or single-wall tank with other secondary
containment and under a canopy or other aboveground storage tank
system with double wall, or single-wall tank with secondary
containment and under a canopy; and with electronic interstitial
monitoring for a double-wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring for a
§ 690-118 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-118
1:760
§ 690-119. Conditional use application.
Article VI shall apply to all applications for conditional use permits under
this section except as expressly modified by this section.
single-wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations
shall meet the standard double-wall tank or single-wall tank secondary
containment installation requirements of § ATCP 93.260, Wis. Adm.
Code, and receive written approval from the Department of Safety and
Professional Services or its designated local program operator under
§ ATCP 93.110, Wis. Adm. Code. These requirements apply to tanks
containing gasoline, diesel, biodiesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel,
fuel oil, petroleum products, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste
oil, or hazardous substances.
G. One thousand feet between a well and land application of municipal,
commercial, or industrial waste; the boundaries of a land-spreading
facility for spreading of petroleum-contaminated soil regulated under
state administrative regulations while that facility is in operation;
agricultural, industrial, commercial or municipal wastewater treatment
plant treatment units, lagoons, or storage structures; manure stacks or
storage structures; or a POWTS dispersal component with a design
capacity of 12,000 gallons per day or more.
H. Twelve hundred feet between a well and any solid waste storage,
transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor,
processing, wood-burning, one-time disposal or small demolition
facility; sanitary landfill; coal storage area; salt or deicing material
storage area; any single-wall farm underground storage tank or singlewall
farm aboveground storage tank or other single-wall underground
storage tank or aboveground storage tank that has or has not received
written approval from the Department of Safety and Professional
Services or its designated local program operator under § ATCP 93.110,
Wis. Adm. Code, for a single-wall tank installation. These requirements
apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, biodiesel, ethanol, other
alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel,
lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances, and bulk pesticide or
fertilizer handling or storage facilities.
A. Required application materials. In addition to the application materials
required under Article VI, each application for a conditional use permit
under this section shall include the following, unless waived by the
Utility or Plan Commission:
(1) A statement with supporting evidence showing that the use seeking
the proposed conditional use shall conform to the standards set
forth in Subsection C below.
(2) An operational plan and/or other documentation which describes in
detail the use, activities, and structures proposed.
§ 690-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-119
1:761
(3) An operational safety plan, which details the operational
procedures for material processes and containment, best
management practices, stormwater runoff management, and
groundwater monitoring, as required.
(4) A contingency plan which addresses in detail the actions that will
be taken should a contamination event caused by the proposed use,
activities, or structures occur.
(5) An environmental risk assessment report prepared by a licensed
environmental professional which details the risk to, and potential
impact of, the proposed use, activities, and structures on
groundwater quality.
(6) Additional information deemed necessary to determine and provide
for enforcement of this section may be required.
(7) Prepayment of the required fee.
B. Referral to Utility Commission and Plan Commission. A properly filed
application shall be referred to the Utility Commission for its review
and recommendation, if any, including proposed conditions, to the Plan
Commission. The Plan Commission shall review the application and
make its decision following a hearing as required under Article VI .
C. Standards for conditional use. In addition to the standards for
conditional uses set out in Article VI the Plan Commission shall apply
the following factors:
(1) The City's responsibility as a public water supplier to protect and
preserve the health, safety and welfare of its citizens.
(2) The degree to which the proposed land use practice, activity or
facility may threaten or degrade groundwater quality in the City or
the City's recharge area.
(3) The economic hardship which may be faced by the landowner if the
application is denied.
(4) The availability of alternative options to the applicant, and the cost,
effect and extent of availability of such alternative options.
(5) The proximity of the applicant's property to other potential sources
of contamination.
(6) The then-existing condition of the City's groundwater public water
wells and well fields, and the vulnerability to further
contamination.
(7) The direction of flow of groundwater and other factors in the area
of the applicant's property which may affect the speed of the
groundwater flow, including topography, depth of soil, extent of
aquifer, depth to water table and location of private wells.
§ 690-119 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-119
1:762
(8) Any other hydrogeological data or information which is available
from any public or private agency or organization.
(9) The potential benefit, both economic and social, from the approval
of the applicant's request for a permit.
D. Types of conditions which the Plan Commission may require.
(1) In addition to the conditions and restrictions set out in Article VI,
the Plan Commission may stipulate conditions and restrictions,
including but not limited to the following:
(a) A requirement for periodic environmental and safety sampling,
testing, and reporting to establish the continued protection of
the public water supply. The City may require an application to
install one or more groundwater monitoring well(s) at the
expense of the applicant;
(b) The establishment of safety structures to prevent groundwater
contamination;
(c) The establishment of an operational safety plan to define
processes and procedures for material containment,
operations monitoring, best management practices, and
stormwater runoff management to prevent groundwater
contamination;
(d) Written policies and procedures for reporting and cleaning up
any spill of a hazardous material;
(e) The provision of copies of all federal, state and local facility
operation approval or certificates, and ongoing environmental
monitoring results to the City;
(f) A written agreement pursuant to which the applicant agrees to
be held financially responsible for all environmental cleanup
costs in the event of groundwater contamination;
(g) Bonds and/or securities satisfactory to the City for future
monitoring and cleanup costs if groundwater contamination
occurs in the future;
(2) The foregoing conditions are listed for illustration purposes and are
not exclusive.
E. Payment of costs. The applicant shall be solely and exclusively
responsible for any and all costs associated with the application. The
conditional use will become effective only after any costs incurred by
the City during the conditional use application review process and
billed to the applicant are paid by the applicant. Those costs may
include:
§ 690-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-119
1:763
§ 690-120. Existing nonconforming uses.
Nonconforming uses lawfully in existence within the Groundwater
Protection Overlay District at the adoption of this chapter creating this
district may continue to exist in the form and scope in which they existed
at that time, subject to the provisions of Article VIII. In the event a lawful
nonconforming use poses a direct hazard to the City's public water supply,
the City may take any action permitted by law to abate the hazard.
§ 690-121. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to imply that the City has
accepted any of an owner or operator's liability if a facility or use, whether
permitted as of right or pursuant to a conditional use permit, contaminates
groundwater in any aquifer.
(1) The City's expenses, including consultant's and attorney's fees, if
any, associated with the review at the invoiced amount, plus
administrative costs.
(2) The cost of an environmental impact study, if so required by the
City or its designee.
(3) The cost of groundwater monitoring or groundwater wells, if
required by the City or its designee.
(4) The costs of an appraisal for the property or other property
evaluation expense, if required by the City or its designee.
§ 690-119 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-121
1:764
ARTICLE XXIII
Extraterritorial Zoning District
§ 690-122. Identification and purpose. [Amended 3-22-2004]
The Extraterritorial Zoning District is that area lying outside the City but
within 1 1/2 miles of the City limits, as shown on the map entitled "City of
Reedsburg Official Extraterritorial Zoning Map," dated December 8, 2003;
the purpose of the Extraterritorial District is to provide for proper zoning
and control over said area and allow for the orderly growth and expansion
of the City.
§ 690-123. Accepted uses.
In the Extraterritorial District, no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, except for one of more of the following uses:
§ 690-124. Lot sizes.
In the Extraterritorial District, the minimum area and width of lots shall be
as follows:
A. Existing agricultural uses may continue regardless of extraterritorial
zoning.
B. In a Residential A or RC Zoning District in the extraterritorial region,
farming with stock will be allowed on 40 acres or more.
C. In a Residential A or RC Zoning District in the extraterritorial region,
livestock and animals will be allowed on lots of the size of 1.5 acres or
more with the total population of animals not to exceed one animal unit
per acre. (See § 690-9 for the definition of "animal unit.")
D. Animal shelters, barns, corrals, feedlots, etc. shall be located more than
100 feet from any existing nonfarm residence and greater than 50 feet
from any residential lot line.
A. Lots served by public sanitary sewer shall have the minimum lot size
and width as required by § 690-18, Schedule 1.35
B. Lots not served by public sanitary sewer shall have minimum lot sizes
and widths as follows:
Minimum
District
Percolation
Rate
Minimum Lot
Area Lot Width
R2 0-15 20,000 square feet 100
15-30 35,000 square feet 125
30-45 1 acre 150
35.Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 690-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-124
1:765
Minimum
District
Percolation
Rate
Minimum Lot
Area Lot Width
45-60 1.25 acre 150
R3 N/A 1-acre minimum
for multiple-family
dwellings with 4
or more units.
Minimum lot size
shall be increased
to accommodate
on-site waste
disposal as
required by state
and local code.
Density ratio
maximum is 1
dwelling unit per
2,400 square feet
of lot area.
125
B2 N/A Minimum lot size
shall be large
enough to
accommodate onsite
waste disposal
as required by
state and local
code.
100
I1, I2 and I3 N/A Minimum lot size
shall be large
enough to
accommodate onsite
waste disposal
as required by
state and local
code.
100
A 30-45 1 acre 150
45-60 1.25 acre 150
C N/A N/A N/A
C. The front yard setback along a state or county trunk highway shall be
50 feet from the right-of-way line in all zones. All other setbacks shall
follow the code as required by § 690-18, Schedules 1-5.36
36.Editor's Note: Said schedules are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 690-124 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-125
1:766
§ 690-125. Building permits. [Amended 7-11-2005]
Building permits for all construction in the Extraterritorial District will be
issued by the respective building inspector of the township in which the
project being permitted will take place. The City Zoning Administrator shall
approve a permit as to zoning prior to the issuance of the building permit
by the Township Building Inspector with the exception of nonhabitable
agricultural buildings that the respective town Zoning Administrator shall
approve. Two copies of the permit application shall be submitted to the
City Zoning Administrator. One copy shall be signed as approved or not
approved, as the case may be, by the City Zoning Administrator and
returned to the applicable Town Clerk or Assessor. The City shall retain
one copy for its files. Permits shall only be issued by the Township Building
Inspector if the project is in compliance with this chapter. The City shall
collect the park fee for residential housing units in accordance with Chapter
332, Impact Fees, of the Code of the City of Reedsburg.
§ 690-126. Enforcement.
Enforcement of the extraterritorial zoning district shall be by the City
Zoning Administrator, the same as provided for zoning enforcement within
the City with penalties or violations also the same.
§ 690-127. Conditional uses and variances. [Amended 7-11-2005]
The conditional use provision and variance provisions in Article VI of this
chapter shall apply to the Extraterritorial District, provided that the Joint
Extraterritorial Board of Appeals will be referred all applications for a
variance (as opposed to the City Zoning Board of Appeals) and the Joint
Territorial Commission will be referred all applications for a conditional use
permit (as opposed to the City Plan Commission).
§ 690-128. Amendment of districts.
The Council may amend the districts and regulations after first submitting
the proposed amendment to the Joint Extraterritorial Committee for its
recommendation and report.
§ 690-129. Nonconforming uses.
The nonconforming uses provision in Article VIII of this chapter of the Code
of the City of Reedsburg shall apply to the extraterritorial zoning area.
Any changes in nonconforming uses shall be subject to the nonconforming
uses provision in Article VIII of this chapter, which shall apply to the
extraterritorial zoning area, provided said matter shall be referred to the
Joint Extraterritorial Committee instead of the City Plan Commission.
§ 690-130. Zoning Board of Appeals.
The provisions relating to the Zoning Board of Appeals in § 690-12 of Article
III of this chapter of the Code of the City of Reedsburg shall apply to the
§ 690-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-130
1:767
extraterritorial zoning area, except that the Joint Extraterritorial Board of
Appeals shall have the power and duty to enact the provisions of § 690-12.
§ 690-131. Annexation, effect.
All territory annexed to the City from the extraterritorial zoning area shall
become a part of the City but shall continue to have the same zoning as it
had in the extraterritorial zoning area unless alternative zoning is required
by the Plan Commission and approved by the Council to conform to the
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 690-130 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-131
1:768
ARTICLE XXIV
Comprehensive Plan
§ 690-132. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to § 62.23(2) and (3), Wis. Stats, the City of Reedsburg is
authorized to prepare and adopt a Comprehensive Plan as defined at
§ 66.1001(1)(a) and (2), Wis. Stats.
§ 690-133. Written procedures.
The Common Council of the City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin, adopted written
procedures designed to foster public participation in the stages of the
preparation of a Comprehensive Plan, as required by § 66.1001(4)(a), Wis.
Stats.
§ 690-134. Recommendation of adoption.
The City Plan Commission of the City of Reedsburg, by a majority vote of
the entire Commission, recorded in its official minutes, adopted a resolution
recommending to Common Council the adoption of the document entitled
"Comprehensive Plan of the City of Reedsburg," containing all of the
elements specified in § 66.1001(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 690-135. Compliance with statutory provisions.
The City held a least one public hearing on this chapter, in compliance with
the requirement of § 66.1001(4)(d), Wis. Stats.
§ 690-136. Adoption of Plan.
The Common Council of the City of Reedsburg, Wisconsin, does, by
enactment of this chapter, formally adopt the document entitled
"Comprehensive Plan of the City of Reedsburg," pursuant to
§ 66.1001(4)(C), Wis. Stats.
§ 690-137. Amendment procedures.
A. Applicants seeking to amend the Comprehensive Plan of the City of
Reedsburg must submit a request using the land use change application
form provided by the City Clerk-Treasurer. This must be submitted in
advance of meetings of the City Plan Commission in accordance with
the schedule appended to the application. Applicants shall submit a
proposed map or other description of the change to accurately describe
the amendment and shall provide written justification for the
amendment.
B. If applicable to the extraterritorial zoning area of the City, applications
shall be referred to the Reedsburg Area Development Council for
recommendation prior to consideration by the Plan Commission.
§ 690-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-137
1:769
C. Once approved by the Plan Commission, the application for an
amendment to the Comprehensive Plan shall be considered and
approved by the Common Council prior to the Common Council
considering any related Zoning Map amendments or other land use
changes.
D. For parcels designated under the existing land use area of the
Comprehensive Plan Map, a proposed rezoning does not require a
Comprehensive Plan Map amendment. If the designation differs from
this map and the rezoning is adopted by the Common Council, the Plan
Commission shall note it for when the Comprehensive Plan Map is
officially updated within the ten-year mark of the Plan's adoption. For
parcels under the proposed land use designation, a Comprehensive
Plan Map amendment is not required if, by findings of fact by the Plan
Commission, the proposed rezoning can still meet the intent of the
Comprehensive Plan Map.
E. The City staff shall attempt to notify affected property owners (within
150 feet of the subject property) prior to every meeting of the
Reedsburg Area Development Council, City Plan Commission or
Common Council where the proposed amendment is considered. A
public hearing with a Class 1 notice shall be held by the Common
Council prior to consideration of the proposed amendment. All
amendments shall be handled as ordinances amending the
Comprehensive Plan ordinance.
§ 690-137 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-137
1:770
ARTICLE XXV
Multifamily Residential Real Estate Developments
[Added 2-24-2005]
§ 690-138. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APARTMENT — A residential building, or portion thereof, containing
dwelling units used for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other and containing three or more residential
dwelling units.
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT — A residential real estate development
subject to a condominium declaration pursuant to Chapter 703, Wis. Stats.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (MFRD) — An apartment or
condominium development.
§ 690-139. Approval.
No MFRD may be constructed and maintained unless it is approved
pursuant to this article.
§ 690-140. General requirements.
In addition to standards applicable to regular subdivisions, no MFRD shall
be approved unless the following items have been submitted and approved
by the City:
A. A development plan of the project, including location and sizes of
structures, parking layout, access areas and exterior elevations;
B. A preliminary landscaping plan of the project indicating types and sizes
of landscaping materials and permanent irrigation facilities, prepared
by a person licensed by the state to prepare such plans;
C. A preliminary lighting plan of the project indicating location and nature
of exterior lighting and lighting fixtures in common areas;
D. The proposed condominium documents, including those portions of the
covenants, conditions and restrictions that apply to the conveyance of
units, the assignment of parking and the management of common areas
within the project;
E. Preliminary construction plans of any proposed new buildings. For
existing buildings proposed to be converted, original construction plans
or a set of plans accurately showing existing construction shall be
submitted; and
F. Such other information which the City Engineer determines is
necessary to evaluate the proposed project.
§ 690-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-141
1:771
§ 690-141. Environmental preservation.
The location and orientation of all buildings shall, whenever feasible,
preserve natural features by minimizing the disturbance to the physical
environment. Natural features such as trees, waterways, historic landmarks
or slopes shall be delineated in the development plan and considered when
planning the location and orientation of buildings, open spaces,
underground services, walks, paved areas, play areas, parking areas and
finished grade elevations.
§ 690-142. Landscaping.
The following standards shall be met:
§ 690-143. Lighting.
All on-site lighting systems shall be required on all vehicular accessways
and along major walkways. Such lighting shall be directed onto the
driveways and walkways within the development and away from the
adjacent properties. Lighting shall also be installed within all covered and
enclosed parking areas.
§ 690-144. Lot coverage.
Lot coverage shall conform to this chapter's requirements for the zoning
district in which the MFRD project is proposed.
§ 690-145. Open space, common.
The following requirements shall apply:
A. All setback areas fronting on or visible from an adjacent public street,
and all recreation, leisure and open space areas, shall be landscaped in
accordance with the project plan. Parking lots are allowed in the
setback area if approved by the Plan Commission;
B. Decorative design elements, such as fountains, pools, benches,
sculpture, planters, exterior recreational facilities and similar
elements, may be permitted, providing such elements are incorporated
as a part of the landscaping plan.
A. Minimum grass or vegetated open space for MFRDs shall be 30% of the
parcel being developed.
B. Common open-space areas shall be designed and located within the
project to afford use by all residents of the project. These common
areas may include, but are not limited to, game courts or rooms,
swimming pools, garden roofs, sauna baths, putting greens, or play lots.
C. Active recreation and leisure areas, except those located completely
within a structure, used to meet the open space requirement, shall not
be located within 15 feet of any door or window of a dwelling unit.
§ 690-141 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-145
1:772
§ 690-146. Open space, private.
Notwithstanding the common open space requirement, each unit may
directly access private open space.
§ 690-147. Trash collection areas.
Trash collection areas shall be provided within 250 feet of the units they
are designed to serve. Such areas shall be enclosed within a building or
screened with masonry or wood walls having a minimum height of five feet.
Access gates or doors to any trash area not enclosed within a building are
to be of opaque material.
§ 690-148. Exceptions.
Where there are unusual circumstances involving the location, site, design
or configuration of a proposed MFRD, the Plan Commission may approve
exceptions to one or more of the terms of this chapter. Lack of funds to
comply shall not constitute a reason for an exception.
§ 690-149. Application procedure.
D. Private waterways, including pools, streams and fountains, may be used
to satisfy not more than 50% of the required open space.
E. Short-term bicycle parking shall be provided. Enclosed, long-term
bicycle parking may be included and can be used as part of the 30%
common area requirement. The Plan Commission may also reduce auto
parking spaces based on the proposed long- and short-term bicycle
parking (Article XVI). [Added 12-31-2015 by Ord. No. 1821-16]
A. The developer of an MFRD shall file an application with the Clerk/
Treasurer for approval of the project plan. The Clerk/Treasurer shall
refer the application to the City Engineer and the City Plan
Commission.
B. The application shall be accompanied by 12 copies of the site plan (8.5
inches by 11 inches reduction), written material and other information
required by this section and one 11 inches by 17 inches or larger copy
of the site plan. The application shall contain the elements required by
City Plan Commission policy.
C. An applicant who wishes to change an approved site plan, if such
proposed changes increase density by more than 5% or otherwise
substantially alters parking, principal uses, drainage or similar
principal site plan elements, then such changes shall be reviewed and
decided upon in the same procedures as set forth herein for
consideration of an original application.
D. An application for approval of an MFRD shall be reviewed as a site plan
review under Article VII. [Amended 2-23-2009]
§ 690-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-149
1:773
E. MFRD review fees will be the same as a conditional use permit
application fee established under this chapter.
§ 690-149 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-149
1:774
ARTICLE XXVI
Sexually Oriented Businesses
[Added 10-22-2007]
§ 690-150. Proximity.
§ 690-151. Distance measurements.
For purposes of this section, specified distances shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or streets, from the
property line of the sexually oriented adult business establishment to the
property boundary line of the other specified use or zoning district.
§ 690-152. Building entrances and windows.
All building openings, entries and windows shall be located, covered or
screened in such a manner as to prevent the interior of such premises from
being viewed from the outside of the business establishment.
A. A sexually oriented adult business shall not be located within 600 feet of
a zoning district that allows residential uses.
B. A sexually oriented adult business shall not be located within 600 feet of
another sexually oriented adult business.
C. A sexually oriented adult business shall not be located within 600 feet of
the following:
(1) Public library;
(2) Public playground or park;
(3) Educational facility (K through 12), including its grounds;
(4) A state-licensed family day-care home, group day-care home or
day-care center;
(5) A worship facility; and
(6) Any youth-oriented establishment.
§ 690-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-152
1:775

ARTICLE XXVII
Nonmetallic Mining
§ 690-153. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NONMETALLIC MINING —
NONMETALLIC MINING SITE — Any of the following:
§ 690-154. Sites one acre or greater; secondary standards.
Operations or activities for the extraction from the earth, for sale or
use by the operator of mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals such
as stone, sand, gravel, asbestos, beryl, clay, feldspar, peat, talc, and
topsoil, including such operations or activities as excavation, grading,
and dredging. Exemptions include operations or activities for street or
utility work as well as building and subdivision development sites.
A.
On-site processes that are related to the extraction of mineral
aggregates or nonmetallic minerals, such as stockpiling of materials,
blending mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals, crushing,
screening, scalping and dewatering.
B.
The location, in the Agricultural and Industrial Zoning Districts, where
nonmetallic mining is proposed or conducted.
A.
Storage and processing areas that are in or contiguous to areas
excavated for nonmetallic mining.
B.
C. Areas where nonmetallic mining refuse is deposited.
Areas disturbed by activities such as construction or improvement of
private roads or haulage ways for nonmetallic mining.
D.
Areas where grading or regrading is necessary to conduct nonmetallic
mining or to achieve a land use specified in an approved nonmetallic
mining reclamation site.
E.
A. Application. This section applies to all nonmetallic mining sites that are
any of the following:
(1) Greater than one acre of total affected acreage in the parcel to be
mined; or
(2) Mined for more than 24 months.
B. Permit. Nonmetallic mining sites may be permitted under this article
with the submission of a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI.
The Plan Commission or RADC shall determine if the nonmetallic
mining site is in the public interest after consideration of the following:
§ 690-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-154
1:777
(1) The nonmetallic mining site complies with all provisions of this
chapter and Sauk County Code Chapter 24.
(2) The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special
exception use shall not endanger the public health, safety, or
general welfare, nor impair significant aesthetic, scientific,
educational, or agricultural values.
(3) That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the
conditional use will not substantially affect the existing use of
adjacent properties and will not have a substantial adverse effect
on the most suitable long-term future use for the area.
(4) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, traffic plans, and
other site improvements are or will be provided.
(5) All outdoor lighting shall utilize fully shielded lighting fixtures to
minimize artificial sky glow and prevent light trespass or glare
beyond the property line.
(6) That the nonmetallic mining use shall conform to all government
regulations and standards pertaining to the activity, including air
and water quality standards and stormwater and wastewater
permit discharge requirements.
(7) That the noise, vibration, and dust levels be within the standards as
established by the state.
(8) That an undeveloped buffer zone adjacent to extraction operations,
commencing not less than 50 feet from a property line, or not less
than 600 feet from an established building, or such other distance
as the Plan Commission or RADC finds necessary for the protection
and safety of adjacent properties from mineral extraction sites,
with a stable angle of repose be provided along property lines.
(9) That the reclamation plan, which shall similarly be imposed as a
condition of approval, will be enforceable and, as enforced, will
result in the property being in a final condition which is reasonably
safe, attractive and, if possible, conducive to productive new uses
for the site.
(10) Stormwater runoff leaving the site will be controlled to limit
sediment delivery to surface waters. Appropriate stormwater
discharge or construction site erosion plans may be required.
(11) Nonmetallic mining operations and reclamation shall be conducted
in a manner that does not cause a permanent lowering of the
groundwater table that results in adverse effects on surface waters
or a significant reduction in the quantity of groundwater available
for reasonable use to future users.
§ 690-154 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-154
1:778
C. Additional findings and conditions. Where deemed practicable and
necessary by the Plan Commission or RADC, the following additional
conditions may be added to a special exception:
(1) Vegetative buffers, stockpiles, storage, and repairs shall conform to
§ 690-155. An earth bank, berm, or vegetative screen shall be
constructed and maintained to screen the mining operation from
view.
(2) Safety standards. The nonmetallic mining site shall be enclosed by
a fence, maintained at all times, with warning signs posted no more
than 100 feet apart to indicate the presence of a nonmetallic
mining site. Fencing and signs shall be installed prior to
commencement of operations.
(3) Water from site dewatering and washing operations will meet the
conditions of the required Wisconsin Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (WPDES) permit from DNR.
(4) Any noise shall be kept below 70 dbA as measured at the
nonmetallic mining site's property line during the mine's
operational hours. Backup alarms on vehicles that are required by
OSHA shall be exempt from this requirement. Verification of this
requirement shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator upon
written request.
(5) Any conditions reasonable to protect public health, safety, and
welfare, including the factors listed above, may be imposed as part
of the special exception.
D. Time of operation. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the
conditional use permit shall be in effect for not more than five years and
may be renewed by application to the Plan Commission or RADC. All
permitted operations may be inspected at least once every year by the
Zoning Administrator, and may be inspected at the time a request for
renewal is submitted to the Zoning Administrator to determine if all
conditions of the operation are being complied with. Renewed permits
shall be modified to be in compliance with all state, county, and local
law. Permits may be amended on application to the Plan Commission or
RADC to allow extensions or alterations in operations under new
ownerships or managements.
E. Termination of nonmetallic mining activities. If nonmetallic mining
activities terminate for a period of five years or more on a site which is
the subject of an approved conditional use permit, the permit holder is
not entitled to a right of renewal at the end of the permit period, despite
compliance of former operations with all conditions of the original
permit, unless:
(1) The discontinuance was specified as part of the original operations
plan.
§ 690-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-154
1:779
§ 690-155. Sites less than one acre, not exceeding 24 months;
secondary standards.
(2) The operator has Plan Commission or RADC approval of an
amendment to the original permit, placing the operation on
inactive status with conditions as to interim or partial reclamation.
(3) Within two years of the cessation of the operation, all equipment,
stockpiles, rubble heaps, other debris and temporary structures,
except fences, shall be removed or backfilled into the excavation,
leaving the premises in a neat and orderly condition.
(4) As a condition of approval, the operator shall accept responsibility
for remediation, or the permit may be revoked.
F. Stockpiling. Stockpiling of any nonmetallic mineral, including stone,
sand, gravel, clay, and topsoil, shall not be permitted beyond final
reclamation.
A. Permit. Nonmetallic mining sites of one acre or less may be permitted
under this section with the submission of a conditional use permit
pursuant to Article VI. The Plan Commission or RADC shall determine if
the nonmetallic mining site is in the public interest after consideration
of the following, provided the nonmetallic mining site complies with all
provisions of this chapter and Sauk County Code Chapter 24. These
requirements include the requirement for financial assurance and a
reclamation plan under Sauk County Code Chapter 24.
B. Time of operation. Nonmetallic mining sites permitted under this
section shall not exceed 24 months of operation, calculated from the
date the land use permit is issued and concluding upon the completion
of final reclamation. If a nonmetallic mining site exceeds 24 months of
operation, it shall be reviewed under the standards of § 690-154.
C. Number. Multiple locations for extraction may be located on a single
parcel, provided that the total of all locations combined not exceed 15
acres.
D. Occurrence. Nonmetallic mining sites under this article shall not be
permitted to occur on a parcel more than once in any three-year period,
calculated on the date that the land use permit was issued by the
Zoning Administrator.
E. Length of operation. Nonmetallic mining sites under this article cannot
be extended in duration.
F. Stockpiling. Stockpiling of any nonmetallic mineral, including stone,
sand, gravel, clay and topsoil, shall not be permitted beyond final
reclamation.
G. Material storage. All materials used in conjunction with the facility shall
be stored inside.
§ 690-154 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-155
1:780
§ 690-156. Review procedure, standards, and application.
The application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by the
following information:
H. Vegetative buffer. All vehicle repair and maintenance facilities located
in nonindustrial zones shall include a vegetative buffer.
A. Ownership and management data. The location of the proposed site of
operation, legal description, ownership of the land, leasehold, license
and other property interests, and the identity of all individuals,
partnerships, associations, or corporations which are involved of the
proposed operation.
B. Site plan. Provide a scaled site plan, indicating:
(1) Date, North arrow, and graphic scale.
(2) Location of property lines, rights-of-way, easements, and
watercourses.
(3) Roads, driveways, and intersections.
(4) Outlines of all buildings, setbacks, and dimensions.
(5) Means of vehicular access.
(6) Schematic of drainage system.
(7) Complete site erosion control plan and finished grade plan.
(8) Proposed location, acreage, and depth of intended operation.
(9) Proposed location of mineral extraction site, waste dumps, tailing
ponds, sediment basins, stockpiles, structures, roads, railroad
lines, utilities, or other permanent or temporary facilities used in
the mining process.
(10) Surface drainage of the property.
(11) Location and names of all streams, roads, railroads, utility lines,
and pipelines on or adjacent to the proposed site.
(12) Location and description of the surface land use and vegetation,
including all pertinent physical characteristics of the extraction
site, and adjacent properties, including agricultural,
archaeological, historical, and educational features.
(13) Any additional information as requested by the Zoning
Administrator or Committee.
C. Operations plan. The operations plan shall address the following
factors:
§ 690-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-156
1:781
§ 690-157. Reclamation plan.
The reclamation plan and financial assurance shall be provided to Sauk
County as pursuant to § NR 135, Wis. Adm. Code, and Sauk County Code
Chapter 24. Sauk County may require the submittal of additional
information as may be necessary to determine the nature of the mining
operation and proposed reclamation.
§ 690-158. Groundwater maintenance and management plan.
For sites with planned excavation lower than the groundwater table, the
operator shall submit a detailed hydrogeological report. The operator shall
be required to reimburse the City for the expense of professional work or
opinions in review of a hydrogeological report if recommended by staff or
the Plan Commission or RADC. The hydrogeological report shall provide
the following information, as well as a description and justification of all
hydrologic methods used:
(1) A timetable for the commencement and cessation of mining
operations, and, if seasonal operations are intended, the months of
operation shall be identified.
(2) Estimated quantity in tons per year to be extracted, specified by
phase.
(3) The anticipated number of years of operation.
(4) A description of the extraction and processing procedures, phasing,
and equipment to be used.
(5) A description of operating hours, days of operation, blasting and
crushing hours, and hauling hours.
(6) Proposed plan shall include the effect and mitigation measures of
the operation on the quality and quantity of groundwater.
(7) A description of the measures to be taken to control dust, noise,
and vibration.
(8) The proposed mode of transport and the route used to move
materials.
(9) Proposed earth bank, berm or vegetative screening, where deemed
practicable to conceal the mining operation from view.
(10) A description of on-site safety measures, including fencing and
signage.
A. Existing conditions to establish baseline data, including, but not limited
to:
(1) Analysis of groundwater quality on the mining site consistent with
§ NR 140.20, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 690-156 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-158
1:782
(2) Identification of all known contaminated groundwater resources
within 1/2 mile of the mining site.
(3) Identification of all karst features, such as sinkholes, stream sinks,
springs, caves, joints, or fractures, within 1/2 mile of the mining
site.
(4) Identification and elevation of all surface waters and headwaters
within a minimum of 1/2 mile of the mining site. Elevations must
include the existing water level, as well as the ordinary high-water
mark where applicable.
(5) Identification of all existing groundwater users (such as
neighboring private water-supply wells, wellhead protection areas,
municipal wells, and irrigation wells) within 1,200 feet of the
mining site consistent with Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code. Well
construction reports, including well location, well depth, depth of
casing, depth to water, and aquifers penetrated, shall be identified.
(6) Elevation of the groundwater table, groundwater flow directions,
and groundwater velocities.
(7) All information in Subsection A(1) to (6) above shall be presented in
the form of contour maps and multiple geologic cross-sections
passing through the proposed excavation and all areas of concern.
B. Proposed operational data, including, but not limited to:
(1) Elevation of the lowest point of mining and dewatering activities
below groundwater.
(2) Description of the means planned to prevent surface water running
into the excavation.
(3) Where dewatering is proposed, provide pumping rates and times,
elevations of the groundwater drawdown level, and identification of
groundwater discharge locations and quantities.
(4) A groundwater monitoring program to ensure compliance with
Subsections A and B of this section. Such program should include
the installation of monitoring wells near the site perimeter of the
proposed area of excavation to measure groundwater elevations,
quality, flow directions, and velocities.
C. The Plan Commission or RADC may require the applicant to provide
additional relevant hydrogeological studies, such as groundwater
modeling, if any of the following apply:
(1) Dewatering is proposed at the mining site.
(2) Known contaminated groundwater resources exist within 1/2 mile
of the mining site.
§ 690-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 690-158
1:783
(3) Known karst features, such as sinkholes, stream sinks, springs,
caves, joints, or fractures, exist within 1/2 mile of the mining site.
(4) Exceptional, outstanding, or impaired waters listed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under the Clean Water
Act § 303d37 exist within 1/2 mile of the mining site.
(5) Existing wells using the same or a shallower aquifer exist within
1,200 feet of the mining site.
D. If groundwater modeling is required, the following minimum
information shall be provided:
(1) Description and justification of all input data to groundwater
models.
(2) Calibration of all groundwater models.
(3) Sensitivity analysis for all groundwater models.
(4) Detailed output from the hydrologic methods, including the
elevation of the water, elevation of the cone of depression caused
by dewatering, groundwater flow directions, groundwater
velocities, mounding elevations, and any potential effects on
nearby surface water, springs, or users of surface water and
groundwater.
(5) Description of the possible existence of fractures or solution
cavities in the geologic material and their effect on groundwater
flow and land stability.
37.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1313(d).
§ 690-158 REEDSBURG CODE § 690-158
1:784
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of Former Municipal Codebook to 2019
Code
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title from Former Municipal
Codebook
Location in 2018 Code
Ch. 1, General Government
1.01, Form of Government Ch. 9
1A.01-1A.04, Office of City Administrator Ch. 115, Art. I
1.02, Mayor Ch. 104, Art. I
1.03, Aldermen Ch. 104, Art. II
1.04, City Wards Ch. 9
1.05, Appointed City Officials Ch. 115, Art. II
1.06, Comptroller Ch. 115, Art. II
1.07, Bonds Ch. 115, Art. II
1.08, Office of Chief of Police Established Ch. 124, Art I
1.09, City Hall Office Hours Ch. 9
1.101, Board of Review Ch. 21, Art. I
1.102, Community Development Authority Ch. 21, Art. II
1.103, Utility Commission Ch. 21, Art. III
1.104, City Planning Commission Ch. 21, Art. IV
1.105, Industrial Development Commission Ch. 21, Art. V
1.106, Airport Commission Ch. 21, Art. VI
1.107, Police and Fire Commission Ch. 21, Art. VII
1.108, Library Board Ch. 21, Art. VIII
1.109, Room Tax Commission Ch. 21, Art. IX
1.110, Special/Advisory Bodies Ch. 21, Art. X
1.111, Public Construction Without Bids Ch. 9
1.112, Reserved for Future Use Omitted
1.113, Gift and Gratuity Ch. 115, Art. III
§ 690-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:785
Chapter/Title from Former Municipal
Codebook
Location in 2018 Code
1.114, Public Records Ch. 138, Art. II
1.115, Fair and Open Housing Ch. 63
1.116, Attendance at Closed Sessions Ch. 115, Art. IV
1.17, Regulation of Alarm Systems Ch. 192
1.18, Reserved for Future Use Omitted
1.19, Reserved for Future Use Omitted
1.20, City of Reedsburg Code of Ethics Ch. 55
Ch. 2, The Governing Body
2.01-2.06, Common Council Committees Ch. 104, Art. III
2.07, Council Meetings and Rules Ch. 104, Art. IV
Ch. 3, Finance and Taxation
3.01 - 3.05, 3.07-3.09, Finance and Taxation Ch. 72
3.06, Destruction of Records Ch. 138, Art. I
3.10, Water Utility Impact Fees / Impact
Fees for Capital Projects
Ch. 332
Ch. 4, Police Department Ch. 124, Art. II
Ch. 5, Fire Department
5.01 - 5.06, 5.16, Fire Department; Rescue
Fund
Ch. 79
5.07-5.15, Regulations Ch. 290, Art. I
Ch. 6, Civil Defense Ch. 48
Ch. 7, Traffic Code
7.01-7.18, 7.21-7.24, 7.26-7.33, 7.35,
Regulations
Ch. 615
7.19, Number not used Omitted
7.20, Bicycles Ch. 224
7.25, Snowmobiles Ch. 509
7.34, All-Terrain Vehicles Superseded by Ord. No.
1822-16; see Ch. 608
Ch. 8, Streets and Sidewalks
8.01, Official Map Ch. 537, Art. I
8.02, Street and Sidewalk Grades Ch. 537, Art. II
8.03, Excavations Ch. 537, Art. III
8.04, Sidewalk Construction and Repair Ch. 537, Art. IV
§ DT-1 REEDSBURG CODE § DT-1
1:786
Chapter/Title from Former Municipal
Codebook
Location in 2018 Code
8.05, Curb and Gutter Construction Ch. 537, Art. IV
8.06, Obstructions and Encroachments Ch. 537, Art. V
8.07, Snow and Ice Control Ch. 537, Art. VI
8.08, Coasting Prohibited Ch. 537, Art. VII
8.09, Trees and Shrubs Ch. 584
8.10, Penalty Ch. 537, Art. VIII
Ch. 9, Orderly Conduct
9.01, General Provisions Ch. 434
9.02, Offenses Against Bodily Security Ch. 434
9.03, Offenses Against Public Safety and
Welfare
9.03(1) Ch. 434
9.03(2) and (3), Firearms, Throwing Stones
and Other Objects
Ch. 282
9.03(4), Fireworks Ch. 297
9.03(5), Blasting Ch. 231
9.04, Offenses Against Public and Private
Property:
9.04(1), (2), (4), (5), (6) Ch. 434
9.04(3), Littering Ch. 374
9.05, Offenses Against Public Peace, Good
Order and Other Public Interest:
9.05(1), (2), (4), (6)-(9), (11)-(21), (24), (25),
Peace and Good Order
Ch. 434
9.05(3) and (5), Alcohol Offenses Ch. 382, Art. III
9.05(10), Curfew Ch. 382, Art. I
9.05(22), Parks and Playgrounds Ch. 423
9.05(23), Number Not Used Omitted
9.06, Truancy Ch. 382, Art. II
9.07, General Penalty Provision Ch. 434
9.08, Reserved for Future Use Omitted
9.09, Reserved for Future Use Omitted
9.10, Bond Schedules Ch. 434
Ch. 10, Public Nuisances
10.01, Public Nuisances Prohibited Ch. 402
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:787
Chapter/Title from Former Municipal
Codebook
Location in 2018 Code
10.02, Public Nuisance Defined Ch. 402
10.03, Public Nuisances Affecting Health
10.03(1)-(11), Nuisances Ch. 402
10.03(12), Abandoned Vehicles Repealed by Ord. No.
1879-18
10.03A, Commercial and Industrial Property
Maintenance
Ch. 452, Art. I
10.04, Public Nuisances Offending Morals
and Decency
Ch. 402
10.05, Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and
Safety
Ch. 402
10.06, Dutch Elm Disease and Elm Bark
Beetles Declared Public Nuisances
REP
10.07-10.09, Abatement of Public Nuisances Ch. 402
10.10, Chronic Nuisances Ch. 452, Art. II
Ch. 11, Health and Sanitation
11.01, Health Officer: Duties and Powers Ch. 315
11.02, Rules and Regulations Ch. 315
11.03, Health Nuisances: Abatement of Ch. 315
11.04, Communicable Diseases Ch. 315
11.05, Regulation of Nuisance -Type
Businesses
Ch. 315
11.06 Reserved for Future Use Omitted
11.07, Introduction of Fluorine into the
City's Water System
Ch. 315
11.08, Littering Prohibited Repealed by Ord. No.
1878-18
11.09, Garbage, Recycling and Refuse:
Collection of
Ch. 518
11.10, 11.11, 11.12 Repealed 3-25-2002
11.13, Debris, Junk: Order to Remove and
Penalties
Ch. 452, Art. III
11.14, Abandonment of Vehicles Repealed by Ord. No.
1879-18; see now Ch. 402
11.15, Sewer and Water: Compulsory
Connection to
Ch. 315
11.16, Private Well Abandonment Ch. 628
§ DT-1 REEDSBURG CODE § DT-1
1:788
Chapter/Title from Former Municipal
Codebook
Location in 2018 Code
11.17, Use of Tobacco Products Prohibited Ch. 315
11.18, Reserved for Future Use Omitted
11.19, Reserved for Future Use Omitted
11.20, Penalty Ch. 315
Ch. 12, Licenses and Permits
12.01, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented
Malt Beverages
Ch. 349
12.015, Improper Exhibitions Ch. 349
12.017, Revocation & Suspension of
Licenses
Ch. 349
12.02, Transient Merchants Ch. 577
12.025, Garage Sales Ch. 306
12.03, Cigarette Retailer License Ch. 366, Art. I
12.04, Dances and Dance Halls Ch. 199, Art. I
12.05, Amusements and Shows Ch. 199, Art. II
12.06, Amusement Games Ch. 199, Art. III
12.07, Golf, Miniature Ch. 199, Art. IV
12.08, Tattoo Establishments Ch. 366, Art. II
12.09, Pool Halls, Billiard Halls, Etc. Ch. 199, Art. V
12.10, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home
Parks
Ch. 390
12.11, Taxicabs and Drivers Ch. 548, Art. I
12.12, Natural Gas Franchise NI
12.13, Weights and Measures Regulation Ch. 366, Art. III
12.14, Garbage and Refuse; Licensing and
Regulation of Collector
REP
12.15, Electrical Inspector Repealed by Ord. No.
1816-15
12.16-12.17, Penalty and Revocation of
License
Ch. 366, Art. IV
Ch. 13, Municipal Utilities Ch. 493
Ch. 14, Building Code
14.01 - 14.26 Ch. 242
14.27, Street Numbers Required Ch. 452, Art. IV
Ch. 15, Electrical Code REP
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:789
Chapter/Title from Former Municipal
Codebook
Location in 2018 Code
Ch. 16, Plumbing Code Ch. 441
Ch. 17, Zoning Ch. 690
Ch. 18, Subdivision and Platting Ch. 674
Ch. 19, Large Group Assemblies Ch. 217
Ch. 20, Cable Television REP
Ch. 21, Airport Commission Ch. 21, Art. VI
Ch. 22, Reedsburg Municipal Airport
Minimum Standards
Superseded by Ord. No.
1836-16; see now Ch. 185
Ch. 23, Floodplain Zoning Ch. 650
Ch. 24, Extraterritorial Zoning NI
Ch. 25, Construction and Effect of Ordinances
25.01, 25.03, 25.04, 25.08 Ch. 1, Art. I
25.02, 25.05-25.07 NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 26, Fire Limits in the City of Reedsburg Ch. 290, Art. II
Ch. 27, Enforcement by Citation Ch. 30
Ch. 28, Bird Sanctuary Ch. 210, Art. III
Ch. 29, Regulation and Control of Animals
29.01-29.22, 29.24 Ch. 210, Art. I
29.23, Feeding Wild Animals Ch. 210, Art. II
Ch. 30, Taxicab Services Ch. 548, Art. II
Ch. 31, Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Ordinance Ch. 665
Ch. 32, Fees REP
Ch. 33, Historic Preservation Ch. 324
Ch. 34, Parades & Special Events Ch. 415
Ch. 35, Storm Water Management and
Erosion Control
Ch. 530
Ch. 36, Municipal Court Superseded by Ord. No.
1835-16; see now Ch. 37
Ch. 37, Adult-Oriented Business Ch. 176
Ch. 38, Sexual Offender Residency
Requirements
Ch. 501
Ch. 39, Regulation of Secondhand Dealers Ch. 485
Ch. 40, Regulation of Storm Water Utility Ch. 147
Ch. 41, Towing Ch. 565
§ DT-1 REEDSBURG CODE § DT-1
1:790
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1814-15 9-14-2015 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 615
1815-15 9-28-2015 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1816-15 9-28-2015 Mobile Homes and Mobile Home
Parks Amendment; Electrical
Inspector Repealer
Ch. 390
1817-15 10-26-2015 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1818-15 10-26-2015 Intoxicating Liquor and
Fermented Malt Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 349
1819-15 11-23-2015 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1820-16 1-11-2016 Subdivision of Land Amendment Ch. 674
1821-16 1-11-2016 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1822-16 1-11-2016 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1823-16 1-25-2016 Intoxicating Liquor and
Fermented Malt Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 349
1824-16 1-25-2016 Parades and Special Events
Amendment
Ch. 415
1825-16 2-22-2016 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1826-16 2-22-2016 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1827-16 3-28-2016 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1829-16 5-23-2016 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1830-16 5-23-2016 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1831-16 6-13-2016 Annexation NCM
1832-16 6-27-2016 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1833-16 6-27-2016 Vehicles, All-Terrain Amendment Ch. 608
1834-16 7-25-2016 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 615
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:791
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1835-16 6-27-2016 Court, Municipal Amendment Ch. 37
1836-16 10-24-2016 Airport Minimum Standards Ch. 185
1837-16 11-28-2016 Tourist Rooming Houses Ch. 556
1838-16 10-24-2016 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1839-17 2-27-2017 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 434
1840-17 Apr 2017 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and Authority:
Airport Commission Amendment
Ch. 21, Art. VI
1841-17 5-8-2017 Rights-Of-Way Ch. 478
1842-17 6-26-2017 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and Authority: Utility
Commission
Ch. 21, Art. III
1843-17 6-26-2017 Construction Codes Amendment Ch. 242
1844-17 6-12-2017 Intoxicating Liquor and
Fermented Malt Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 349
1845-17 6-12-2017 Intoxicating Liquor and
Fermented Malt Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 349
1846-17 Not adopted
1847-17 7-10-2017 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 615
1848-17 7-10-2017 Mayor and Council Ch. 104
1849-17 Mayor and Council Amendment Ch. 104, Art. IV
1850-17 8-28-2017 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1851-17 10-23-2017 Mayor and Council: Council
Meetings and Rules of Procedure
Amendment
Ch. 104, Art. IV
1852-17 10-23-2017 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and Authority:
Airport Commission Amendment;
Mayor and Council: Common
Council Committees Amendment
Ch. 21, Art. VI;
Ch. 104, Art. III
1853-18 1-8-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1854-17 11-27-2017 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1855-17 11-27-2017 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1857-18 1-8-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
§ DL-1 REEDSBURG CODE § DL-1
1:792
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1858-18 2-12-2018 Mayor and Council: Common
Council Committees Amendment
Ch. 104, Art. III
1859-18 2-12-2018 Parks and Playgrounds
Amendment
Ch. 423
1860-18 2-26-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1861-18 2-26-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1862-18 2-26-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1863-18 2-12-2018 Impact Fees Amendment Ch. 332
1864-18 3-26-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1865-18 3-26-2018 Parades and Special Events
Amendment
Ch. 415
1866-18 4-9-2018 Annexation NCM
1867-18 4-23-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1868-18 5-14-2018 Minors: Alcohol and Tobacco
Offenses Amendment
Ch. 382, Art. III
1870-18 5-14-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1871-18 5-14-2018 Police Department: Composition
of Department; Powers and
Duties Amendment
Ch. 124, Art. II
1872-18 6-11-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1873-18 7-9-2018 Court, Municipal Amendment Ch. 37
1874-18 7-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 615
1875-18 7-23-2018 Animals: Protection, Licensing
and Control Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 210, Art. I;
Ch. 690
1876-18 7-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1877-18 7-23-2018 Intoxicating Liquor and
Fermented Malt Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 349
1878-18 7-23-2018 Health and Sanitation
Amendment
Ch. 315
1879-18 7-23-2018 Nuisances Amendment Ch. 402
1880-18 7-23-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 615
1883-19 3-25-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1884-19 3-25-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1885-19 4-22-2019 Annexation NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:793
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1886-19 7-8-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690
1887-19 8-12-2019 Mayor and Council: Council
Meetings and Rules of Procedure
Amendment
Ch. 104, Art. IV
1888-19 8-26-2019 General Provisions: Adoption of
Code
Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
1889-19 11-11-2019 Vehicles, All-Terrain
Amendment
Ch. 608 2
1890-19 9-9-2019 Emergency
Government
Amendment
Ch. 48 2
1891-19 9-9-2019 Impact Fees
Amendment
Ch. 332 2
1892-19 10-28-2019 Airport Minimum
Standards
Amendment
Ch. 185 2
1893-19 11-25-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690 2
1894-19 11-25-2019 Annexation NCM 2
1895-19 11-11-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 690 2
1896-19 11-25-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 2
1897-19 11-11-2019 Health and
Sanitation
Amendment
Ch. 315 2
§ DL-1 REEDSBURG CODE § DL-1
1:794