CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SPARTA, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: March 21, 2018 
Effective: March 21, 2018 
____________ 

> 
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Ronald Button 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jim Church, Alderman, 1st District 
Kevin Brueggeman, Alderman, 2nd District 
Mary VonRuden, Alderman, 3rd District 
Norman G. Stanek, Alderman, 4th District 
Alli Karrels, Alderman, 5th District 
Ed Lukasek, Alderman, 6th District 
Josh Lydon, Alderman, 7th District 
Kevin Riley, Alderman, 8th District 
City Council 
____________ 
James Hellman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Julie Hanson 
City Clerk 
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Ronald Button 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jim Church, Alderman, 1st District 
Kevin Brueggeman, Alderman, 2nd District 
Bruce Humphrey, Alderman, 3rd District 
Norman G. Stanek, Alderman, 4th District 
Alli Karrels, Alderman, 5th District 
Ed Lukasek, Alderman, 6th District 
Josh Lydon, Alderman, 7th District 
Kevin Riley, Alderman, 8th District 
City Council 
____________ 
James Hellman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Julie Hanson 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Sparta, Wisconsin. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the city's prior code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Jean B. Lindsay, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Todd Fahning, City Administrator, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sparta, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sparta, Wisconsin. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sparta, Wisconsin, 2017. 
ORDINANCE NO. 941 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF SPARTA, WISCONSIN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Sparta, Wisconsin," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 26, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 18, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine in the maximum amounts permitted or required by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 18, 2017, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon its passage and publication as provided by law. 
Dated this 21 st day of March, 2018.   
  ;sigr; Ronald Button\Mayor   
  ;b0;ATTEST: 
/s/ Julie Hanson 
      City Clerk     
  
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council, held on the 21 st day of March, 2018.   
  
/s/ Julie Hanson 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    Adding to this table with each supplement helps users of this Code of Ordinances gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Legislation Include/Omit Supp. No. Amd. No. 33 Included 1 Ord. No. 937 Included 1 Ord. No. 938 Included 1 Ord. No. 939 Included 1 Ord. No. 940 Omitted 1 Ord. No. 941 Included 1 Ord. No. 942 Included 1 Ord. No. 943 Included 1 Ord. No. 944 Omitted 1 Ord. No. 945 Omitted 1 Ord. No. 946 Included 1  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - Form of government. 
    The city shall be organized and governed under the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 62 known as mayor-alderperson plan. 
(Prior Code, § 1.01) 
Secs. 1-2-1-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 1-21. - Elected officials. 
    Elected officials of the city shall be a mayor, one alderperson from each aldermanic district, and a municipal judge. The office of constable is dispensed with pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(b). 
(Prior Code, § 1.02) 
State Law reference- Municipal officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 
Sec. 1-22. - Appointed officials. 
    The following shall be appointed officials: 
Official How Appointed Term, Expiration Assessor City council Two years, even numbered Building inspector Mayor, subject to confirmation by council Two years, even numbered Police chief Police and fire commission Indefinite City attorney City council One year City clerk City council Indefinite City comptroller City council Two years, odd numbered City forester Mayor, subject to confirmation by council One year Parks and recreation director City council Indefinite Public works director City council Indefinite Electrical inspector Mayor, subject to confirmation by council Two years, even-numbered Fire district trustee City council member, from public safety committee Three Years Plumbing inspector Mayor, subject to confirmation by council Two years, even-numbered Safety inspector Mayor, subject to confirmation by council One year Sanitation superintendent City council One year Treasurer City council Two years, even-numbered Deputy treasurer City council Two years, even-numbered Water department superintendent City council Indefinite Weed commissioner Mayor, subject to confirmation by council One year Zoning administrator Mayor, subject to confirmation by council One year  
(Prior Code, § 1.03) 
Sec. 1-23. - Terms of mayor and alderpersons. 
(a)  Mayor. The mayor shall be elected for a term of three years. 
(b)  Alderpersons. One alderperson shall be elected for a two-year term in even numbered years in aldermanic districts 1, 3, 5 and 7. One alderperson shall be elected for a two-year term in odd numbered years in aldermanic districts 2, 4, 6 and 8. 
(c)  Municipal judge. The municipal judge shall be elected to a four-year term in even numbered years. 
The regular term of office of the mayor and alderperson shall commence on the third Tuesday of April succeeding their election. The regular term of all other elected and appointed officials shall commence on May 1, following their election or appointment, except officers appointed for indefinite terms who shall take office upon appointment and qualification. 
(Prior Code, § 1.04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 
Sec. 1-24. - Qualifying. 
(a)  Oath. Every person elected or appointed to an office shall take and file the oath within ten days after notice of his election or appointment. 
(b)  Certificate of appointment. When and appointive official has filed the oath and bond as required, the clerk shall issue to him a certificate of appointment. If the appointment is to a board of commission, the appointee shall file the certificate with the secretary thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 1.05) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 
Sec. 1-25. - Removals. 
    Elected officers may be removed by recall as provided in Wis. Stats. § 9.10 or by the city council for cause pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 17.12(1)(d) and 17.16. Appointed officers may be removed as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.12(1)(c) and (d) and 17.16 except as provided otherwise by charter ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 1.06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 17.12. 
Sec. 1-26. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies in elected or appointed positions are caused as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.03 and 17.03(5). Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.23. 
(Prior Code, § 1.07) 
State Law reference- How vacancies are caused, Wis. Stats. § 17.03; how vacancies are filled, Wis. Stats. § 17.23. 
Sec. 1-27. - Salaries. 
(a)  Any alderperson elected after January 1, 2011, shall receive a salary of $300.00 per month. All other alderpersons shall receive a salary of $275.00 per month. In addition, any mayor or alderpersons elected after January 1, 1981, shall receive $10.00 for each special meeting of the city council attended in addition to the regular monthly meeting. The term "special meeting" shall include a reconvened session of an adjourned regular monthly council meeting. 
(b)  Salaries of all other city officers and employees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council in accordance with law. 
(Prior Code, § 1.08) 
State Law reference- Salaries of officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09; compensation of governing bodies, Wis. Stats. § 66.0505. 
Sec. 1-28. - Retirement. 
    All eligible city personnel are included under the state retirement fund. 
(Prior Code, §§ 1.09, 1.56) 
Secs. 1-29-1-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC OFFICERS 

Sec. 1-60. - Mayor. 
(a)  Chief executive officer. The mayor shall be the chief executive officer. He shall take care that city ordinances and state laws are observed and enforced and that all city officers and employees discharge their duties. 
(b)  Recommendations to council. He shall, from time to time, give the council such information and recommend such measures as he may deem advantageous to the city. 
(c)  Presiding officer. When present, he shall preside at the meetings of the council. 
(d)  Veto power. He shall have veto power as to all acts of the council, except such as to which it is expressly or by necessary implication otherwise provided. All such acts shall be submitted to him by the clerk and shall be in force upon his approval evidenced by his signature, or upon his failing to approve or disapprove within five days, which fact shall be certified thereon by the clerk. If he disapproves, he shall file his objections with the clerk who shall present them to the council at its next meeting. A two-thirds vote of all the members of the council shall then make the act effective notwithstanding the objections of the mayor. 
(e)  Council president. The council, at its first meeting subsequent to the regular election and qualification of new members shall, after organization, choose from its members a president who, in the absence of the mayor, shall preside at meetings of the council and during the absence or inability of the mayor shall have the power and duties of the mayor, except he shall not have power to approve any act of the council which the mayor has disapproved by filing objections with the clerk. He shall, when so officiating, be styled "acting mayor." 
(f)  Mayor's salary. The salary of the mayor shall be $8,520.00 per year, and shall be applicable to any person elected to that position during the ensuing year or thereafter unless such salary is changed by resolution of the common council adopted by a three-fourths vote of all members of the council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 
Sec. 1-61. - Alderpersons. 
(a)  Powers. Except as otherwise specifically provided, the council shall have the management and control of the city property, finances, highways, navigable waters and the public service, and shall have power to act for the government and good order of the city for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety and welfare of the public, and may carry out its powers by license, regulation, suppression, borrowing of money, tax levy, appropriation, forfeiture, imprisonment, confiscation and other necessary or convenient means. The powers conferred shall be in addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by express language. 
(b)  Salary of alderpersons. The salary of each alderperson is established at $300.00 per month and shall be applicable only to alderpersons elected during the ensuing year and thereafter, immediately following such election. Such salary shall remain in effect unless altered by a three-fourths vote of all members of the common council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.16) 
State Law reference- Common council, Wis. Stats. § 62.11. 
Sec. 1-62. - City administrator. 
(a)  Creation. To provide the city with a more efficient, effective and responsible government under a government system of a part-time mayor and council, there is created the office of city administrator. 
(b)  Appointment. The common council shall appoint the city administrator who shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to suspension or removal for cause by the council. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the city administrator shall be established by resolution of the common council but shall include directing the effective and efficient performance of all city employees and coordinating and expediting all city services, functions and programs. 
(Prior Code, § 1.035) 
Sec. 1-63. - City clerk. 
(a)  Duties prescribed by law or council. He shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by state statutes and by order of the council. He generally shall perform, under direction of the city administrator, all duties pertaining to his office as city clerk, and shall be responsible for all the official acts of his assistants. 
(b)  Deputy. In the absence of the city clerk, the deputy city clerk, if appointed shall perform the duties of the clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 1.19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 
Sec. 1-64. - City treasurer. 
    The city treasurer shall perform such duties as prescribed by state statutes and by order of the council. He generally shall perform, under direction of the city administrator, all duties pertaining to his office as city treasurer and shall be responsible for all the official acts of his assistants. He shall perform such other duties as shall be prescribed by supervisory personnel of the state department of revenue. 
(Prior Code, § 1.20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 
Sec. 1-65. - Chief of police. 
(a)  General duties. The police chief shall be appointed by the police and fire commission and shall hold office during good behavior, subject to suspension or removal by such commission. He shall perform such duties as are prescribed by chapter 4. 
(b)  Duty of reporting. The police chief shall turn over at least monthly to the city treasurer all fees, forfeitures, receipts and all other moneys received by his department. He shall also make annual reports to the council and all such other reports that are required of him by state laws and city ordinances. The police chief shall at the time of making his report to the council as to the efficiency of the police force, number of arrests made and the occasions therefor, and such other matters as he shall embody in his reports, make and attach to each such report a brief summary or recapitulation showing the number of policemen and their respective salaries, total number of arrests made and the occasions therefor, and such other matters in brief as he shall deem to be important. 
(Prior Code, § 1.22) 
Sec. 1-66. - Comptroller. 
    The city administrator shall perform the duties of the comptroller. 
(Prior Code, § 1.24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 
Sec. 1-67. - Water department superintendent. 
    The water department superintendent shall be under the immediate supervision and direction of the public works director, subject to general control of the city council. The superintendent shall perform such duties and have such powers as shall be contained in this Code, particularly chapter 13. 
(Prior Code, § 1.25) 
State Law reference- Management of municipal public utility by commission, Wis. Stats. § 66.0805. 
Sec. 1-68. - Sanitation superintendent. 
    The sanitation superintendent shall perform the duties imposed by this Code, particularly chapter 15, and such other duties as may be required to be performed by the city council. The sanitation superintendent shall be under the immediate supervisor of the public works director. 
(Prior Code, § 1.26) 
Sec. 1-69. - Safety inspector. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of creating the office of safety inspector and providing for appointment thereto is to promote safety to the general public and to city employees while performing work for the city and to prevent hazardous conditions arising to the general public and city employees engaged in any city work. 
(b)  Safety rules. The safety inspector may require all city employees to observe all safety rules, promulgated by him or the state department of industry, labor and human relations relating to city employment, or such rules as may be prescribed by the city council, and insurance underwriters companies which are under contract with the city to provide liability insurance coverage on behalf of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 1.31) 
Sec. 1-70. - Zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator may issue citations with respect to ordinances which are directly related to the official responsibilities of the zoning administrator under this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 1.325) 
Secs. 1-71-1-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND SIMILAR BODIES 

Sec. 1-99. - Alderperson; terms on boards and commissions. 
    Any alderperson representing the council on any city boards and commissions, either by appointment or by election of the council, shall so serve for a term not to exceed one year. If such alderperson should resign as alderperson, he shall be deemed to have resigned from such board or commission. 
(Prior Code, § 1.40) 
Sec. 1-100. - Board of review. 
(a)  Organization and appointment. The board of review shall consist of five city residents, none of whom shall occupy any public office or be publicly employed. The members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. One member shall be appointed each year for a five-year term. Appointments shall be made at the organization meeting of the council, and the member appointed shall commence his term on May 1. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The board of review shall have such powers as are granted or required by state law and additional powers and duties as designated by the city council from time to time. 
(c)  Compensation and time of sessions. The board of review shall receive $30.00 each for each day of actual attendance at the annual meeting. The annual meeting of the board of review shall be within 30 days from the second Monday of May and the first meeting shall be between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Prior Code, § 1.41) 
State Law reference- Boards of review, Wis. Stats. § 70.46 et seq. 
Sec. 1-101. - Plan commission. 
(a)  Organization and appointment. The plan commission shall consist of the mayor, who shall be the presiding officer, the chairman of the park board, two alderpersons and three citizens. The alderperson members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the council members present at the council's organization meeting each year, or whenever a vacancy in the alderperson's seat shall exist. One citizen member shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council, at the organization meeting of the council each year for a three-year term. If the chairman of the park board is an alderperson, he may serve on the commission in a dual capacity, and an additional citizen shall be appointed so that the board has seven members. Such additional citizen member shall be appointed for a one-year term. 
(b)  Organization. Within 30 days after appointment, the plan commission members shall organize by the election of a vice-chairman, secretary, and such other officers as may in their judgment be necessary. All plan commission members shall serve without compensation; except if the council deems advisable, the secretary may receive such compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the council and provided for in the appropriate ordinance. 
(c)  Functions and powers. The plan commission shall have such powers as are granted or required by state law and additional powers and duties as designated by the city council from time to time. 
(d)  Matters referred to plan commission. The council, or other public body or officer of the city having final authority thereon, shall refer to the plan commission, for its consideration and report before final action is taken by the council, public body or officer, the following matters: The location and architectural design of any public or private building which uses include commercial, manufacturing, institutional and multi-family including, but not limited to, site and landscaping approval; the location of any statute or other memorial; the location, acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation, abandonment or authorization for any public utility whether publicly or privately owned; all plats of lands in the city or within the territory over which the city is given platting jurisdiction by Wis. Stats. ch. 236; the location, character and extent or acquisition, leasing or sale of lands for public or semi-public housing, slum clearance, relief of congestion, or vacation camps for children; and the amendment or repeal of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this section. Unless such report is made within 30 days, or such longer period as may be stipulated by the council, the council or other public body or officer may take final action without it. 
(e)  Aid in carrying out functions. The plan commission shall, if it deems advisable, employ experienced advice upon the authority of the council, if an appropriation is made by the council therefor, and may have made maps showing proposed additions to or changes in the city plan. The commission may request assistance from any city department, commission or agency. 
(f)  Records. The plan commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which shall be open to inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 1.42) 
State Law reference- City planning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
Sec. 1-102. - Board of zoning appeals. 
(a)  Organization and appointment. A board of appeals is established. The board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. The board members shall serve without compensation. The mayor shall designate one of the members as chairman, and the city clerk shall serve as secretary of the board. The term of office of the board members shall be for three years, except of those first appointed, one shall serve for one year, two for two years, and two for three years respectively, with terms beginning on May 1. The mayor may appoint for a term of three years two alternate members of such board in addition to the five members above provided for, who shall act with full power only when a board member refuses to vote because of interest or when a member is absent. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The board of appeals shall have such powers as are granted or required by state law and additional powers and duties as designated by the city council from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 1.43) 
State Law reference- City planning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
Sec. 1-103. - Police commission. 
(a)  Organization and appointment. The board of police commissioners shall consist of five citizens, three of whom shall constitute a quorum. The mayor shall annually, between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May, appoint one member for a five-year term in writing to be filed with the secretary of the board. No appointment shall be made which will result in more than three members of the board belonging to the same political party. Such appointments shall be subject to confirmation by the council. The board shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The board of police commissioners shall have such powers as are granted or required by state law and additional powers and duties as designated by the city council from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 1.44) 
State Law reference- City police and fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 
Sec. 1-104. - Library board. 
(a)  Organization and appointment. The Sparta Free Library shall be administered by a library board composed of seven appointed members, a minimum of five of which shall be citizens of the city, appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. Each regular appointment shall be for a three-year term. One of the members shall be a school district administrator, or his representative. Not more than one council member shall be a member of the library board. No compensation shall be paid to the members of the library board for their services, but they may be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in performing duties outside the city authorized by the board. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The library board shall have such powers as are granted or required by state law and additional powers and duties as designated by the city council from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 1.45) 
State Law reference- Library boards, Wis. Stats. § 43.54 et seq. 
Sec. 1-105. - Board of public works. 
(a)  Organization and appointment. The board of public works shall consist of four alderperson members and three citizen members, appointed by the mayor. The citizen members shall hold their office for three years, and the first citizen members shall be appointed for the term of one, two and three years, respectively, and thereafter for three years or until their successors are qualified. 
(b)  Powers and duties. It shall be the duty of the board, under the direction of the council, to superintend all public works and keep the streets, alleys, sewers and public works in repair, as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.14(6); provided, however, the powers and duties of the board of public works shall not extend to matters within the jurisdiction of the public facilities board. 
(Prior Code, § 1.48) 
State Law reference- City boards of public works, Wis. Stats. § 62.14. 
Sec. 1-106. - Housing authority. 
    The housing authority shall consist of five citizens who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, to five-year terms. 
(Prior Code, § 1.53) 
Sec. 1-107. - Block grant commission. 
    The block grant commission, created by resolution of the city council, shall consist of two citizens and three alderpersons to be appointed by the mayor for one-year terms. 
(Prior Code, § 1.54) 
Secs. 1-108-1-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ETHICS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Codes of ethics of local government officials, employees and candidates, Wis. Stats. § 19.59. 

Sec. 1-128. - Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is established ethics regulations for all city officials and employees, elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of boards, committees and commissions of the city. The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all officials and employees by setting forth acts incompatible with the best interests of the city citizens and by directing disclosure by officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city. The provisions and purpose of this article and rules and regulations as may be established are declared to be in the best interests of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(9)) 
Sec. 1-129. - Responsibility of public office. 
    Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the federal and state constitutions and carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and municipality and to observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest shall be their prime concern. Their conduct in both official and private affairs should be above reproach to foster respect for all government. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(9)) 
Sec. 1-130. - Dedicated service. 
    All officials and employees of the city should be loyal to the objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain these objectives. Appointive officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority. Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so. They should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(9)) 
Sec. 1-131. - Fair and equal treatment. 
(a)  Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or permit unauthorized use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit. 
(b)  Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(9)) 
Sec. 1-132. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  Financial and personal interest prohibited. No official or employee, paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall act in regard to financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public interest contrary to the provisions of this section or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Financial interest means any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or to any person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee. 
    Personal interest means any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or from close business or political associations, whether or not any financial interest is involved. 
(c)  Specific conflicts enumerated. 
(1)  Incompatible employment. No official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render service, for private interest, which employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties, unless otherwise permitted by law and unless disclosure is made as provided herein. 
(2)  Disclosure of confidential information. No official or employee shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the city, nor shall he use the information to advance the financial or other private interests of himself or others. 
(3)  Gifts and favors. No official or employee shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in business dealings with the city; nor shall any official or employee accept any gift, favor or thing of value that may tend to influence him in the discharge of his duties, or grant in the discharge of his duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. Gifts received under unusual circumstances should be referred to the ethics board within ten days for recommended disposition. 
(4)  Representing private interests before city agencies or courts. No officer or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than himself, his spouse or minor children, before any city agency or municipal court. However, a council member may appear before city agencies on behalf of his constituents in the course of his duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(9)) 
Sec. 1-133. - Disclosure of interest in legislation. 
    Any council member who has a financial interest or personal interest in any proposed legislation before the council shall disclose on the records of the council or the ethics board the nature and extent of such interest. Any other official or employee who has a financial or personal interest in any proposed legislative action of the council and who participated in discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation to the council shall disclose on the records of the council the nature and extent of the interest. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(9)) 
Sec. 1-134. - Ethics board. 
(a)  The ethics board shall consist of three members. The membership shall be the same as the finance committee. The city attorney shall furnish the board necessary legal assistance to carry out its function. 
(b)  Membership on the ethics board shall be synonymous with appointment to the licensing and investigation committee and shall develop written rules of procedure which shall be submitted to the council for approval. 
(c)  The ethics board may take recommendations with respect to amendments of this section. 
(d)  Upon sworn complaint of any person alleging facts which, if true, would constitute improper conduct under the provisions of the section, the board shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with all common law requirements of due process and, in written findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, make a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct of the subject official or employee and, if appropriate, refer the matter to the council or other proper authority. 
Sec. 1-135. - Applicability. 
    When an official or employee has doubt as to the applicability of a provision of this article to a particular situation or definition of terms used in this article, he should apply to the ethics board for an advisory opinion and will be guided by that opinion when given. The official or employee shall have the opportunity to present his interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicability of provisions of this article before such advisory decision is made. This article shall be operative in all instances covered by its provisions except when superseded by an applicable statutory provision and statutory action is mandatory, or when the application of a statutory provision is discretionary but determined by the ethics board to be more appropriate or desirable. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(9)) 
Sec. 1-136. - Penalty and sanctions. 
    Violations of any provisions of this article may constitute cause for suspension, removal from office or employment or other disciplinary action. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(9)) 
Secs. 1-137-1-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency location and continuity of government, Wis. Stats. § 323.50 et seq.; local officers and succession to office, Wis. Stats. § 323.54. 

Sec. 1-156. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attack means any attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the United States causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property, or persons in the United States in any manner, by sabotage or by the use of bombs, missiles, shellfire, or atomic, radiological, chemical, bacteriological, or biological means or other weapons or processes. 
    Authorized deputy means a person who is presently authorized to perform the functions, exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of an office if the office is vacant or at such times as it lacks administration due to the death, absence or disability of the incumbent officer. 
    Emergency interim successor means a person designated pursuant to this section for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but not the office, of a city office if such officer or any authorized deputy is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office. 
    Unavailable means either a vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the office, or the lawful incumbent of the office (including any deputy exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office because of a vacancy) and his authorized deputy are absent or unable for physical, mental or legal reasons, to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(1)) 
Sec. 1-157. - Designation, status, qualifications and term of emergency interim successors. 
(a)  Elective officers. Within 30 days after qualifying for office, the mayor, each member of the council, the city clerk, the city treasurer, the city attorney, and the municipal judge shall, in addition to any authorized deputy, designate such number of emergency interim successors to his office and specify their rank in order of succession after any authorized deputy so there will not be less than three authorized deputies or emergency interim successors or combination thereof for the office. 
(b)  Appointive officers. The city council shall within the time specified in subsection (a) of this section, in addition to any authorized deputy, designate for appointive officers including the police chief, the fire chief and the health officer such number of emergency interim successors to these officers and specify their rank in order of succession after any authorized deputy so there will be no less than three authorized deputies or emergency interim successors or combination thereof for each officer. 
(c)  Review of designations. The incumbent of the elective officers specified in subsection (a) of this section, and the city council in the case of those appointive officers specified in subsection (b) of this section, shall review, and as necessary promptly revise the designations of emergency interim successor to ensure that at all times there are at least three such qualified emergency interim successors or authorized deputies or any combination thereof for each officer specified. 
(d)  Qualifications. No person shall be designated or serve as an emergency interim successor unless, under state law or city ordinance, he holds the office of the person to whose powers and duties he is designated to succeed; but no provision prohibiting an officer or employee of the city from holding another office shall be applicable to an emergency interim successor. 
(e)  Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an emergency interim successor holds that designation at the pleasure of the designator; provided, he shall be replaced if removed. He retains this designation as emergency interim successor until replaced by another appointed by the authorized designator. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(2)) 
Sec. 1-158. - Assumption of powers and duties of officer by emergency interim successor. 
    If in the event of attack, any officer named in section 1-157(a) and (b) and any authorized deputy is unavailable, his emergency interim successor highest in rank in order of succession who is not unavailable shall, except for the power and duty to appoint emergency interim successor, exercise the powers and discharge the duties of such officer. An emergency interim successor exercises, or resumes and discharges these duties only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or authorized deputy or emergency interim successor higher in rank in order of succession exercises or resumes the exercise of, the powers and discharge of the duties of the office, or until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is appointed to fill such vacancy or is elected and qualified as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(3)) 
Sec. 1-159. - Recording and publication. 
    The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized deputy shall be filed with the city clerk and each designation, replacement, or change in order of succession of an emergency interim successor shall become effective when the designator files with city clerk the successors' name, address and rank in order of succession. The city clerk shall keep on file all such data regarding authorized deputies and emergency interim successors which shall be open for public inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(4)) 
Sec. 1-160. - Formalities of taking office. 
    At the time of their designation, emergency interim successors shall take such oath and do such other things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which they succeed. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(5)) 
Sec. 1-161. - Quorum and vote requirements. 
    In the event of an attack: 
(1)  Quorum requirements for the city council shall be suspended; and 
(2)  Where the affirmative vote of a special proportion of members for approval of an ordinance, resolution or other action would otherwise be required, the same proportion of those voting thereon shall be sufficient. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10(6)) 
Sec. 1-162. - Emergency government. 
(a)  Joint action ordinance. A joint action ordinance of the board of supervisors of the county providing for a county-municipal joint action emergency government plan of organization was adopted by the county board on September 6, 1972. Such county ordinance is made a part hereof by reference and is ratified and accepted by the city. This ratification and acceptance of the joint action ordinance shall constitute a mutual agreement between the city and the county as provided by the joint action ordinance. 
(b)  County-municipal emergency government coordinator. The county-municipal emergency government coordinator appointed and employed by the county board is designated and appointed emergency government coordinator for the city, subject to the conditions and provisions set forth in state law and the county joint action ordinance. 
(Prior Code, §§ 6.01, 6.02) 
Secs. 1-163-1-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 1-191. - Election officials. 
    The election officials shall consist of two inspectors, one election clerk and two ballot clerks, for each aldermanic district; provided, however, that the city clerk may increase or decrease the number of election officials for any particular election, so long as the total number of election officials and their method of appointment complies with Wis. Stats. § 7.30(1). Election official shall have such duties as are prescribed by state law and assigned from time to time by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.60) 
State Law reference- Appointment of election officials, Wis. Stats. § 7.30. 
Sec. 1-192. - Poll hours. 
    Poll hours within the city shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(Prior Code, § 1.61) 
Sec. 1-193. - Aldermanic districts. 
    The city shall be divided into eight aldermanic districts as follows: 
(1)  First aldermanic district. The first aldermanic district shall consist of Wards 1 and 2. 
(2)  Second aldermanic district. The second aldermanic district shall consist of Wards 3 and 4. 
(3)  Third aldermanic district. The third aldermanic district shall consist of Wards 5 and 6. 
(4)  Fourth aldermanic district. The fourth aldermanic district shall consist of Wards 7, 8 and 19. 
(5)  Fifth aldermanic district. The fifth aldermanic district shall consist of Wards 9, 10 and 17. 
(6)  Sixth aldermanic district. The sixth aldermanic district shall consist of Wards 11, 12 and 18. 
(7)  Seventh aldermanic district. The seventh aldermanic district shall consist of Wards 13 and 14. 
(8)  Eighth aldermanic district. The eighth aldermanic district shall consist of Wards 15 and 16. 
(9)  Legal descriptions. The legal descriptions of the 16 city wards, together with a map showing the ward boundaries, is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(10)  Aldermanic representation. There shall be one alderperson elected to represent each of the above aldermanic districts. 
(Prior Code, § 1.71) 
State Law reference- Division of municipalities into wards, Wis. Stats. § 5.15. 
Secs. 1-194-1-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 1-225. - Municipal judge. 
(a)  Office created. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 755.01, there is created the office of municipal judge for the city. 
(b)  Election; term. The municipal judge shall be elected at large at the spring election in even numbered years for a term of four years, or until a successor is elected and qualified, commencing on May 1 next succeeding his election. Mid-term vacancies in the office of municipal judge shall be filled by special election to be held not less than 55 nor more than 70 days after the order of the council therefor. 
(c)  Salary. The municipal judge shall receive a salary as set by the common council, payable monthly, which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. No salary shall be paid to the judge for any time during his term for which he has not executed and filed his official bond and oath as required by subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Bond; oath. The municipal judge shall execute and file with the clerk of the courts for the county the oath prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 757.03 and a bond in the penal sum of $1,000.00. The municipal judge shall not be qualified to act until a certified copy of the bond is filed with the city clerk and a certified copy of the oath is file with the office of the state administrator of courts as required by Wis. Stats. § 755.03. 
(e)  Jurisdiction. The municipal judge shall have jurisdiction as provided by law and Wis. Stats. § 755.045 and exclusive jurisdiction of violations of city ordinances, resolutions and bylaws. For violations of this Code by children 14 or older, other than traffic or boating offenses as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 938.17, the municipal court, notwithstanding any penalty provision to the contrary, shall enter any of the dispositional orders permitted under Wis. Stats. § 938.17. 
(Prior Code, § 1.21(a)) 
Sec. 1-226. - Municipal court. 
(a)  Court established. The municipal court for the city is established pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 755. 
(b)  Hours. The municipal court for the city shall be open as determined by order of the municipal judge. 
(c)  Location. The municipal judge shall keep his office and hold court in the city hall. 
(d)  Procedure. The procedure in municipal court for the city shall be as provided by this section and state laws, including, without limitation because of enumeration, Wis. Stats. §§ 23.66 to 23.99, 345.20 to 345.53, 778.14, 778.15, and 778.18 and Wis. Stats. chs. 755 and 800. 
(e)  Collection and return of forfeitures. The municipal judge shall collect all forfeitures, penalty assessments, fees and taxable costs in any action or proceeding before him and shall pay over such moneys to the city treasurer within seven days of collection. At such time, the municipal judge shall also report to the city treasurer the title, nature of offenses and total amount of judgments imposed in actions and proceedings in which such moneys were collected. 
(f)  Contempt of court. 
(1)  The municipal judge, after affording an opportunity to the person accused to be heard in defense, may punish for contempt of municipal court persons guilty of either of the following acts and no other: 
a.  Disorderly, contemptuous and insolent behavior toward the judge while engaged in any judicial proceeding or other conduct which tends to interrupt the proceedings or to impair the respect due the judge's authority. 
b.  Resistance of or disobedience to any lawful order or process made or issued by the judge. 
(2)  The municipal judge may, upon finding any person guilty of contempt, order such person to forfeit not more than $50.00 plus the penalty assessment under Wis. Stats. § 757.05. Upon nonpayment of the forfeiture and penalty, the person found guilty of contempt may be sentenced to the county jail not to exceed seven days. 
(Prior Code, § 1.21(b)) 
Sec. 1-227. - Stipulations and deposits in municipal court. 
(a)  Deposit schedule to be established. The municipal judge shall establish and submit to the city council for approval in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 800.037 a schedule of deposits for violations of city ordinances, resolutions and bylaws, except traffic regulations which are governed by Wis. Stats. § 345.27 and boating violations governed by Wis. Stats. § 23.67. When approved by the council, such deposit schedule shall be posted in the office of the municipal court clerk and the city police department. 
(b)  Stipulation and deposit in lieu of court appearance. Persons cited for violations of city ordinances, resolutions or bylaws for which a deposit has been established under this subsection shall be permitted to make a stipulation of no contest and a deposit in lieu of court appearance as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 800.037, 800.035 and 800.09. 
(c)  Traffic and boating deposits. The deposit schedule established by the state board of county judges and the procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. chs. 23 and 345 shall apply to stipulations and deposits for violations of traffic regulations enacted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 345.27 and boating regulations enacted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 30.77. 
(d)  When not permitted. Stipulations and deposits shall not be permitted after initial appearance or in cases of contempt under section 1-226(f). 
(Prior Code, § 1.21(c)) 
Chapter 2 - CITY COUNCIL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Presiding officer, duties. 
(a)  The mayor or other presiding officer of the council shall preserve order and decorum; may speak to points of order in preference to others, rising from his seat for that purpose; and shall decide questions of order, subject to an appeal by any member, on which appeal no member shall speak more than once, unless by leave of the council. On appeal being taken, the question shall be, "Shall the decision of the chair stand as the judgment of the council?" which question and the action thereon shall be entered in the journal. 
(b)  The mayor or other presiding officer shall inform the council when necessary, or when referred to for that purpose, on any point of order or practice. 
(c)  He shall authenticate, by his signature, when necessary, all ordinances, resolutions, orders and proceedings of the meetings of the council over which he presides. 
(d)  The mayor or other presiding officer of the council may call a member to the chair, but such substitution shall not extend beyond an adjournment. 
(Prior Code, § 2.06) 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-21. - Regular meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the city council shall be held at the council chambers of the municipal building in the city, on the third Wednesday of each month at 6:30 p.m., except when the day for holding any regular meeting is a legal holiday or election day, the regular meetings shall be held at the same time and place on the following day. The first meeting of a new council following a regular city election shall be held following the conclusion of the regular April meeting of the previous council. 
(Prior Code, § 2.01(1)) 
Sec. 2-22. - Special meetings. 
(a)  Special meetings may be called by the mayor upon written notice of the time and purpose thereof to each member of the council, delivered to him personally or left at his usual place of abode at least six hours before the meeting. A special meeting shall be called by members filed with the clerk not less than 24 hours prior to the time of such meeting which shall be specified in the request. The clerk shall cause written notice of such meeting to be delivered to each member of the council personally or left at his usual place of abode at least six hours before the meeting. 
(b)  A special meeting may be held without notice when all council members are present or consent in writing to the holding of such meeting. 
(c)  At a special meeting no business shall be transacted other than that for which the meeting was called, except by unanimous consent of all council members. 
(Prior Code, § 2.01(2)) 
Sec. 2-23. - Adjournments. 
    Any regular or special meeting may be adjourned by a majority of the members present. 
(Prior Code, § 2.01(3)) 
Sec. 2-24. - Meetings shall be public. 
    All meetings of the council shall be open and public as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 19.81-19.98. Procedure shall be recorded by the city clerk or under his authorization in record books kept for that purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 2.01(4)) 
Sec. 2-25. - Call to order. 
    The mayor or president of the council (as the case may be) shall promptly call each meeting of the council to order at the hour fixed for the holding of such meeting. If the mayor and president are absent, the city clerk shall call the meeting to order and the alderpersons present shall elect one of their number president pro tem. 
(Prior Code, § 2.01(5)) 
Sec. 2-26. - Roll call and quorum. 
    Before proceeding to business, the roll of the council members shall be called alphabetically, and the names of those present and those absent shall be recorded in the proceedings of the council. Six members shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn and may compel the attendance of absent members. The mayor shall not be counted in determining whether a quorum is present. 
(Prior Code, § 2.01(6)) 
Sec. 2-27. - Attendance; leave of absence. 
    No council member, city clerk, police chief or police officer whose duty it is to attend, shall absent himself from the council meetings unless for illness or other good cause, without first having obtained leave of absence from the mayor. 
(Prior Code, § 2.01(7)) 
Sec. 2-28. - Disturbance, how suppressed. 
(a)  Whenever any disturbance or disorderly conduct occurs in the council chambers, rooms or halls adjacent thereto, the mayor or presiding officer of the council may, by and with the aid of the police chief or other police officer in attendance upon the meeting of the council, cause the same to be cleared of all persons except members and officers of the council. 
(b)  The council may punish by forfeiture members or other persons present for disorderly behavior. Any person proposed to be punished hereunder shall be given an opportunity to be heard in his defense. 
(Prior Code, § 2.01(8)) 
Sec. 2-29. - Order of business. 
    In the absence of an agenda, the order of business shall be as follows. The order of business may be temporarily suspended by unanimous vote. 
(1)  Call or roll and announcement of presence or absence of a quorum. 
(2)  Reading and correcting the minutes of the last preceding meeting or meetings. 
(3)  Unfinished business appearing on the record. 
(4)  Reports of standing committees. 
(5)  Reports of special committees. 
(6)  Introduction of resolutions. 
(7)  Passage of ordinances. 
(8)  Introduction of new ordinances. 
(9)  Introduction and consideration of new and miscellaneous business. 
(Prior Code, § 2.02) 
Secs. 2-30-2-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-47. - Standing committees. 
    The following standing committees of the council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall consist of three or more members each: 
(1)  Finance committee, charged with supervision with the city's finance and personnel matters. 
(2)  Public safety committee, charged with the overall public safety matters within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.03(1)) 
Sec. 2-48. - Special committees. 
    Select or special committees may be provided for by motion or resolution, designating the number and object, and, unless otherwise ordered, shall be appointed by the mayor or other presiding officer of the council. 
(Prior Code, § 2.03(2)) 
Sec. 2-49. - Reference of ordinances, resolutions, etc. 
    Every paper or writing that comes before the council for action shall be referred to the appropriate committee by the presiding officer without motion unless objected to by some member. 
(Prior Code, § 2.03(3)) 
Sec. 2-50. - Committees, when to report. 
    All matters referred to a committee shall be reported back at the next regular meeting of the council, and if not disposed of, the council may fix a time within which the committee shall make its report to the council. The chairman of each committee shall make a report of all matters still pending before the committee whenever requested to do so by any member of the council. 
(Prior Code, § 2.03(4)) 
Sec. 2-51. - Reports of dissenting members of committees. 
    If all the members of any committee required or entitled to report on any subject referred to them cannot agree upon a report, the majority and minority of such committee may each make a separate report, and any member dissenting in whole or in part from the reasoning and conclusions of both majority and minority may also present a statement of his reasons and conclusions, and all such reports, decorous in language and respectful to the council, shall be entered at length in the journal. 
(Prior Code, § 2.03(5)) 
Sec. 2-52. - Adoption of reports and recommendations of committees, boards and commissions. 
    To approve actions by the committees, boards and commissions and accept their recommendations, the council shall by motion adopt the committee, board or commission report, action or recommendation. If certain actions or recommendations of the committees, boards and commissions are not adopted, accepted and approved, the motion for adoption shall specify the specific part, act or recommendation excepted. All motions for adoption, or motions for adoption with exceptions, shall be subject to amendment according to the rules for amendment contained in Robert's Rules of Order, newly revised. 
(Prior Code, § 2.03(6)) 
Secs. 2-53-2-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-78. - Introduction of business to council. 
    No business shall be introduced to the council unless presented by a member of the council. 
(Prior Code, § 2.04(1)) 
Sec. 2-79. - Motions. 
(a)  Motions to be stated before debates; reducing to writing. When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by the member making the same or by the presiding officer or be read by the clerk before being debated. If any member requires it, all motions (except to adjourn, postpone or commit) shall be reduce to writing. 
(b)  Motions in order during debate. When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received except: 
(1)  To adjourn. 
(2)  To lay on the table. 
(3)  For the previous question. 
(4)  To postpone to a certain day. 
(5)  To commit to a standing committee. 
(6)  To commit to a select committee. 
(7)  To amend. 
(8)  To postpone indefinitely. 
These several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they stand in this rule. 
(c)  Motion to adjourn; lay on table. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, and a motion to adjourn, to lay on the table, and call for the previous question, shall be decided without debate. 
(d)  Motion for reconsideration. Any member voting in the majority may move reconsideration of the vote on any question at the same or next succeeding meeting. A motion to reconsider being raised and lost shall not be renewed. 
(e)  Moving previous question. Any member wishing to terminate debate may call the previous question. The question to be announced by the presiding officer shall be "Shall the main question now be put?" Such motion shall be decided without debate. If a majority of the members present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be taken without further debate, and its effect shall be to put an end to all debate and bring the council to a direct vote, first upon the pending amendment, if any, and then upon the main question. 
(Prior Code, § 2.04(2)) 
Sec. 2-80. - Debate. 
(a)  Recognition for debate. When a member is to speak in debate or deliver any matter to the council, he shall rise in his place and address himself to the presiding officer, and confine his remarks to the question under debate, and avoid personalities. 
(b)  Presiding officer to name first to speak. When two or more members rise at the same time, the presiding officer shall name the member who is first to speak. 
(c)  Member may speak twice. No member shall speak more than twice on any question except by leave of the council. 
(Prior Code, § 2.04(3)) 
Sec. 2-81. - Voting. 
(a)  Members shall vote. Every member, when a question is put, shall vote unless the council shall, for special cause, excuse him or her, but no member shall be excused after the council has commenced voting. The order of the ayes and noes taken shall be rotated alphabetically, but failure to adhere to the order of taking the ayes and noes shall not affect the validity of any vote. 
(b)  Tie vote; mayor to vote. The mayor shall not vote on the call of ayes and noes except in the case of a tie vote, when he shall cast the deciding vote. 
(c)  Ayes and noes vote. The ayes and noes may be required by any member of the council on confirmation. On adoption of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriating or disbursing money, or creating any liability or charge against the city or any fund thereof, the vote shall be ayes and noes. All aye and no votes shall be recorded in the journal. 
(Prior Code, § 2.04(4)) 
Sec. 2-82. - Call of the house. 
(a)  Who may call. Any three members of the council may make a call of the house and require absent members to be sent for, but a call of the house cannot be made after the voting has commenced. 
(b)  Putting question on call of the house. On a call of the house being moved, the presiding officer shall say: "It requires three members to order the call of the house," and three or more shall rise, the call shall thereby be ordered. 
(c)  Doors to be closed. The officer acting as sergeant-at-arms shall close the doors and no member shall leave the room. 
(d)  Absentees, how brought in. The clerk shall immediately call the roll and furnish a list of the absentees without leave to the sergeant-at-arms, who shall forthwith proceed to find and bring in such absentees. 
(e)  Procedure while under call. While the council is under call no business shall be transacted except to receive and act on the report of the sergeant-at-arms; no other motion shall be in order except to adjourn and motion to suspend further proceedings under the call, which motions shall be determined by ayes and noes, and the motion to suspend further proceedings under the call shall not be adopted unless a majority of the members-elect vote in favor thereof, but a majority of those present may adjourn. 
(Prior Code, § 2.04(5)) 
Sec. 2-83. - Robert's rules of order, newly revised. 
    At any time when a question arises which is not covered by these rules, Robert's Rules of Order, newly revised, shall apply, unless otherwise required by ordinance or statute, with the exception that all motions requiring a two-thirds vote as designated in Robert's Rules of Order, newly revised, shall require a three-fourths vote of council. 
(Prior Code, § 2.04(6)) 
Sec. 2-84. - Suspension of rules. 
    These rules may be suspended temporarily by a three-fourths vote of the members present. 
(Prior Code, § 2.04(7)) 
Sec. 2-85. - Amendment of rules. 
    These rules may be amended or changed at any time by a three-fourths vote of all members present. 
(Prior Code, § 2.04(8)) 
Sec. 2-86. - Sergeant-at-arms. 
    The police chief or police officer designated to attend the council meeting shall act as sergeant-at-arms. 
(Prior Code, § 2.04(9)) 
Sec. 2-87. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  Publication. All ordinances, rules, regulations and by-laws required to be published, shall be published in the official newspaper within 15 days of passage, and shall not be in effect until so published. 
(b)  Adoption. Each ordinance or resolution shall be read three times, which by motion may be by title, prior to passage. No ordinance or resolution shall receive its third reading on the day of its first reading except by three-fourths vote of the members present. 
(c)  Approval of ordinances by mayor; vetoes. All ordinances, resolutions and acts subject to the veto power of the mayor shall be submitted to him by the clerk and shall be in force upon his approval evidenced by his signature, or upon his failing to approve or disapprove within five days, which fact shall be certified thereon by the clerk. If the mayor disapproves, he shall file his objections with the clerk, who shall present them to the council at its next meeting. A two-thirds vote of all members of the council shall make the act effective notwithstanding the objections of the mayor. 
(Prior Code, § 2.05) 
Chapter 3 - FINANCE, TAXATION AND CITY RECORDS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-1-3-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-19. - Fiscal year. 
    The calendar year shall be the fiscal year. 
(Prior Code, § 3.02) 
Secs. 3-20-3-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET 

Sec. 3-42. - Budget. 
(a)  Departmental estimates. When requested by the finance committee, each year, each officer, department and committee shall file with the clerk an itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties of such officer, department or committee during the preceding fiscal year, and a detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision of such officer, department or committee during such year, and of the conditions and management of such fund; also detailed estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year. Such statements shall be presented in the form prescribed by the clerk and shall be designated as "departmental estimates," and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main division of all departments. 
(b)  Finance committee to prepare. 
(1)  Each year the finance committee shall prepare and submit to the council a proposed budget presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the city for the ensuing calendar year. The budget shall include the following information: 
a.  The expense of conducting each department and activity of the city for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increase and decrease recommended as compared with appropriations for the current year. 
b.  An itemization of all anticipated income of the city from sources other than general property taxes and bonds issued, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year. 
c.  An itemization of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
d.  Such other information as may be required by the council and by state law. 
(2)  The city shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens. 
(c)  Hearing. The council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as required by law. Following the public hearing the proposed budget may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the council as ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 3.03) 
Sec. 3-43. - Changes in budget. 
    The amount of the tax to be levied or certified, the amounts of the various appropriations, and the purposes thereof shall not be changed after approval of the budget except by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the council. Notice of such transfer shall be given by publication within 15 days thereafter in the official city newspaper. 
(Prior Code, § 3.04) 
Sec. 3-44. - City funds to be spent in accordance with appropriation. 
    No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as authorized by section 3-43. At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the council to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned. 
(Prior Code, § 3.05) 
Secs. 3-45-3-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-62. - Confidentiality of income and expense information. 
    Whenever the assessor, in the performance of the assessor's duties, requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47 or any successor statute thereto, then, such income and expense information that is provided to the assessor shall be held by the assessor on a confidential basis, except, however, that the information may be revealed to and used by persons in the discharging of duties imposed by law, or office, including, but not limited to, use by the assessor in performance of official duties of the assessor's office and use by the board of review in the performance of official duties, or pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided to the assessor under Wis. Stats. § 70.47, unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is not subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(Prior Code, § 3.13) 
Sec. 3-63. - Special assessments deferments. 
    The council may, by resolution, direct the treasurer to pay all, or any portion, of special assessments or special charges extended upon the current or next tax roll against property owned by and upon which reside worthy, indigent persons in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 74.77 with interest. The applicable interest rate for each year or portion thereof that a special assessment or special charge is outstanding shall be three percent over the prime rate posted in the Wall Street Journal (Midwest Edition) under the column "money rates" reflective of corporate loans posted by at least 75 percent of the nation's 30 largest banks, on the first business day of January of the year in which the disbursement is made and shall remain in effect until paid in full. Guidelines for determination of eligibility for such city payment shall be established, from time to time, by the council. 
(Prior Code, § 3.08) 
Sec. 3-64. - Aggregate tax stated on roll. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.65(2), the clerk shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount of state, county, local, school and other general property taxes minus credits applied under Wis. Stats. § 79.10(9), except credits determined under Wis. Stats. § 79.10(7m), in a single column in the roll opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied, or, in the case of personal property, in a single column opposite the name of the person against whom the tax is levied. Each tax bill or receipt shall show the purpose for which the taxes are to be used giving the breakdown for state, county, local, school and other general property taxes. The tax roll shall indicate all corrections made under Wis. Stats. §§ 70.43 and 70.44. 
(Prior Code, § 3.01) 
Sec. 3-65. - Installment payment of real estate tax. 
(a)  Owners of real estate in the city may elect to pay real estate taxes in installments as follows: One-fourth of such tax on or before January 31 of each year and the remainder in three equal installments payable on March 31, May 31 and July 31. 
(b)  If any owner of real estate elects to pay his real estate taxes in installments for any year as is set out in subsection (a) of this section and if any installment of such extended tax shall not be paid on or before the installment paying date such taxpayer shall be subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 74.12 as it pertains to the installment tax payments. 
(Prior Code, § 3.06) 
Sec. 3-66. - Claims for back up of sewer or drains. 
    Without admitting or accepting legal liability or responsibility to do so, the city may consider claims for damages to property, repair, replacement or clean up expenses, not to exceed $1,000.00 in total, for sewer back up into a residential basement as a result of conditions originating in a public sewer main and not from a private lateral. 
(Prior Code, § 3.14) 
Sec. 3-67. - New subdivision; sewer and water improvements. 
    In any subdivision receiving final approval by the city council after July 10, 1979, the owners of the land in such subdivision shall be responsible for the entire cost of construction of all sewer and water improvements made to such subdivision. In determining the benefit to such property, the cost of construction subject to this assessment shall include the cost of labor, materials and other expenses reasonably related to installation of the improvement. Such cost shall be levied against the property as a special assessment in accordance with the procedure set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.0703. Payment of such special assessment may be deferred as provided by law in the discretion of the city council. In case of conveyance, descent, foreclosure or other transfer, voluntary or involuntary or by operation of law, of property located in subdivision which is the subject of this section, the above requirements shall continue to bind the parties acquiring such lands. Owners of lands so transferred shall pay the cost of construction of such improvements on a pro rata basis in proportion to their ownership of street frontage served by such improvements. 
(Prior Code, § 3.09) 
Sec. 3-68. - Credit for curb, gutter and paving improvements on corner lots. 
    A parcel of land against which has been levied a special assessment for curb and gutter or paving improvement in one of the streets upon which it abuts shall be entitled to a deduction when levied upon for curb and gutter or paving improvement laid in the other street upon which such parcel of land abuts as follows: The parcel of land shall be assessed for all of the cost of such improvement on the shorter side of such lot and 50 percent of the cost of such improvement on the longer side of such lot. This formula will apply whether one or both sides are improved initially. 
(Prior Code, § 3.11) 
Sec. 3-69. - Allocation of costs for paving at time of initial installation of curb and gutter. 
    At time of the initial installation of curb and gutter on city streets, not covered by chapter 18, the city will be responsible for paying 50 percent of the cost of paving the street and the adjoining property owners will be assessed the remaining 50 percent based on linear front footage. 
(Prior Code, § 3.115) 
Secs. 3-70-3-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROOM TAX 

Sec. 3-97. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gross receipts has the meaning as defined in Wis. Stats. § 77.51(11)(a), (b) and (c) insofar as applicable. 
    Hotel, motel, or bed and breakfast means a building or group of buildings in which the public may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including, without limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, lodginghouses, roominghouses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any other building or group of buildings in which accommodations are available to the public irrespective of whether membership is required for use of the accommodations, except accommodations rented for a continuous period of more than one month and accommodations furnished by any hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes, or by corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
    Transient means any person residing for a continuous period of less than one month in a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, or other furnished accommodations available to the public. 
(Prior Code, § 3.12(A)) 
Sec. 3-98. - Tax imposed. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.75, a tax is imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, rooms or lodging to transients by hotelkeepers, motel operators, bed and breakfast operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Effective January 1, 2009, such tax shall be at a rate of six percent of the gross of receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis. Stats. § 77.52(2)(a)1. 
(Prior Code, § 3.12(B)) 
Sec. 3-99. - Uses of tax receipts. 
(a)  The Sparta area chamber of commerce may perform the functions of a tourism entity, defined as a non-profit organization providing staff, development or promotional services for the tourism industry in the city. 
(b)  A tourism entity receiving room tax revenue from the city shall promote and develop tourism, and shall report annually to the city pursuant to any agreement entered into for the receipt and expenditure of room tax funds. 
(Prior Code, § 3.12(C)) 
Sec. 3-100. - Treasurer to administer; procedure. 
    This division shall be administered by the city treasurer in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The tax imposed for each calendar quarter is due and payable on the last day of the month next succeeding the calendar quarter for which imposed. A return shall be filed with the treasurer by those furnishing at retail such rooms and lodging, on or before the same date on which such tax is due and payable. Such return shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter for such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the treasurer deems necessary. The return shall be accompanied by a copy of the state sales tax return filed by the person filing the room tax return for the same period of time set forth in the room tax return. 
(2)  Every person required to file such quarterly returns shall, with his first return, elect to file an annual calendar year or fiscal year return. Such annual return shall be filed within 90 days of the close of each such calendar or fiscal year. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns and modified returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly returns and shall contain certain such additional information as the treasurer requires. Such annual returns shall be made on forms as prescribed by the city treasurer. All such returns shall be signed by the person required to file a return or his duly authorized agent, but need not be verified by oath. 
(3)  The treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but in no event longer than one month from the filing date. 
(Prior Code, § 3.12(D)) 
Sec. 3-101. - Liability on sale of business. 
    If any person liable for any amount of tax under this division sells out his business or stock of goods or quits the business, his successor or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the treasurer that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person subject to the tax imposed by this division fails to withhold such amount of tax from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the price of the accommodations valued in money. 
(Prior Code, § 3.12(E)) 
Sec. 3-102. - Enforcement of collection of room tax. 
    As a means of enforcing the collection of the room tax imposed hereunder, the city may: 
(1)  Whenever the city has probable cause to believe that the correct amount of room tax has not been assessed or that the tax return is not correct, inspect and audit the financial records of any person subject to section 3-98 pertaining to the furnishing of accommodations to determine whether or not the correct amount of room tax is assessed and whether or not any room tax return is correct, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0615. 
(2)  The city may impose a forfeiture of five percent of the tax under section 3-98 or subsection (3) of this section, on any person subject to the tax who fails to comply with a request to inspect and audit the person's financial records under subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  The city may determine the tax under section 3-98 according to its best judgment if any person required to make a return fails, neglects or refuses to do so for the amount, in the manner and form and within the time prescribed by the city. 
(4)  The city may require each person who is subject to subsection (3) of this section to pay an amount of taxes the city determines to be due under subsection (3) of this section plus interest at the rate of one percent per month on the unpaid balance. No refund or modification of the payment determined may be granted until the person files a correct room tax return and permits the city to inspect and audit his financial records under subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)  The city may impose a forfeiture of 25 percent of the room tax due for the previous year under section 3-98 or subsection (3) of this section or $5,000.00, whichever is less, for failure to pay the tax under section 3-98. 
(Prior Code, § 3.12(F)) 
Sec. 3-103. - Records. 
    Every person liable for the tax imposed by this division shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city treasurer requires. 
(Prior Code, § 3.12(G)) 
Sec. 3-104. - Returns confidential. 
(a)  All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to such returns, on file with the city treasurer may divulge their contents to the following and no others: 
(1)  The person who filed the return. 
(2)  Officers, agents or employees of the federal internal revenue service or the state department of revenue. 
(3)  Officers, employees or agents of the city treasurer, and professional persons employed for the purpose of enforcing this division and its penalty provisions. 
(4)  Such other public officials of the city when deemed necessary. 
(b)  No person having administrative duty under this division shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records of any person on whom a tax is imposed by this division, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided herein. 
(c)  Any person who violates this subsection, relating to confidentiality of returns, may be required to forfeit not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Prior Code, § 3.12(H)) 
Secs. 3-105-3-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY RECORDS 

Sec. 3-122. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to specify retention periods for certain city records and to allow access to records to the same extent, and in the same manner, as allowed by state law. 
(Prior Code, § 3.07(1)) 
Sec. 3-123. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Legal custodian means the individual responsible for maintaining records pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.33. 
    Record has the meaning defined in Wis. Stats. § 19.32(2). 
    Requester has the meaning defined in Wis. Stats. § 19.32(3). 
    Retention period means the minimum required period of time that a document will be maintained as described in section 3-125. 
(Prior Code, § 3.07(2)) 
Sec. 3-124. - Duty to maintain. 
    City legal custodians shall maintain all records for the retention period, and for any additional time period as described in section 3-127, if applicable. Thereafter, after the state historical society has waived receipt of the records (see section 3-126), the legal custodian may destroy the records. 
(Prior Code, § 3.07(3)) 
Sec. 3-125. - Retention period. 
(a)  The city common council, by separate resolution, shall adopt a schedule which describes the minimum time periods for which records shall be maintained by a legal custodian of the city. The resolution may be amended from time to time, as described below, and the resolution and any amendments thereto are incorporated herein by reference. The initial retention schedule resolution that is adopted contemporaneously with this article has been reviewed and approved along with this article by the state public records and forms board. The retention schedule resolution shall not be modified in a manner that reduces the retention periods described in the initial retention schedule resolution, or which adds additional documents to the schedule, unless those reductions or retention periods for additional documents are first reviewed and approved by the state public records and forms board. 
(b)  Any record that is not described in the retention schedule shall be maintained for a minimum of seven years, and may be destroyed thereafter unless a longer retention period is required by section 3-127, or by state statute, rule, or other applicable law. 
(Prior Code, § 3.07(4)) 
Sec. 3-126. - Notice to state historical society. 
(a)  The state historical society has waived the notice that would otherwise be required prior to destruction of certain records as described in the retention schedule. The retention schedule resolution shall not be modified in a manner that waives notice to the state historical society, or which adds additional documents to the schedule and waives notice of their destruction, unless those waivers are first reviewed and approved by the state public records and forms board and the state historical society. 
(b)  In the event that the retention schedule does not specifically note the state historical society's waiver regarding any particular record, then the state historical society must be given 60 days written notice prior to destruction of the record, as described in Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(a). 
(Prior Code, § 3.07(5)) 
Sec. 3-127. - Additional retention periods. 
    In addition to the retention period described in the retention schedule, records shall be maintained for the following additional time periods: 
(1)  A record that is existing at the time of a request shall not be destroyed until after the request is granted, or in the event the request is denied until at least the time period described in Wis. Stats. § 19.35(5) has passed from the date of the denial. 
(2)  A record that is existing at the time that the legal custodian receives written notice that a mandamus action relating to the record has been commenced pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.37, shall not be destroyed until the final court order is issued in the action and the appeals are exhausted, as further described in Wis. Stats. § 19.35(5). 
(3)  A record that is known by the legal custodian to be relevant to litigation that is pending at the time that the record would otherwise be destroyed, shall not be destroyed until the litigation is resolved. 
(Prior Code, § 3.07(6)) 
Sec. 3-128. - Reproduced original records. 
    Records may be kept and preserved through the use of microfilm or another reproductive device, optical imaging, electronic formatting, or any other reproduction format authorized by Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(c) and the reproduction shall be deemed an original record for all purposes, in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(c). 
(Prior Code, § 3.07(7)) 
Sec. 3-129. - Public access. 
    All records maintained by a legal custodian shall be made available for inspection, copying, or other use that is authorized by state law, to the same extent as allowed by state statutes, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. § 19.35 and in the same manner. 
(Prior Code, § 3.07(8)) 
Sec. 3-130. - Photocopying charges. 
    A requester shall pay a fee of $0.25 per page for a photocopy of a record, unless the requester is specifically excluded from payment of the fee by state law. The requester also shall pay such other fees as may be charged pursuant to state law, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. § 19.35(3). 
(Prior Code, § 3.07(9)) 
Sec. 3-131. - Uniform regulation of public records. 
    All state statutes incorporated or referenced herein shall be deemed to include all subsequent amendments, repeals, and re-numbering that may be enacted regarding the same, in order to ensure uniform statewide regulation of public records. 
(Prior Code, § 3.07(10)) 
Chapter 4 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 4-1. - Organization of police department. 
    The city police department shall consist of a police chief and such other officers, assistants, and patrol officer as from time to time shall be appointed, pursuant to the provisions of state law, the ordinances and resolutions of the common council, and the rules and regulations of the police commission. 
(Prior Code, § 4.01) 
Sec. 4-2. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Monthly reports. The police chief shall submit a monthly general report to the mayor and common council of all activities of the department during the preceding month. 
(b)  Police records. There shall be kept by the department a suitable record in which shall be entered the name of every person arrested in the city, the name of the person making the arrest, the date and cause of the arrest, the court from which the warrant was issued, the disposition made of the case, the amount of fine and costs paid and to whom paid, bond posted, and all complaints in full. 
(Prior Code, § 4.02) 
Sec. 4-3. - General powers of police officers. 
    Every member of the police department shall: 
(1)  Familiarize himself with the ordinances of the city and state law and attend to the enforcement of such ordinances by all lawful means. 
(2)  Help prevent crimes, misdemeanors and violations of city ordinances and protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the city and its inhabitants. 
(3)  Report all street and sidewalk obstructions, unlighted street lamps, unlawful street signs or signals, and defective or dangerous streets and sidewalks to the appropriate person or organization responsible for their repair or service. 
(4)  Maintain order at the scene of a fire or any other fire response within the city. 
(5)  See that the necessary permits and licenses issued by the state or city are in the possession of or properly displayed by any person engaged in an activity or business within the city for which such permit or license is required and that the terms of such permits or licenses are complied with. 
(6)  Perform such other lawful duties as ordered by the police chief or his authorized representative. 
(Prior Code, § 4.03) 
Sec. 4-4. - Responsibilities of chief of police. 
(a)  Duties. In addition to the duties imposed upon him elsewhere in this Code, the police chief shall: 
(1)  Have command of the police department on administrative matters, subject to the direction of the mayor, to the extent that the council may delegate such authority or direction to him. 
(2)  Cause to be maintained accurate records of complaints, crimes, traffic accidents, ordinance violations, arrest, summons, incidents, and calls for police service and shall provide a system of periodic summary and analysis to ensure the most efficient and effective deployment and use of the department's resources. He shall submit or cause to be submitted to the various agencies such reports and summaries as are required by state law or ordinances and shall participate in voluntary programs designed to improve law enforcement and public safety. 
(3)  Submit such reports and comply with such administrative procedures as may be prescribed by the mayor and the common council relative to fiscal and administrative matters. 
(4)  Submit such reports or information and comply with such policies as may be prescribed by common council. 
(5)  Have exclusive control of the assignment, hours of duty, and transfer of all members of the department. 
(6)  Plan, organize, staff, direct, and control the human and material resources of the department for the most effective and efficient discharge of its duty to protect persons and property, preserve the peace, protect the rights of citizens and enforce state law and the ordinances of the city as are within its jurisdiction. He shall supervise the preparation and presentation of annual reports and budgets for the police department. He shall be required to certify to the correctness of all bills incurred by the department. 
(7)  Strive to maintain suitable, productive relationships with other city departments and with other governmental agencies and private organizations concerned with law enforcement, crime prevention, administration of judges and public safety. He shall cooperate and exchange information with other city departments in matters relating to their various functions. 
(8)  Plan and execute programs designed to prevent and repress crime, apprehend and prosecute offenders, recover property, and regulate non-criminal conduct, giving highest priority in the allocation of resources to crime and other offenses most hazardous to life and property. 
(b)  Custody of department equipment. The police chief shall be the custodian of all city property, equipment and supplies under the control of, or used by, the police department and shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, safeguarding and accurate records of such property, equipment, and supplies. 
(c)  Custody of department property. The police chief shall be the custodian of all property and shall be responsible for the safekeeping, lawful disposition and accurate record of the same. He shall see that all property is returned to its lawful owner or otherwise disposed of according to applicable statutes. 
(Prior Code, § 4.04) 
Sec. 4-5. - Rules and policies for the police department. 
    The police chief shall establish and promulgate rules of conduct, directives and policies and procedures and prescribe such duties for individual members as he may deem necessary for the effective and efficient command and operation of the department; provided no such rules of conduct, directive or policy procedure duties or assignment shall be in conflict with the statutes, ordinances and approved city personnel rules and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 4.05) 
Sec. 4-6. - Maintenance of personnel records and performance evaluations. 
    The police chief shall cause to be maintained adequate personnel records of employment, assignment, promotions, attendance, performance and training for all members of the department. He shall also comply with all provisions of the law enforcement standards board in regard to background investigations. He shall keep himself adequately informed of the activities of the department and be assured that the duties of his subordinates are properly discharged. He shall formulate procedures for recognizing outstanding performance by department members for investigating complaints of misconduct by any department member and for taking appropriate disciplinary action subject to the provisions of the applicable statutes and rules of the department. 
(Prior Code, § 4.06) 
Sec. 4-7. - Police chief's responsibility for training. 
    The police chief is responsible for the training of all members of the department. He shall cause adequate and progressive programs of training to be organized and conducted to prepare department members in the knowledge, procedures, and techniques of their duties and responsibilities. He will ensure that, within the budgetary limitations, members of the department attend training courses, seminars, and conferences necessary to maintain and improve their job skills and professional knowledge. He shall encourage department members to further their education in law enforcement through study, special courses, college attendance, extension programs, and independent readings. 
(Prior Code, § 4.07) 
Sec. 4-8. - Civilians to assist. 
    All persons in the city, when called upon by any police officer or peace officer, shall promptly aid and assist him in the execution of his duties and whoever shall neglect or refuse to give such aid or assistance shall be subject to the general penalty as provided in this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 4.08) 
Chapter 5 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 5-1. - Fire department recognized. 
    ERV's Sparta Area Fire Protection District is officially recognized as the fire department of the city. The duty of the firefighting and the prevention of fires in the city are delegated to such fire protection district. Its organization and internal regulation shall be governed by the provisions of a fire protection agreement effective January 1, 2013 and by such bylaws adopted by the district and by such bylaws as are adopted by the district. 
(Prior Code, § 5.01) 
Sec. 5-2. - Appropriations. 
    The council shall appropriate funds as set forth in the fire protection agreement described in section 5-1. 
(Prior Code, § 5.02) 
Sec. 5-3. - Miscellaneous references to fire chief. 
    Whenever reference is made in this Code of city ordinances to the "fire chief," that individual is the fire chief of ERV's Sparta Area Fire Protection District and such duties, authority and responsibilities as described from time to time herein are assigned to that person. 
(Prior Code, § 5.03) 
Sec. 5-4. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order, rule or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 25-11. 
(Prior Code, § 5.15) 
Chapter 7 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - State traffic laws adopted. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 340-348 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 305 describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, inclusive of any provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty if a fine or term of imprisonment, are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed, or prohibited by any statute or administrative rule or regulation incorporated by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any further amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes or administrative rules and regulations incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this chapter to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the state. 
(b)  Without limiting the general adoption of statutes in subsection (a) of this section, the statutory provisions following the prefix "7" describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic in the following enumerated sections of state law, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. 
7.341.04 Operating Unregistered or Improperly Registered Vehicle 7.341.045 Use of Registered Farm Trucks 7.341.05 When Vehicle Exempt from Registration 7.341.07 Certain Vehicles to be Registered by Resident Lessee 7.341.08 Application for Registration 7.341.11(4) Display of Registration Certificates 7.341.15 Display of Registration Plates 7.341.16(2) Surrender of Illegible Plates 7.341.51 Registration of Dealer, Distributor, Manufacturer or Transporter 7.341.55 Misuse of Plates 7.341.61 Improper Use of Evidence or Registration 7.341.62 False Evidence of Registration 7.341.63(3) Surrender of Plates Upon Suspension 7.342.05 Certificate of Title Required 7.342.06 Application For Certificate of Title 7.342.15 Transfer of Interest in a Vehicle 7.342.16 Transfer to or from Dealer 7.342.30(2), (3) Assignment and Stamping of New Identification Numbers 7.342.31(2) Report of Stolen or Abandoned Vehicle 7.342.33 Sale of Vehicle Used as Taxicab 7.342.34 Destruction of Vehicles 7.343.10 Occupational Licenses 7.343.12 School Bus Operators to Obtain Special License 7.343.125 Chauffeurs to Obtain Special License 7.343.18 License to be Carried 7.343.19 Duplicate Licenses 7.343.22 Notice of Change of Address or Name 7.343.305 Implied Consent 7.343.35 Surrender of License Upon Revocation Cancellation or Suspension 7.343.45 Permitting Unauthorized Persons to Drive 7.343.46 Renting Vehicles 7.344.45 Surrender of License and Registration Upon Suspension 7.344.46 Transfer of Ownership to Defeat Financial Responsibility 7.344.51, 7.344.52 Financial Responsibility for Rented Vehicles 7.345.55 Traffic Officers Not to Profit From Arrests 7.346.02 Applicability of Ch. 346 7.346.03 Authorized Emergency Vehicle 7.346.04(1), (2) Obedience to Traffic Officer, Signs and Signals 7.346.05 Vehicles to be Driven on Right Side of Roadway 7.346.06 Meeting of Vehicles 7.346.07 Overtaking and Passing on Left 7.346.075 Overtaking and Passing Bicycles 7.346.08 When Overtaking and Passing on Right Permitted 7.346.09 Limitations on Overtaking on Left or Driving on Left Side of Roadway 7.346.10 When Passing at Railroad Crossing or Intersection Prohibited 7.346.11 Passing or Meeting Frightened Animal 7.346.12 Driving Through Safety Zones Prohibited 7.346.13 Driving on Roadways Laned for Traffic 7.346.14 Distance Between Vehicles 7.346.15 Driving on Divided Highway 7.346.16 Use of Controlled-Access Highways, Expressways and Freeways 7.346.18 General Rules of Right-of-way 7.346.19 What to do on Approach of Emergency Vehicle 7.346.20 Right-of-way of Funeral Processions and Military Convoys 7.346.21 Right-of-way of Livestock 7.346.23 Crossing Controlled Intersection or Crosswalk 7.346.24 Crossing at Uncontrolled Intersection or Crosswalk 7.346.25 Crossing at Place Other Than Crosswalk 7.346.26 Blind Pedestrian on Highway 7.346.27 Persons Working on Highway 7.346.28 Pedestrians to Walk on Left Side of Highway; Pedestrians on Sidewalks 7.346.29 When Standing or Loitering in Roadway or Highway Prohibited 7.346.31 Required Position and Method of Turning at Intersections 7.346.32 Required Position for Turning Into Private Road or Driveway 7.346.33 Where Turns Prohibited 7.346.34 Turning Movements and Required Signals on Turning and Stopping 7.346.35 Method of Giving Signals on Turning and Stopping 7.346.37 Traffic-Control Signal Legend 7.346.38 Pedestrian Control Signals 7.346.39 Flashing Signals 7.346.40 Whistle Signals 7.346.41 Display of Unauthorized Signs and Signals Prohibited 7.346.42 Interference With Signs and Signals Prohibited 7.346.44 All Vehicles to Stop at Signal Indicating Approach of Train 7.346.45 Certain Vehicles to Stop at All Railroad Crossings 7.346.46 Vehicles to Stop at Stop Signs 7.346.47 When Vehicles Using Alley or Non-Highway Access to Stop 7.346.48 Vehicles to Stop for School Buses Loading or Unloading Children 7.346.50 Exceptions to Stopping and Parking Restrictions 7.346.505 Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited in Places Reserved for Handicapped 7.346.51 Stopping, Standing or Parking Outside of Business or Residence Districts 7.346.52 Stopping Prohibited in Certain Specified Places 7.346.53 Parking Prohibited in Certain Specified Places 7.346.54 How to Park and Stop on Streets 7.346.55 Other Restrictions on Parking and Stopping 7.346.57(2) Reasonable and Prudent Speed 7.346.57(3) Conditions Requiring Reduced Speed 7.346.57(4)(a)-(c) Fixed Speed Limits in School or Safety Zones 7.346.57(4)(d)-(h) Fixed Speed Limits 7.346.57(4)(hm) Emergency Energy Speed Limit 7.346.57(4)(i) Speeding in Park or Recreation Area 7.346.57(5) Zoned and Posted Speed Limits 7.346.58 Special Speed Restrictions for Certain Vehicles 7.346.59 Minimum Speed Regulations 7.346.595 Motor-Driven Cycles 7.346.61 Applicability of Sections Relating to Reckless and Drunken Driving 7.346.62(1) Reckless Driving (First Offense Within four Years) 7.346.63(1), (3)(a), (b), (4) Operating Under Influence of Intoxicant (First Offense Within five Years) 7.346.66 Applicability of Sections Relating to Accidents and Accident Reporting 7.346.68 Duty Upon Striking Unattended Vehicle 7.346.69 Duty Upon Striking Property on or Adjacent to Highway 7.346.70 Duty to Report Accident 7.346.71 Coroners to Report 7.346.72 Garages to Keep Record of Repairs of Accident Damage 7.346.73 Accident Reports Confidential 7.346.77 Responsibility of Parent or Guardian for Violation of Bicycle and Play Vehicle Regulations 7.346.78 Play Vehicles Not to be Used on Roadway 7.346.79 Special Rules Applicable to Bicycles 7.346.80 Riding Bicycle on Roadway 7.346.803 Riding Bicycle on Bicycle Way 7.346.804 Riding Bicycle on Sidewalks 7.347.489 Lamps and Other Equipment on Bicycles 7.346.87 Limitations on Backing 7.346.88 Obstruction of Operator 7.346.89 Inattentive Driving 7.346.90 Following Emergency Vehicle 7.346.91 Crossing Fire Hose 7.346.92 Illegal Riding 7.346.93 Intoxicants in Vehicles Carrying Minors 7.346.935 Drinking in Motor Vehicles on Highways 7.346.94 Miscellaneous Prohibited Acts 7.347.03 Sale of Prohibited Equipment 7.347.04 Improperly Equipped Vehicle 7.347.06 When Lighted Lamps Required 7.347.07 Special Restrictions on Lamps and the Use Thereof 7.347.08 Determining the Visibility Distance and Mounted Height of Lamps 7.347.09 Headlamps on Motor Vehicles 7.347.10 Headlamp Specifications for Motor Vehicles Other Than Power-Driven Cycles 7.347.11 Headlamp Specifications for Power-Driven Cycles and Motor Bicycles 7.347.12 Use of Multiple-Beam Headlamps 7.347.13 Tail Lamps and Registration Plate Lamps 7.347.14 Stop Lamps 7.347.15 Direction Signal Lamps or Devices 7.347.16 Clearance Lamps and Reflectors 7.347.17 Color of Clearance and Marker Lamps and Reflectors 7.347.18 Mounting of Clearance Lamps and Reflectors 7.347.19 Visibility of Clearance Lamps and Reflectors 7.347.20 Lamp or Flag on Projecting Load 7.347.21 Lamps and Flags on Trains of Agricultural Vehicles 7.347.22 Lamps on Farm Tractors and Self-Propelled Farm Implements 7.347.23 Lamps on Highway Maintenance Equipment 7.347.24 Lamps on Nonmotor Vehicles and Equipment 7.347.245 Identification Emblem on Slow Moving Vehicles 7.347.25 Special Warning Lamps on Emergency Vehicles 7.347.26 Restrictions on Certain Optional Lighting Equipment 7.347.27 When Lighted Lamps Required on Parked Vehicles 7.347.28 Certain Vehicles to Carry Flares or Other Warning Devices 7.347.29 Display of Warning Devices for Certain Vehicles When Standing on Highway 7.347.35 Brakes 7.347.36 Performance Ability of Brakes 7.347.38 Horns and Warning Devices 7.347.39 Mufflers 7.347.40 Mirrors 7.347.41 Speed Indicators 7.347.415 Odometer Tampering 7.347.42 Windshield Wipers 7.347.43 Safety Glass 7.347.44 Painting Requirements 7.347.45 Tire Equipment 7.347.46 Fenders and Mudguards 7.347.47 Drawbars, Trailer Hitches and Manufactured Home Couplings 7.347.48 Seat Belts 7.347.485 Protective Headgear for Motorcyclist 7.347.486 General Requirements (Motorcyclists) 7.347.487 Seating Requirements (Motorcyclists) 7.347.488 Moped Equipment 7.347.49 Equipment of Vehicles Transporting Flammable Liquids 7.348.05 Width of Vehicles 7.348.06 Height of Vehicles 7.348.07 Length of Vehicles 7.348.08 Vehicle Trains 7.348.09 Projecting Loads on Side of Vehicle 7.348.10 Special Limitations on Load 7.348.15 Weight Limitations on Class "A" Highways 7.348.16 Weight Limitations on Class "B" Highways 7.348.17 Special or Seasonal Weight Limitations 7.348.175 Seasonal Operating Rights for Vehicles Hauling Peeled or Unpeeled Forest Products Cut Crosswise 7.348.18 Weight Limitations Apply to Publicly-Owned Vehicles; Exceptions 7.348.19 Traffic Officers May Weigh Vehicles; Require Removal of Excess Load. 7.348.20 Policy in Prosecuting Weight Violations 7.348.25 General Provisions Relating to Permits for Vehicles and Loads of Excessive Size and Weight 7.348.26 Single Trip Permits 7.348.27 Annual or Multiple Trip Permits 7.348.28 Permits to be Carried 7.350.01-7.350.19 Snowmobiles 7.941.01 Negligent Operation of Vehicles  
(c)  In addition to those statutes adopted in subsection (b) of this section, the definitions of Wis. Stats. §§ 340.01, 341.01, 342.01, 343.01, 344.01, 346.01, 347.01 and 348.01 are adopted as though fully set forth in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 7.01) 
Sec. 7-2. - Applicability to school property. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 118.105, this chapter shall apply to property owned by the public schools. 
(Prior Code, § 7.13) 
Sec. 7-3. - Trains not to obstruct traffic. 
    No railroad train, locomotive or car shall stop upon or across any highway or street crossing within the city or remain standing upon such crossing longer than ten minutes, except in cases of accident; and any conductor, engineer, brakeman or other person in charge thereof or responsible therefor who shall violate this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $25.00. 
(Prior Code, § 7.08) 
Sec. 7-4. - School buses, use of flashers. 
    School bus operators shall not use flashing red warning lights in the city, except where emergency conditions create a safety hazard to passengers or pedestrians or where the operator is prevented by traffic conditions from loading and unloading passengers immediately next to a curb. School bus operators are prohibited from using flashing red warning lights when pupils or other authorized passengers are loading or unloading directly from or onto the school grounds or that portion of the right-of-way between the roadway and the school grounds designated by school warning signs as provided in Wis. Stats. § 118.08(1) in which a street or highway borders the grounds of a school, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.21(2), except where emergency conditions create a safety hazard to passengers or pedestrians. 
(Prior Code, § 7.09) 
Sec. 7-5. - Vehicular traffic at airport. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency equipment means crash, fire and rescue, or place motor vehicles and such other equipment as the airport manager may designate as necessary to safeguard airport runways, taxiways, ramps, buildings and other property. 
    Service, maintenance and construction equipment means approved equipment normally operated by the airport owner, its agents or under contract, fixed base operators, or other governmental agencies performing official duties on landing areas, runways, taxiways and peripheral roads for the servicing, maintenance and construction of airport facilities and services or for the servicing of aircraft. The term "service, maintenance and construction equipment" shall include equipment owned and operated by a contractor performing work on the airport under a contractual agreement with the Sparta/Fort McCoy Airport. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn excepting aircraft. 
(b)  Operation of vehicles on runways, taxiways and ramps. 
(1)  No vehicle shall enter, be driven upon, or operated upon any airport runway, taxiway, ramp, tie down area, or any area posted by signs prohibiting the entrance thereon. 
(2)  The provision of this section shall not apply to emergency equipment or service, maintenance, and construction equipment when engaged in performing normal duties. 
(3)  Aircraft owners may be granted authorization by the airport manager or his designated representative to operate a vehicle to reach their own aircraft in a tie down area. Aircraft owners desiring to operate a vehicle for this purpose shall request such authorization in advance. Any authorization granted shall apply only to a specific need request. Blanket-type authorizations shall not be granted. Unless specifically authorized, aircraft owners shall not pass over any runway, taxiway, or ramp and shall proceed through the tie down area at a speed not to exceed ten miles per hour. They shall not at any time park a vehicle on any area used for the movement of aircraft. Such authorization shall not be granted contrary to the provisions of CFR part 139 or part 107, Federal Aviation Regulations (applicable only to airline airports). 
(c)  Speed of vehicles. No vehicle shall be driven upon any road within the perimeter of the airport or upon other aircraft areas, in excess of the speed limit posted, nor shall the driver of any vehicle fail to adhere to any sign posted to regulate vehicle traffic on or about the airport. 
(d)  Vehicle parking. All vehicles parked on the airport shall be parked in designated areas and in accordance with posted signs or other markings. The airport manager may move, or order the removal of any vehicle improperly parking, at the owner's expense. Fines or forfeitures may be levied in accordance with section 7-1. 
(e)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city police department of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The military police of Fort McCoy, Wisconsin, also have jurisdiction over these lands. 
(f)  Violation. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof forfeit not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until the forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(Prior Code, § 7.17) 
Sec. 7-6. - Erection of traffic signs and signals. 
(a)  The board of public works shall procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules of the state highway division giving notice of the provisions of article II of this chapter, sections 7-61, 7-63, 7-87 and 7-88-7-101. Signs shall be erected in such locations and manner authorized by the city council to give adequate warning to users of the street, alley or highway. No provision of such section shall be enforced unless and until such signs are erected and in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(b)  Removal of unofficial sign and signals. The board of public works may order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this section or Wis. Stats. § 346.41. Any charge imposed on a premises for removal of such an illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the council at its next regular meeting for review and certification. 
(Prior Code, § 7.12) 
Sec. 7-7. - Bicycles. 
(a)  Unclaimed or unidentified bicycle. All abandoned bicycles and unidentified bicycles remaining in police department custody may, after 30 days, be disposed of, made available to the public for purchase, or sold at auction. 
(b)  Riding on sidewalks. Bicyclists exercising due care may drive and operate their bicycles upon the sidewalks, except sidewalks in the central business districts when such riding shall not jeopardize the safety of pedestrians thereon. 
(c)  Bicycle rental agency. A rental agency within the city shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required by the state motor vehicle code. 
(d)  Effects of regulation. 
(1)  No person shall perform any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this section. 
(2)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit a ward to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(3)  The regulation applicable to bicycles shall apply wherever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated therein. 
(Prior Code, § 7.11) 
Sec. 7-8. - Play vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate or ride any skateboard, roller skates, roller skis or play vehicles, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On any city street. 
(2)  On any sidewalk in any business district. For purposes of this section the term "business district" shall be defined as any area primarily commercial in nature. 
(3)  In any public parking lot. 
(4)  On any public property where signs prohibit it. 
(5)  On any private property, unless permission has been received from the owner, lessee or person in charge of that property. 
(b)  Operators or riders of skateboards, roller skates, roller skis or play vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians using the sidewalk and shall not otherwise endanger or interfere with pedestrian traffic on those sidewalks. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Every person 14 years of age to 18 years of age who is convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall forfeit not more than $25.00, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(2)  Violators who have not attained 14 years of age who are convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall have their skateboard, roller skates, roller skis, or play vehicle detained for not more than 30 days. 
(3)  Violators who have attained their 18th birthday who have been convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall forfeit an amount as provided in section 25-11. 
(4)  Parents of violators who knowingly permit a second or subsequent violation shall forfeit an amount as provided in section 25-11. 
(Prior Code, § 7.16) 
Secs. 7-9-7-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 7-35. - Speed limits. 
    The city council determines that the statutory speed limits on the following streets or portions thereof are unreasonable, unsafe and imprudent and modifies such speed limits under authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 349.11: 
(1)  Speed limits increased. Speed limits established by Wis. Stats. § 346.57(4)(e), (f) and (g) are increased as herein set forth upon the following streets or portions thereof: 
a.  Thirty-five miles per hour on State Highway 16 between the east line of Dike Road to the east city limits. 
b.  Twenty-five miles per hour on Avon Road. 
(2)  Speed limits decreased. With the approval of the state highway division, the speed limits set forth in Wis. Stats. § 346.57(4)(e), (f) and (g) are decreased as herein set forth upon the following streets or portions thereof: 
a.  Fifteen miles per hour on Richgruber Road. 
b.  Fifteen miles per hour on Osborne Drive. 
(3)  Speed limit in Memorial Park. The speed limit on streets and roadways located in Memorial Park shall be ten miles per hour. This speed limit shall apply at all hours of the day on the following portions of the following streets: 
a.  On East Main Street extended easterly from the intersection of East Main Street and Rusk Avenue, which easterly extension of East Main Street is also known as Memorial Drive; 
b.  From Pine Street extended easterly from the intersection of Rusk Avenue and Pine Street and continuing easterly along Pine Street extended which is also known as Memorial Drive to the point where Memorial Drive meets and becomes East Main Street extended. 
(Prior Code, § 7.02(1)-(3)) 
Sec. 7-36. - Exhibition of power. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the city in any manner which tends to be an exhibition of power. The term "exhibition of power or speed" means the operation of a motor vehicle in any manner where excessive power is used or acceleration is very rapid from any position in a roadway (moving, stopped or parked), from public facilities, private drives, stop signs or traffic signals. It includes the excessive revving of the engine, squealing or spinning the tires, and all erratic driving and other misconduct with a motor vehicle not covered elsewhere in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 7.02(4)) 
Secs. 7-37-7-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET USE DESIGNATIONS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 7-61. - Through streets. 
    In the interest of public safety and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.07, the following streets or portions thereof are declared to be through streets. Traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by the board of public works in accordance with section 7-6: 
(1)  Water Street from the north city limits to the north line of Avon Road, except at the intersection with Franklin Street traffic traveling north and south must come to a complete stop before entering the intersection at Oak Street, Montgomery Street and Wisconsin Street, traffic traveling north and south must obey the traffic signals. 
(2)  Highway 21 from the north city limits to the south line of East Montgomery Street; Montgomery Street from the west line of Rusk Avenue to the east line of North Black River Street except all traffic traveling east and west must obey the traffic signals at North Water Street. Montgomery Street from the west city limits to the west line of North Black River Street. Traffic on Eyler Street approaching the intersection with West Montgomery shall yield the right-of-way. Traffic on Goodman Street approaching the intersection with West Montgomery shall come to a complete stop before entering the intersection. All traffic traveling west on North Fairway Drive and all traffic traveling west on South Fairway Drive shall come to a complete stop before entering Highway 21. Traffic entering Rusk Avenue/Montgomery Street intersection from any direction shall come to a complete stop. 
(3)  Black River Street from the north city limits to the south city limits except at the Wisconsin Street, Montgomery Street and Avon Road intersections. 
(4)  Wisconsin Street from the west line of South Black River Street to the east city limits except the Water and Black River Street intersections where traffic must obey the traffic signals. Also, West Wisconsin Street from the west line of South Black River Street to the west city limits, with traffic obeying the traffic signals at Alpine Drive and Industrial Drive. 
(5)  Court Street from the south line of Montgomery Street to the north line of Wisconsin Street except at the Oak Street intersection. At such intersections all vehicles entering the same from the north, west, south and east shall come to a full and complete stop. North Court Street from the north line of Montgomery Street to the south line of Division Street. Traffic on Austin Street and Garfield Street approaching the intersection with North Court Street shall yield the right-of-way. South Court Street from the south line of Wisconsin Street to the north line of South Water Street. 
(6)  Oak Street from the east line of Court Street to the east line of East Avenue, except at the Water Street intersection where traffic is controlled in all directions by an automatic signal light, and except traffic entering the Oak Street intersection from the south on East Avenue need not stop before entering Oak Street. 
(7)  Pine Street at the intersection of Pine Street and the swimming pool parking lot. Traffic traveling on the swimming pool parking lot and approaching Pine Street shall come to a complete stop before entering Pine Street. All traffic entering the intersection of Rusk Avenue and Pine Street from all directions shall come to a full and complete stop. 
(8)  Main Street from east line of Water Street to the west line of Rusk Avenue. 
(9)  North Street from the west line of K Street to the east line of Myrtle Street. 
(10)  Jefferson Avenue from the west line of South Court Street to the east line of Myrtle Street. Traffic on L approaching intersection with the above street shall yield the right-of-way. 
(11)  Walrath Street from the east line of South Water Street to the east line of the city limits. 
(12)  Franklin Street from the east line of Water Street to the west line of Benton Street. Traffic on Spring Street approaching the intersection with Franklin Street shall yield the right-of-way. Also, Franklin Street from the east line of Tyler Street to the west line of Tyler Street. Traffic on Tyler Street approaching Franklin Street shall yield the right-of-way. 
(13)  Division Street from the east line of Chester Street to the west line of Rusk Avenue. Traffic on Kent Street approaching the intersection with East Division Street shall stop. 
(14)  Milwaukee Avenue at the intersection of Milwaukee Avenue and Golf Course Road. Traffic on Golf Course Road approaching Milwaukee Avenue shall come to a full and complete stop before entering Milwaukee Avenue. 
(15)  Rusk Avenue from the north line of Highway 21 to East Division Street. 
(16)  Kent Street from the north line of East Montgomery Street to the south line of East Division Street. 
(17)  Wolcott Street, all traffic traveling on Douglas approaching intersection with Wolcott shall stop. 
(18)  Belmont Avenue from the south line of Belmont Avenue north to the south line of West Wisconsin Street. Traffic approaching Belmont Avenue on Maple Avenue shall stop for traffic on Belmont Avenue. 
(19)  Oak Street from the west line of South Court Street to the east line of Black River Street. Traffic on either Stelting Street or Myrtle Street or L Street or K Street approaching the intersection of any such street with West Oak Street shall stop before entering such intersection. 
(20)  Central Avenue from the west line of South K Street to the east line of North Myrtle Street. Traffic on North L Street approaching the intersection with Central Avenue shall yield the right-of-way. 
(21)  Traffic approaching East Franklin Street from both directions on Tyler Street shall yield to traffic on East Franklin Street. 
(22)  All traffic traveling south on South Water Street shall stop for traffic on Avon Road except traffic turning right off South Water Street shall not stop. 
(23)  Industrial Drive. 
(Prior Code, § 7.03) 
Sec. 7-62. - Stop signs. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.07(8), stop signs shall be erected to control traffic at points on city streets described as follows: 
(1)  On Memorial Drive which is Pine Street extended easterly in Memorial Park so as to require eastbound traffic on Pine Street to stop before entering Memorial Drive at the entrance of Memorial Park lying at the east end of Pine Street. 
(2)  On Memorial Drive which is Pine Street extended easterly, requiring westbound traffic on Memorial Drive to stop before entering the crosswalk located at the west end of the Memorial Park parking area, which parking area is located just north of Memorial Drive and just east of the east end of Pine Street. 
(3)  On Memorial Drive which is East Main Street extended easterly so as to require eastbound traffic on such portion of Memorial Drive to stop before entering the crosswalk located just west of the gate to the baseball field-park area at the south end of Memorial Park. 
(4)  On Memorial Drive which is East Main Street extended easterly so as to require westbound traffic on such portion of Memorial Drive to stop before entering the crosswalk located just west of the gate to the baseball field-park area at the south end of Memorial Park. 
(5)  On Myrtle Street so as to require traffic traveling north on Myrtle Street and traffic traveling south on Myrtle Street to stop at West Main Street. 
(6)  On Rusk Avenue requiring traffic on Rusk Avenue traveling in a northerly direction and traffic on Rusk Avenue traveling in a southerly direction to stop at the intersection of Rusk Avenue and East Franklin Street. 
(7)  On the entrance roadway to Fisherman's Park so as to require traffic traveling westerly on the entrance roadway to stop before entering East Ave. 
(8)  On Osborne Drive so as to require traffic traveling north on Osborne Drive to stop before entering East Montgomery Street, and on Osborne Drive so as to require traffic traveling south on Osborne Drive to stop before entering Pine Street. 
(9)  On the north and south sides of Grace Street at the intersection with St. Anne Street so as to require traffic traveling north and south on Grace Street to stop before entering or crossing St. Anne Street. 
(10)  On Hoeschler Drive at the intersection with Pfaff Parkway so as to require traffic traveling west on Hoeschler Drive to stop before entering or crossing Pfaff Parkway. 
(11)  On East Division Street at the intersection with North Chester Street so as to require traffic traveling west on East Division Street to stop before entering North Chester Street. 
(12)  On St. Anne Street so as to require east bound and west bound traffic on St. Anne Street to stop before entering Thayer Street. 
(13)  On Thayer Street so as to require northbound traffic on Thayer Street to stop before entering Jefferson Avenue and on Thayer Street so as to require southbound traffic on Thayer Street to stop before entering Jefferson Avenue. 
(14)  North Rusk/Ellen/Margaret/Teena. 
a.  On Margaret Street so as to require traffic traveling west on Margaret Street and traffic traveling east on T Street to stop at North Rusk Avenue. 
b.  On Teena Street so as to require traffic traveling west on Teena Street and traffic traveling east on Teena Street to stop at North Rusk Avenue. 
(15)  Washington/Mill and Circle/Jefferson and Blake/Hill/Jefferson/K and Monroe/Chester. 
a.  On Washington Street so as to require traffic traveling east on Washington Street and traffic traveling west on Washington Street to stop at Mill Street. 
b.  On Circle Drive so as to require traffic traveling south on Circle Drive to stop before entering Jefferson Avenue. 
c.  On Blake Street, Hill Street and Jefferson Avenue so as to require traffic traveling east and west on the streets to stop before entering K Street. 
d.  On Monroe Street so as to require traffic entering Chester Street to stop before entering. 
(16)  On Thayer Street so as to require traffic to stop at West Main Street. 
(17)  On Hickory Street so as to require traffic entering Monroe Street to stop before entering. 
(18)  On K Street so as to require traffic entering Central Avenue to stop before entering. 
(19)  On Main Street so as to require traffic entering K Street to stop before entering. 
(20)  Thayer/Central and West Main/North L. 
a.  Central Avenue so as to require east bound and west bound traffic on Central avenue to stop before entering Thayer Street. 
b.  On West Main Street so as to require traffic to stop at North L Street. 
(21)  On Maple Street at the intersection of Maple Street and Stelting Streets. 
(22)  On Chester Street so as to require traffic to stop at Pearl Street. 
a.  On access drive to old airport property so as to require traffic traveling East to stop before entering county Highway A. 
b.  On Southeast corner of River Road so as to require traffic exiting River Pines Mobile Home Park to stop. 
c.  On Pine Street so as to require traffic traveling East and West to stop before entering Chester Street. 
(23)  On L Street so as to require traffic entering Main Street to stop before entering. 
a.  On Randy Road so as to require traffic entering James Drive to stop before entering. 
b.  On Terry court so as to require traffic entering Linda Lane to stop before entering. 
c.  On Randy Road so as to require traffic entering Linda Lane to stop before entering. 
(24)  On Myrtle Street so as to require traffic entering Central Avenue to stop before entering. 
(25)  On Prairie Avenue so as to require traffic entering Milwaukee Street to stop. 
(26)  On Hoeschler Drive so as to require East bound traffic to stop before entering Roberts Road. 
(27)  On Blake Street so as to require traffic entering South L Street to stop before entering. 
(28)  On Douglas Street so as to require traffic entering Milwaukee Street to stop. 
(29)  On Theater Road so as to stop traffic entering Highway 16. 
(30)  On Clearview Drive so as to stop traffic entering Terry court from the east. 
(31)  On Terry court so as to stop traffic entering River Road from the north. 
(32)  On Chester Street so as to stop traffic entering Division Street. 
(33)  On Kroeger Drive, so as to stop traffic entering Meadow View Lane. 
(34)  On Drake Street, so as to stop traffic entering North Street. 
(35)  On Stonewood court, Julie Avenue, Linda Lane, Cedarwood Avenue and River Road so as to stop traffic entering Aspen Boulevard from the east. 
(36)  On Linda Lane and Cedarwood Avenue so as to stop traffic entering Sugarberry Boulevard from the west. 
(37)  On Aspen Boulevard so as to stop traffic entering state Highway 16 from the south. 
(38)  On South Stonewood Court so as to stop traffic entering Julie Avenue from the north. 
(39)  On Julie Avenue so as to stop traffic entering Terry court from the west. 
(40)  On Sugarberry Boulevard so as to stop traffic entering River Road. 
(41)  On Sugarberry Boulevard so as to stop traffic entering Julie Avenue from the south. 
(42)  On Industrial Drive so as to require traffic entering River Road to stop before entering. 
(43)  On Riley Road so as to stop traffic entering State Highway 16 Northbound, State Highway 71 Eastbound and Westbound. 
(44)  On James Drive so as to stop traffic entering Alpine Drive from the east and the west. 
(45)  On Garrett Avenue so as to require traffic entering west Main Street to stop before entering. 
(46)  On Julie Avenue so as to stop traffic entering Aspen Boulevard from the west. 
(47)  On River Road so as to stop traffic entering Aspen Boulevard from the west. 
(48)  On Riverwood Place so as to stop traffic entering Highway 16 from the south. 
(49)  On DeWitt Street so as to stop traffic entering North Street from the north. 
(50)  On Sherry Lynn Lane so as to stop traffic entering Theater Road. 
(51)  On Saddlewood Avenue so as to stop traffic entering Julie Avenue from the south. 
(52)  On Evenson Drive so as to stop traffic entering Julie Avenue from the south. 
(53)  On Evenson Drive so as to stop traffic entering River Road from the north. 
(54)  On Evenson court so as to stop traffic entering River Road from the south. 
(55)  On Pinewood court so as to stop traffic entering River Road from the south. 
(56)  On Oakwood court so as to stop traffic entering River Road from the south. 
(57)  On Remington Avenue so as to stop traffic entering Saddlewood Avenue from the east. 
(58)  On River Trail Avenue so as to stop traffic entering Saddlewood Avenue from the east. 
(59)  On Thayer Street so as to stop traffic entering North Street. 
(60)  On Lynn Drive so as to stop traffic entering Main Street. 
(61)  Hill Street so as to stop traffic entering L Street. 
(62)  On Riverwood Place, so as to stop traffic from entering Julie Avenue from the north and south. 
(63)  On Rusk Avenue entering Division Street. 
(64)  On Garrett Avenue entering Street Anne Street. 
(65)  On K Street entering North Street. 
(66)  On Monroe Street entering Rusk Avenue. 
(67)  On Pearl Street entering Rusk Avenue. 
(68)  On Franklin Street entering Rusk Avenue. 
(69)  Eastbound Main Street entering Rusk Avenue and northbound Rusk Avenue entering Main Street. 
(70)  Remington Avenue entering Evenson Drive. 
(71)  River Trail entering Evenson Drive. 
(72)  Hill Street entering Thayer Avenue. 
(73)  Roberts Road entering River Road. 
(74)  Stelting Street entering Hill Street. 
(75)  Wolcott Street entering East Avenue. 
(76)  Holton Street entering Milwaukee Street. 
(77)  Commercial Drive entering Riley Road. 
(78)  8th court entering Avon Road. 
(79)  Memorial Park at Concession Stand. 
(80)  Northbound Water Street entering Avon Road. 
(81)  On East Oak Street so as to require eastbound traffic on East Oak Street to stop before turning north onto Tyler Street and right turn no stop turning south onto East Avenue. 
(82)  On North L Street so as to stop traffic entering Central Avenue. 
(83)  On South L Street so as to stop traffic entering Jefferson Avenue. 
(84)  On River Road so as to stop traffic entering Sugarberry Boulevard. 
(85)  On Aspen Boulevard so as to stop traffic entering Julie Avenue. 
(86)  On Rusk Avenue, so as to require southbound traffic on Rusk Avenue to stop before turning east onto East Main Street, or continuing south on East Rusk Avenue and right turn no stop turning west onto East Main Street. 
(87)  On West Averill Street at the intersection with Roberts Road so as to require traffic traveling west on West Averill Street to stop before entering or crossing Roberts Road. 
(Prior Code, § 7.035; Ord. No. 934, § 1, 7-19-2017; Ord. No. 943 , § 1, 4-18-2018) 
Sec. 7-63. - Yield signs. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.07(7), yield signs shall be erected to control traffic at points on city streets described as follows: 
(1)  On Myrtle Street so as to require traffic entering Jefferson Avenue from Myrtle Street to yield before entering. 
(2)  On Stelting Street so as to require traffic entering Jefferson Ave. from Stelting Street to yield before entering. 
(3)  On Monroe Street entering Benton Street. 
(4)  On Pearl Street entering Benton Street. 
(5)  On Benton Street entering Pine Street. 
(6)  On Benton Street entering Franklin Street. 
(7)  On Chester Street entering Franklin Street. 
(8)  On Sarah Street entering Franklin Street. 
(9)  On Pine Street so as to require traffic entering Spring Street to yield before entering. 
(Prior Code, § 7.04) 
Sec. 7-64. - One-way street. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.10, the following streets are designated to be one-way and require that all vehicles be operated in one specific direction on such street and appropriate signs shall be installed carrying such designation: 
(1)  West Main Street from the intersection with Water Street to the intersection with Court Street and vehicles shall be operated in a westerly direction only on such portion of West Main Street. 
(Prior Code, § 7.045) 
Secs. 7-65-7-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING 

Sec. 7-87. - Prohibited parking. 
    The following streets and public ways are designated as "No Parking at Anytime:" 
(1)  The north side of Howe Court from North Thayer Avenue west to North Grace Street. 
(2)  The west side of South Chester Street commencing at the north line of East Oak Street and thence north 30 feet to the alley entrance lying between and being parallel with East Oak Street and East Main Street. 
(3)  Both sides of East Main Street commencing at the east end of the East Main Street (Beaver Creek) bridge to the west end of such bridge. 
(4)  In Memorial Park at locations designated by the park board, provided such "No Parking" signs are located along the roadway going through the park or at the entrance to the ball fields. The design, installation and use of such signs shall be in accordance with regulations of the state department of transportation, division of highways. 
(5)  Along the roadway extending from the east end of East Montgomery Street to the municipal golf course club house at locations designated by the park board. Such signs may be installed or removed at particular times of the year as deemed appropriate by the park board. The design, installation and use of such signs shall be in accordance with the regulations of the state department of transportation, division of highways. 
(6)  Both sides of East Oak Street between the west line extended of South Benton Street and the west edge of the East Oak Street (Beaver Creek) Bridge. 
(7)  The east side of Water Street directly in front of the main entry to the Morrow Home, extending from the driveway entrance to the exit. 
(8)  The south side of West Main Street from Black River Street to L Street. 
(9)  The east side of L Street from Oak Street to Main Street. 
(10)  On the south side of Maple Street from 250 feet to 580 feet west of the west line of Black River Street. 
(11)  The east side of Roberts Road commencing at the north line of West Averill Street and then northerly 235 feet. 
(12)  The west side of Roberts Road commencing at the south line of Hoeschler Drive and thence southerly 230 feet. 
(13)  The south side of Hoeschler Drive commencing at the west line of Roberts Road and thence westerly 300 feet. 
(14)  75 feet on the east side of Industrial Drive, commencing 212.5 feet south of the corner of Hoeschler Drive and Industrial Drive, thence south 75 feet. 
(15)  On the west side of South K Street from Maple Street to the La Crosse River. 
(16)  The South side of River Road, commencing 300 feet West of the intersection of River Road and Roberts Road and Roberts Road and extending 175 feet West from the point of beginning as well as 820 feet West of the Roberts/River intersection thence West 170 feet. 
(17)  Both sides of East Division Street for the first 20 feet from Angelo Road. 
(18)  On both sides of Harris Court. 
(19)  On the west side of North Water Street from the north line of Montgomery Street, thence north 150 feet. 
(20)  Both sides of Montgomery Street for the first 150 feet east and west of Black River Street (State Highway 27). 
(21)  On both sides of Montgomery Street for the first 160 feet east and west of the intersection with Water Street. 
(22)  The east side of South Water Street from a point 60 feet south of East Averill Street to a point 240 feet south of East Averill Street. 
(23)  On the east side of South Water Street from 220 feet to 300 feet north of Hill Street and from 90 feet to 180 feet south of Hill Street. 
(24)  Both sides of South Rusk Avenue, commencing at the south line of East Main Street and continuing south for 300 feet. 
(25)  Both sides of Averill Street between Black River Street (Hwy 27) and Roberts Road. 
(26)  Both sides of Avon Road commencing at Highway 27 and east to South Water Street. 
(Prior Code, § 7.05; Ord. No. 923, § 1, 10-19-2016; Ord. No. 925, § 1, 12-21-2016; Ord. No. 935(2), § 1, 10-18-2017; Ord. No. 938 , § 1, 10-18-2017) 
Sec. 7-88. - Restricted parking. 
    The following streets and public ways are subject to special time limits as set forth herein: 
(1)  Overnight parking. No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow a motor vehicle to be parked in any established city parking lot between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. where posted for no overnight parking or in violation of designated alternate overnight parking. Such parking lots shall be designated by a sign stating "NO OVERNIGHT PARKING EXCEPT WHERE POSTED-ALTERNATE OVERNIGHT PARKING." 
a.  The seven parking spaces adjacent to the property at 127 North Water Street, which are located in the parking lot east of and in the 100 block of North Water Street (also known as the First Bank of Sparta parking lot) shall be "RESERVED PARKING." 
b.  The area of the Market Square parking lot bounded by the east line of South Spring Street on the west, the west edge of Beaver Creek on the east, the south line of East Main Street to the north line of East Oak Street on the south, excluding that area occupied by the Sparta Area Rural fire department Station. The 13 spaces on the north side of the first island south of East Main Street shall be designated as overnight parking on even days from November 1 to the following April 1. The 15 spaces on the south side of the first island south of East Main Street shall be designated as overnight parking on odd days from November 1 to the following April 1. All other spaces in the Market Square parking lot are designated for no overnight parking. 
c.  The four parking spaces on the north end of Ray's parking lot (West Main Street) shall be designated for no overnight parking effective between November 1 and April 1. The nine parking spaces on the east side of Ray's parking lot shall be designated for alternate night parking for odd numbered calendar dates. The 12 parking spaces on the west side of Ray's parking lot shall be designated for alternate night parking for even numbered calendar dates effective between November 1 and April 1. 
(2)  Two hour parking. No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked for longer than two continuous hours in any established two-hour zone from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, holidays excluded. Such parking zones and the effective days and hours shall be designated by a sign posted in proximity to such zones. The following shall be established as two-hour parking zones: 
a.  The west side of Water Street from the north line of West Franklin Street to a point located mid-block between Jefferson Ave. and Blake Street 
b.  The east side of Water Street from Franklin Street to the south line of Jefferson Avenue. 
c.  Both sides of West Franklin Street from the west line of North Water Street to the east line of the West Franklin Street (Beaver Creek) bridge. With advance notice and approval of the police department, the Lanham-Kann Funeral Home (or its successors) may place "No Parking" signs for funerals and funeral visitations. 
d.  Both sides of East Franklin Street from the east line of North Water Street to the east line of the public alley lying between and being parallel with North Water Street and North Spring Street, and an additional 25 feet east of the east line of the public alley on the north side of East Franklin Street. 
e.  Both sides of West Main Street from the west line of Water Street to the east line of Court Street, excluding those areas otherwise restricted by this article. 
f.  Both sides of East Main Street from the east line of Water Street to the west line of the East Main Street (Beaver Creek) bridge, excluding those areas otherwise restricted by this article. 
g.  Both sides of West Oak Street from the west line of South Water Street to the east line of South Court Street 
h.  Both sides of East Oak Street from the east line of South Water Street to the west line of the East Oak Street (Beaver Creek) bridge, excluding those areas otherwise restricted by this article. 
i.  Both sides of Jefferson Ave. from the west line of South Water Street to the east line of South Court Street, excluding those areas otherwise restricted by this article. 
j.  The west side of Court Street from the north line of Jefferson Avenue to the south line of Central Avenue and the east side of Court Street from the north line of Jefferson Avenue to a point 275 feet, more or less, north of the north line of West Main Street. 
k.  First two parking spaces on the west side of North Spring Street, just south of East Franklin Street. 
l.  On the north side of West Main Street, the two parking stalls adjacent to the handicapped parking stall in front of the county museum. 
m.  On the south side of Jefferson Avenue between L Street and the alley located approximately 150 feet east. 
(3)  Special restricted parking. The first parking space on the north side of West Main Street and east of the alley in front of 106 North L Street (Sparta Arms). 
(4)  Fifteen minute parking. No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked for more than 15-minutes in any 15-minute zone. The following shall be established as 15-minute parking zones: 
a.  The south side of West Oak Street from the west line of South Court Street and the west line of the municipal building driveway between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
b.  The south side of West Main Street from the intersection with North L Street west to the alley, a distance of 125 feet. 
c.  The second and third stalls on west side of South K Street lying south of Oak Street. 
(5)  Thirty minute parking. No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked for more than 30-minutes in any 30-minute zone. The following shall be established as 30-minute parking zones: 
a.  The North side of Hoeschler Drive commencing at the west line of Roberts Road and thence westerly 300 feet. 
b.  The two southernmost stalls along Beaver Creek in the Franklin Street parking lot. 
(6)  Ninety minute parking. No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked in the following zone between 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m.: On school days, on the north side of Walrath Street, beginning at the intersection with John Street and extending 700 feet east to a point in front of 1118 Walrath Street. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(1)) 
Sec. 7-89. - Night parking. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked for any period of time between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following streets or public ways: 
(1)  Water Street between Franklin Street and a point midblock between Jefferson Ave. and Blake Street. 
(2)  Franklin Street between the West Franklin Street (Beaver Creek) bridge and the public alley west of North Spring Street. 
(3)  Main Street between Court Street and Spring Street. 
(4)  Oak Street between South Court Street and South Spring Street. 
(5)  Court Street between Jefferson Ave. and the public alley north of the museum and the Sparta Free Library. 
(6)  Jefferson Ave. between South Water Street and South Court Street. 
(b)  Alternate night parking. When signs have been erected at or near the city limits as provided in Wis. Stats. § 349.13, after the hour of 2:00 a.m. and before 6:00 a.m., motor vehicles or any other type of vehicles shall be parked on even numbered calendar dates on the side of the street where the dwellings are even numbered and on dates having odd numbered calendar dates on the side of the street having odd numbered dwellings. This provision shall be effective between November 1 and April 1 following each year. The effective calendar date shall be determined as of the date at 2:00 a.m. Further, after the hour of 2:00 a.m. and before 6:00 a.m., motor vehicles or any other type of vehicle shall not be parked on any cul-de-sac within the city between November 1 and April 1 following each year. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(2), (3)) 
Sec. 7-90. - Reserved parking. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked for any period of time in any spaces designated as "Reserved Parking." The following shall be established as "Reserved Parking": The first space on the southwest side of Ray's parking lot shall be designated as the car charging only space. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(4)) 
Sec. 7-91. - Official parking. 
(a)  No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked in violation of any provision set forth herein. The following public property shall be designated "official parking:" 
(b)  The area from the west edge of the city hall building and the west lot line and from the south edge of the city hall building to the south lot line; such official parking only to include parking by city employees during city business hours or for city business purposes and parking by any person for city business purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(5)) 
Sec. 7-92. - Handicapped/disabled parking. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked in any space that has been designated as being for physically handicapped or disabled persons, unless there is attached or displayed special registration plates or permit issued by the state department of transportation, division of motor vehicles. The following shall be designated as restricted parking for physically handicapped or disabled persons: 
(1)  The first parking space located south of the south line of West Main Street on the west side of South Water Street, in front of 100 South Water Street. 
(2)  The first parking space located east of the east line of South Court Street on the south side of West Oak Street, in front of 125 West Oak Street. 
(3)  Any parking area that requires handicapped/disabled parking under Wis. Stats. § 346.503, provided the spaces are designated and signed as required by Wis. Stats. § 346.503. 
(4)  The first parking space on the west side of North Court Street and north of West Main Street. 
(5)  The first parking space on the east side of South Court Street and North of West Oak Street. 
(6)  Twenty-foot parking stall north of maintenance driveway to Memorial Park Football Field on East Side of Rusk Avenue. 
(7)  The first parking space located on the west side of K Street and South of Oak Street. 
(8)  The street frontage immediately adjacent to the property at 314 North Chester Street. 
(9)  On K Street near the Methodist Church. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  In front of 319 North Court Street. 
(12)  The street frontage immediately adjacent to the property at 416 East Main Street. 
(13)  The first parking space on the north side of East Oak Street and East of South Water Street. 
(14)  Two parking spaces on North Benton Street, immediately adjacent to the sidewalk access and ramp for access to Veterans Memorials in Blyton Park. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(6); Ord. No. 937 , § 1, 9-20-2017; Ord. No. 942 , § 1, 4-18-2018) 
Sec. 7-93. - City parks. 
(a)  Restricted. No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked on the grounds of any park in the city, except in a designated and marked parking lot or area. 
(b)  Designation. The park board shall have authority to establish and designate parking lots and areas in the city parks. The entrances and exits to such parking areas shall be designated with signs indicating "parking lot" or "parking area." The boundaries of such parking lot or area shall be designated by appropriate fences, posts, lines, signs, surfacing or other designation. The park board may designate parking spaces within each parking lot or area by lines or other markings and where so appropriately marked, section 7-98 shall apply. The city street department shall post a sign stating "parking on park grounds prohibited except in designated parking areas" at a point adjacent to the city street at the entrance to such park and at such other places on or adjacent to park grounds as the park board shall deem appropriate. 
(c)  Employee parking. Two parking stalls shall be created on the east side of the concession stand building in Memorial Park and shall be designated for "employee parking only." In addition, all parking stalls on the west side of the concession stand shall be designated for "employee parking only." 
(d)  Handicapped/disabled parking. Three parking stalls shall be established on the east side of the concession stand for "handicapped parking only." 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(7)) 
Sec. 7-94. - School zones. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked for any period of time between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on school days on the following streets and public ways: 
(1)  The south side of East Franklin Street from the east line of North Spring Street to the west line of North Benton Street. 
(2)  The west side of North Benton Street from the south line of East Franklin Street to the north line of the driveway of the school parking lot. 
(3)  The east side of South L Street from the north line of West Oak Street to the south line of West Main Street. 
(4)  The west side of South L Street, commencing at the south side of Jefferson Avenue, thence 250 feet south. 
(5)  The south side of Pine Street from the east lot line of the property located at 217 North Rusk Ave. to the east line of the driveway of Lakeview School onto Pine Street. 
(6)  On the following streets and public ways, residential parking only from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. school days only, to-wit: 
a.  North side of West Montgomery Street from North Black River Street to Drake Street. 
b.  South side of West Montgomery Street from Goodman Street to Drake Street. 
c.  Goodman Street, Russell Street, Williams Street and Eyler Street. 
(7)  The east side of Spring Street for the first 360 feet south of Franklin Street. 
(8)  The West side of L for the first 150 feet North of Oak Street. 
(9)  On the following streets and public ways, residential parking only, for the first 130 feet south of Central Avenue on the east side of North L Street. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(8)) 
Sec. 7-95. - Loading zones. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked in any area designated as a loading zone except when actually engaged in loading or unloading, in front of 313 Central Avenue from 6:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(9)) 
Sec. 7-96. - All other. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle and no owner of a motor vehicle shall allow it to be parked for any period of time in violation of the restrictions set forth below: 
(1)  At those locations where temporary "no parking" signs have been erected by the police department or street department for special events including, but not limited to, construction, maintenance, snow removal, parades, etc. Such signs will be removed as soon as practicable after completion of the work or event. 
(2)  On any street or public way within the city for a period of time in excess of 48 hours. 
(3)  In any undesignated space in the parking lot behind 122 North Water Street to 146 North Water Street, for more than 24 consecutive hours. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(10)) 
Sec. 7-97. - Truck and van parking. 
(a)  No truck parking at anytime. No person shall park a truck and no owner of a truck shall allow it to be parked in any portion of the following spaces: The north side of Maple Street from the intersection with Black River Street to the last driveway entrance to the cinema. 
(b)  No truck or van parking. No person shall park a truck or van and no owner of a truck or van shall allow it to be parked in violation of the restrictions set forth below: 
(1)  No parking in the first parking space on either side of the street at all four corners of the following intersections: 
a.  Main and Water Streets. 
b.  Water and Franklin Streets. 
c.  Oak and Water Streets. 
d.  Court and Main Streets. 
e.  Court and Franklin Streets. 
f.  Jefferson Ave. and Water Street. 
g.  Jefferson Ave. and Court Street. 
(2)  No parking in the first two parking spaces on the north side of West Oak Street immediately east of South K Street. 
(3)  No parking on Jefferson Avenue from Court Street west to the driveway for city hall. 
(4)  No parking on the north side of East Oak Street between 100 feet and 57 feet from the Water Street intersection. 
(5)  No parking in the parking stall on Court Street immediately south of Union National Bank and Trust Company's drive-through exit. 
(6)  No parking on the east side of Water Street from 140 feet to 220 feet north of the north line of Blake Street. 
(7)  No truck, van or SUV parking in the first parking stall south of Park Bank parking lot on the east side of North Water Street. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(11)) 
Sec. 7-98. - Designation of parking spaces. 
    The public works department shall have lines or markings painted or placed on the curb or upon the street adjacent to each parking space to designate each individual parking space within the parking zone. Each vehicle parking within the parking zone shall park within the lines or markings so established. No person shall park any vehicle across such line or marking or have part of any vehicle not entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(12)) 
Sec. 7-99. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The police officers of the city or other designated persons acting in accordance with instructions issued by the city council shall report as follows: 
(1)  The date and approximate time of the violation. 
(2)  The license plate number and issuing state. 
(3)  The make and model of the violator's vehicle. 
(4)  The location of the violation. 
(5)  The specific violation charged. 
(b)  The police officer or designated person shall then attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that the vehicle was parked in violation of the provisions of this section and instruct such owner or operator as to the forfeiture attending such violation, including the increased forfeiture for failure to pay within the prescribed time limits. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(13)) 
Sec. 7-100. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of section 7-87 and sections 7-99 through 7-101 shall be subject to the forfeiture as set forth herein: 
(1)  For violation of section 7-89(b) a forfeiture of $15.00 if paid within ten days. After ten days, the forfeiture shall be increased to $30.00. In addition, if the vehicle remains parked in violation of section 7-89(b) for a period in excess of 48 hours, the vehicle may be towed from the street at the owner's expense. 
(2)  For violation of sections 7-87(1) through (17), 7-88, 7-89(a), 7-90, 7-91, and 7-93 through 7-98, a forfeiture of $15.00 if paid within ten days. After ten days, the forfeiture shall be increased to $30.00. 
(3)  For violation of section 7-93 a forfeiture of $100.00 for the first offense if paid within ten days and forfeiture of $200.00 for the second and subsequent offenses if paid within ten days. After ten days the forfeiture shall increase to $200.00 for the first violation. 
(4)  The increased forfeiture shall not apply where the person alleged to have violated the above listed sections gives notice in writing to the police chief or designated police officer at the police department that the alleged violator disputes the charge and requests a hearing thereon. 
(5)  For a violation of the section set forth in subsection (1) of this section, the forfeiture shall not be less than $15.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first violation and not less than $30.00 nor more than $500.00 for the second and subsequent violations within two years. 
(6)  For a violation of the sections set forth in subsection (2) of this section, the forfeiture shall not be less than $15.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first violation and not less than $30.00 nor more than $500.00 for the second and subsequent violations within two years. 
(7)  For failure or refusal to pay the prescribed forfeiture as set forth above, the penalty shall be increased to not less than $60.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first violation and not less than $75.00 nor more than $500.00 for the second and subsequent violation, together with the costs of prosecution. These penalties shall not be imposed unless no less than two notifications of past due are sent to the violator by first class mail and are not returned as undeliverable for any reason. 
(8)  In lieu of enforcing the penalties prescribed in subsection (7) of this section, the city may, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 345.28(4), pay the costs established by the department of transportation under Wis. Stats. § 85.13 and either have the registration on the vehicle involved in the violation suspended or have the registrations of all vehicles owned by the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation suspended. In addition, the department of transportation may be requested to deny any further application for registration by the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation. If the vehicle involved is owned by a leasing or rental company, only the registration of the one vehicle shall be suspended. In all cases, the costs of the suspension shall be assessed against the owner of the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(14)) 
Sec. 7-101. - Storage of vehicles, boats, trailers prohibited. 
    No person shall leave a vehicle, boat, or trailer standing upon any street, highway or municipal parking lot in the city for storage purposes. The term "storage" means leaving of a vehicle, boat, or trailer standing on a street, highway or municipal parking lot for a period of 48 hours or more. 
(Prior Code, § 7.06(15)) 
Secs. 7-102-7-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HEAVY VEHICLES 

Sec. 7-131. - Class "B" highways designated. 
    All streets and alleys within the city, except the following enumerated streets and alleys, are designated Class "B" highways and shall be subject to the weight limitations imposed by Wis. Stats. § 348.16 unless otherwise designated by the council. 
(Prior Code, § 7.07(1)) 
Sec. 7-132. - Routes designated. 
(a)  The following streets and portions of streets within the city are designated heavy traffic routes: 
(1)  Black River Street from the south corporate limits to the intersection of Montgomery Street. 
(2)  STH 21 and STH 27 from the intersection of Montgomery Street to the north corporate limits. 
(3)  Montgomery Street from the intersection of Black River Street to the intersection of Rusk Avenue. 
(4)  Rusk Ave. from the intersection of Montgomery Street to the intersection of Main Street. 
(5)  Water Street from the north corporate limits to the south corporate limits. 
(6)  Court Street from the intersection of Montgomery Street to the intersection of Water Street. 
(7)  Oak Street from the west limits of the intersection of Court Street to the intersection of East Avenue. 
(8)  East Avenue from the intersection of Wisconsin Street to the intersection of Oak Street. 
(9)  Tyler Street from the intersection of Oak Street to the intersection of Main Street. 
(10)  Wisconsin Street from the west corporate limits to the east corporate limits; Milwaukee Street from the intersection of Water Street to the intersection of Walrath Street; Walrath Street from the intersection of Milwaukee Street; to the east corporate limits. 
(b)  Restrictions on use of other streets by heavy traffic. No vehicle or trailer which is not equipped with pneumatic tires or which exceeds 20 feet in length or has a gross load weight exceeding 6,000 pounds shall be parked, operated or moved on any street or alley not part of a heavy traffic route designated in subsection (a) of this section, except to obtain orders for, move or deliver supplies or commodities to or from a place of business or residence facing thereon and except residential owners of such vehicles to go or come from or to their residence by the most direct route from an arterial or collector street to park their vehicle off a public street at such residence; provided further, the weight of the vehicle and load on such other street shall not exceed the limitations of Wis. Stats. § 348.15 or 348.16(3) pertaining to Class "A" highways or deliveries on Class "B" highways. 
(Prior Code, § 7.07(2)) 
Sec. 7-133. - Restriction on parking. 
    No vehicle or trailer which is equipped with pneumatic tires or which exceeds 20 feet in length or has a gross vehicle load weight exceeding 6,000 pounds shall park for longer than 30-minutes on any street designated heavy traffic route in section 7-132(a), except to obtain orders, move or deliver supplies or commodities to or from a place of business or residence facing thereon. 
(Prior Code, § 7.07(3)) 
Sec. 7-134. - Truck idling. 
    No person shall allow a truck engine to idle on a city street for more than two hours. 
(Prior Code, § 7.07(4)) 
Secs. 7-135-7-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SNOWMOBILES 

Sec. 7-152. - State snowmobile laws adopted. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in the following enumerated sections of the state statutes are adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Acts required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or prohibited by this section: 
350.01 Definitions 350.02 Operation of Snowmobiles on or in Vicinity of Highway 350.03 Right-of-way 350.04 Snowmobile Races, Derbies and Routes 350.045 Public Utility Exemption 350.047 Local Ordinance to be Filed 350.05 Operation by Youthful Operators Restricted 350.055 Safety Certification Program Established 350.07 Driving Animals 350.08 Owner Permitting Operation 350.09 Head Lamps, Tail Lamps and Brakes 350.10 Miscellaneous Provisions for Snowmobile Operation 350.12 Registration of Snowmobiles 350.13 Uniform Trail Signs and Standards 350.15 Accident and Accident Reports 350.17 Enforcement 350.18 Local Ordinances 350.19 Liability of Landowners  
(b)  Applicability of rules of the road to snowmobile. The operator of a snowmobile upon a roadway shall in addition to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 350 be subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 346.04, 346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1), and 346.94(1), (6), (6m) and (9). 
(Prior Code, § 7.10(1), (2)) 
Sec. 7-153. - Routes and trails designated. 
(a)  Except as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 350.02 and 350.045, or for snowmobile events authorized in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 350.04, no person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public right-of-way in any public park, golf course or on any other public municipal property in the city, except upon designated snowmobile routes and trails that the park board and city council have approved for use. 
(b)  A snowmobile route is designated on a map, on file in the office of the city clerk, which is incorporated by reference, describing a snowmobile route permitting the operation of snowmobiles thereon and the maintenance thereof by private parties. The city clerk shall file such map and provide the police department with a copy. Such snowmobile routes or trails are permissive and this authority may be terminated by direction of the mayor. The city is expressly not obligated to maintain or operate such trail. The snowmobile route is generally described as follows: 
(1)  Main route. Commencing at the V.F.W. club located on Perch Lake in the city, thence running westerly along the north and west line of the railroad right-of-way to the north boundary of the LaCrosse River, thence westerly along the north and west boundary of the La Crosse River to the west line of South Court Street, thence southerly along the west line of South Court Street to the junction with South Water Street, thence southerly along the west line of South Water Street to the old Chicago, Northwestern Railroad right-of-way, thence westerly to the west limits of the city, thence northerly along the west city limits to STH 16, thence northerly across unplatted lands to the north limits of the city. Also, commencing at the V.F.W. club and commencing easterly across Perch Lake and along marked trails through Memorial Park to the municipal golf course clubhouse building, thence northeasterly along marked trails through Memorial Park to the Eagles Club, thence westerly to STH 21 and across STH 21 to the bowling alley. 
(2)  Spur routes. 
a.  Commencing south of the city shop buildings, thence southerly along the railroad right-of-way and the west line of Clifton Street to the Soo Line Railroad right-of-way, thence westerly to the main route above described west to South Water Street. 
b.  Commencing at a point on the main route as above described where the north line of the La Crosse River joins with the east line of Beaver Creek, thence northerly along the east boundary of Beaver Creek to property described as the Morrow Home. 
c.  Commencing where the west line of South Court Street intersects Maple Street, thence westerly to South K Street, thence northerly to the Best Nights Inn property. 
d.  Commencing at the municipal Golf Course Clubhouse, thence easterly across Memorial Park along marked trails to the east limits of the city. 
e.  Commencing at the VFW Club, thence running Southeasterly across Perch Lake and continuing to the southeast right-of-way line of the Soo Railroad. This spur thence runs southwesterly to Walrath Street and northeasterly along the railroad right-of-way to connect the snowmobile trail east and northeast of the city. 
f.  Commencing at a point on the main route West of Clifton Street and North of its intersection with Milwaukee Street thence South to the north right-of-way line of the Soo Line Railroad, thence Northeasterly to 716 Wolcott Street. 
g.  Commencing at a point where the south right-of-way of Highway 16 and the west city limits intersect, thence east along Highway 16 (Wisconsin Street) to Industrial Drive; thence south on Industrial Drive to Maple Avenue; thence East on Maple Avenue to South Court Street; thence north on South Court Street to the intersection with Wisconsin Street or Highway 16. 
(Prior Code, § 7.10(3)) 
Sec. 7-154. - Times of operation. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public highway or other public property in any public park, public or private golf course or recreational areas, lake or upon any private premises open to the public for snowmobiling within the city between 10:30 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., except snowmobiles may be operated during such times on trails established by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 7.10(4)(a)) 
Sec. 7-155. - Speed. 
    Where permitted, no person shall operate a snowmobile within the city at a speed in excess of ten mph between 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Prior Code, § 7.10(4)(b)) 
Sec. 7-156. - Unattended snowmobiles. 
    No person shall leave or remain unattended a snowmobile on any public highway or public property while the motor is running or with the starting key in the ignition. 
(Prior Code, § 7.10(4)(c)) 
Sec. 7-157. - Operation on sidewalks and malls prohibited. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile on any sidewalk, pedestrian way or mall within the city, except as specifically authorized by section 7-153 or to cross to obtain immediate access to an authorized area of operation. 
(Prior Code, § 7.10(4)(d)) 
Sec. 7-158. - Operation on municipal airport prohibited. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile upon the municipal airport property or adjacent property owned by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 7.10(4)(e)) 
Sec. 7-159. - Use of designated trails required. 
    No motorcycle, mini-bike or other vehicle or bike shall be used or operated upon the official snowmobile trail as herein designated. Any person operating a vehicle or bike other than a snowmobile upon the trail may be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $100.00 per violation. 
(Prior Code, § 7.10(4)(f)) 
Sec. 7-160. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall upon conviction thereof forfeit not more than $600.00 together with costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof may be imprisoned in the county jail for not exceeding 90 days, provided no person shall forfeit an amount in excess of the maximum fine or forfeiture allowed under state law for the same offense and further provided the penalty and forfeiture for parking violations on highways shall be the amount applicable to such violations by owners or operators of motor vehicles under this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7.10(5)) 
Secs. 7-161-7-188. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 7-189. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall operate or allow to be operated on any highway, street or alley within the city a vehicle that is not in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7.15(2)) 
Sec. 7-190. - Owner's liability. 
    Any owner of a vehicle not equipped as required by this section who knowingly causes or permits such vehicle to be operated on a highway in violation of this section is guilty of the violation the same as if he had operated the vehicle. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 347.04, relating to nonapplicability of demerit points, shall apply to owners convicted of violation of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 7.15(3)) 
Sec. 7-191. - Safety checks. 
(a)  Operators to submit to inspection. When directed to do so by any law enforcement officer, the operator of any motor vehicle shall stop and submit such vehicle to an inspection and such tests as are necessary to determine whether the vehicle meets the requirements of this section or that the vehicle's equipment is in proper adjustment or repair. No person when operating a motor vehicle shall fail to stop and submit such vehicle to inspection when directed to do so by any law enforcement officer as herein provided. 
(b)  Authority of officer. Any law enforcement officer of the city is empowered whenever he shall have reason to believe that any provision of this section is being violated to order the operator to stop and to submit such vehicle to an inspection with respect to brakes, lights, turn signals, steering, horns and warning devices, glass, mirrors, exhaust systems, windshield wipers, tires and other items of equipment. 
(c)  Vehicle to be removed from highway. Whenever, after inspection as provided by this section, a law enforcement officer determines that a vehicle is unsafe for operation, he may order it removed from the highway and not operated, except for purposes of removal and repair until the vehicle has been repaired as directed in a repair order. Repair orders may be in the form prescribed by the secretary of the department of transportation under Wis. Stats. § 110.075(5) and shall require the vehicle owner or operator to obtain such repairs as are required. 
(Prior Code, § 7.15(4)) 
Sec. 7-192. - Penalty. 
    Penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be as provided in section 25-11 together with the applicable penalty assessment and the costs of prosecution. 
(Prior Code, § 7.15(5)) 
Secs. 7-193-7-222. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 7-223. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Procedure. This article shall be enforced according to Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0114, and 345.20 to 345.53 and Wis. Stats. ch. 800. 
(b)  Deposit. 
(1)  Any person arrested for a violation of this article may make a deposit of money as directed by the arresting officer at the police station or the office of the clerk of court, or by mailing the deposit to such places. The arresting officer or person receiving the deposit shall notify the arrested person, orally or in writing, that: 
a.  If he fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, he will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture plus costs not to exceed the amount of the deposit; or 
b.  If he fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, and if the court does not accept the deposit as a forfeiture, he will be summoned into court to answer the complaint. 
(2)  The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with the deposit schedule established by the state judicial conference. The deposit shall include court costs and suit tax. 
(3)  The arresting officer or person receiving the deposit shall issue the arrested person a receipt therefor as required by Wis. Stats. § 345.26(3)(b). 
(4)  If a deposit schedule has not been established, the arresting officer shall require the alleged offender to deposit not less than the maximum forfeiture permitted under this article. 
(c)  Stipulation of no contest. Any person charged with a violation of this article may make a stipulation of no contest pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 345.27, which shall be received by the police department or clerk of court within ten days of the date of the alleged violation. Such person shall, at the time of entering into the stipulation, make the deposit required under subsection (b) of this section if he has not already done so. A person who has mailed or filed a stipulation under this subsection (c) may, however, appear in court on the appearance date and may be relieved from the stipulation for cause shown as required in Wis. Stats. § 345.37. 
(Prior Code, § 7.21) 
Sec. 7-224. - Penalty. 
    The penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be a forfeiture as herein provided together with costs under Wis. Stats. § 345.27. 
(1)  Uniform offense. Forfeitures for violation of section 7-1 shall conform to forfeitures for violation of the comparable state offense, including any variations or increases for second offenses. 
(2)  Special local regulation. The forfeiture for violation of article II of this chapter, sections 7-61, 7-63, 7-87, and 7-88-7-101, 7-7, 7-6 and 7-2 shall be not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first offense and not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for the second offense within two years, unless the specific section provides otherwise. Minimum forfeitures shall correspond to the deposit schedule fixed by the state judicial conference. 
(3)  Parking violations. 
Forfeiture Statute Minimum Maximum 346.51(1) Improper parking on/off roadway $15.00 $200.00 346.52(1) Stopping/standing in prohibited areas $15.00 $100.00 Second conviction within one year $30.00 $200.00 346.52(2) Stopping/standing on highway by grade school $15.00 $100.00 Second conviction within one year $100.00 $200.00 346.53 Parking/standing where prohibited $15.00 $100.00 Second conviction within one year $30.00 $200.00 346.54 Improper parking/standing of vehicle $15.00 $100.00 Second conviction within one year $15.00 $200.00 346.55(1) Parking on left side of highway $15.00 $200.00 346.55(3) Parking on posted private property $15.00 $100.00 Second conviction within one year $30.00 $200.00  
(4)  Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited penalty of money deposit under this article shall receipt therefor in triplicate as provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.26(3)(b). Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of subsection (3) of this section shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 343.27, 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2) and the alleged violator shall sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11. 
(5)  Forfeitures in treasury; officer to post bond, qualify. Any officer accepting deposits or forfeited penalties under this article shall deliver them to the city assessor-treasurer within 20 days after receipt. Any officer authorized to accept deposits under Wis. Stats. § 345.26, shall qualify by taking the oath and filing an official bond described in Wis. Stats. § 19.01. 
(Prior Code, § 7.20) 
Chapter 8 - PUBLIC WORKS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Public construction by the city. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.15(1), the following classes of public construction or any part thereof may be done directly by the city without submitting the same for bids, in such cases as the city council shall by resolution designate. Such classes of construction are as follows: 
(1)  Construction and installation of water mains within the city. 
(2)  Construction and installation of storm sewers and sanitary sewer mains and related apparatus in the city. 
(3)  Construction and installation of streets and roadways within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 8.20) 
Sec. 8-2. - Obstructions and encroachments on public property. 
(a)  No person shall encroach upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or occupant, except that the restrictions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Signs and clocks attached to buildings which project not more than six feet from the face of the building and which do not extend below any point ten feet above the sidewalk, street or alley. 
(2)  Awnings which do not extend below any point eight feet above the sidewalk, street or alley. 
(3)  Public utility encroachments authorized by the city. 
(4)  Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded which do not extend more than three feet on a sidewalk, provided such goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures do not remain thereon for more than three hours. 
(5)  Building materials when placed upon the street, alley or sidewalk upon conditions prescribed by the street superintendent, who may require such materials to be protected by barricades or appropriate lights. 
(6)  Sidewalk cafes where tables and chairs do not occupy or extend more than four feet in width on a sidewalk; provided, however, that such cafe furniture shall not be permitted to remain during closing hours of the business and the sidewalk shall be kept in good repair and free from defect and shall be inspected by an employee of the public works department prior to use allowed by this subsection. 
(b)  Sidewalk merchandising displayed during business hours shall not extend more than two feet from the building. Merchandise shall not be permitted to remain during closed hours of the business. Displays shall be maintained neat and orderly. 
(c)  Raking leaves into streets. In the interests of public safety, health and general welfare, community appearance and efficiency of operation, it shall be unlawful to rake or place fallen tree leaves or grass clippings onto the pavement or into the gutter of any public street or alley. No person shall permit grass clippings from mower swaths to remain upon sidewalks or on abutting property. 
(d)  Unlawful dumping on streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited, dump, sort, scatter or leave any rubbish, stone, wire, earth, ashes, cinders, sawdust, hay, glass, manure, filth, paper, snow, ice, dirt, grass, leaves, construction waste, garbage or other offensive or noxious material in any public street, sidewalk, alley, or upon any public property or upon any property of another, without the express permission of the owner of occupant thereof. 
(e)  Obstruction of public ditches. No person shall in any manner obstruct or cause to be obstructed the free passage of water in any public gutter, ditch, culvert, swale or drain or place or cause to be placed any rubbish, dirt, sand, gravel or any other matter or thing so that the same is likely to be carried by the elements into any public gutter, ditch, culvert, swale or drain. 
(Prior Code, § 8.11; Ord. No. 933, § 1, 7-19-2017; Ord. No. 935(1), § 1, 7-19-2017; Ord. No. 936, § 1, 7-19-2017; Ord. No. 933(amended), § 1, 8-16-2017) 
Sec. 8-3. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order, rules or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 25-11. 
(Prior Code, § 8.25) 
Secs. 8-4-8-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, ALLEYS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-25. - Official map adopted by reference. 
    The city adopts the official map for the city, which is incorporated herein as if set forth in full, a copy of which is in the office of the city clerk, including all streets which have been added thereto and all streets deleted therefrom and including proposed streets as indicated thereon extending beyond the city limits, within a 11/2 mile radius thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 8.01) 
Sec. 8-26. - Littering prohibited. 
    Every owner or occupant of any building or lot in the city fronting on any street or alley shall keep the abutting sidewalk clean and such owner or occupant shall keep in good repair such sidewalk. 
(Prior Code, § 8.14) 
Sec. 8-27. - Driving across sidewalks. 
    No person shall ride, drive or draw any vehicle on or across any sidewalk except at the regular crossings. 
(Prior Code, § 8.13) 
Sec. 8-28. - Hitching horses regulated. 
(a)  No person shall leave any horse hitched upon any public street, alley or highway within the city endangering or obstructing public travel. 
(b)  No person shall secure any horse to any ornamental or shade tree in any of the streets or public grounds of the city, or to the box or case around such tree or to any fence around any public grounds. 
(Prior Code, § 8.16) 
Sec. 8-29. - Snow and ice removal. 
(a)  Every owner or occupant of any building or lot, or the person in charge of any church or public building in front of which a sidewalk has been constructed, shall clear off and remove from such sidewalk all snow and ice which has accumulated thereon within 24 hours after the termination of a storm which has deposited such snow and ice. Snow removal shall clear the paved surface of the sidewalk for the full width of the sidewalk. On the corner lots, the plow bank at the curb shall be removed for a width of not less than five feet. In the event of melting show refreezing on sidewalks, the resulting ice shall be removed within 24 hours of forming. Snow or ice removed from sidewalks, driveways or parking lots shall not be deposited on city streets, alleys, neighboring sidewalks, or other rights-of-way. No person in the course of removing snow or ice shall cause or permit it to be placed on any public way. 
(b)  If the person responsible fails to comply with subsection (a) of this section, the city through its officers and employees, may remove such snow and ice and the cost of the removal shall be imposed as a special charge against real property for current services rendered in the amount of $75.00 or actual time and material costs, whichever is greater. Advance notice of a special charge under this article may be given but is not required. 
(c)  In addition, failure to comply with subsection (a) of this section after verbal or written warning from the public works department or a police officer shall subject the person responsible to penalties, fine or forfeiture under section 25-11. Upon the first offense, in addition to the special charge for removal of snow or ice, a notice shall be mailed to the property owner describing the violation (including date and time of snow and ice removal) and possible penalties for subsequent violations. Three violations in one winter season may result in a forfeiture of $100.00 by the property owner. 
(Prior Code, § 8.15) 
Sec. 8-30. - Objects in right-of-way. 
    If any landscaping, fence, or other object placed without city permission on boulevards within city right-of-way must be removed for sidewalk or other construction, such removal shall be the responsibility of the homeowner. The property owner will have 30 days to remove the object before construction begins. Objects not removed within 30 days may be removed by the city or city's agent at the time of construction, with removal and disposal costs charged to the property owner. During a street reconstruction project, affected boulevard trees will be removed at the city's expense. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06(3)) 
Sec. 8-31. - Railroad crossings. 
    The Chicago, Milwaukee, Street Paul and Pacific Railway Company and the Chicago and Northwestern Railway Company shall, at the intersections of all streets which they cross within the city, construct, repair, and maintain suitable safe and convenient crossings over their tracks, for travel of vehicles and pedestrians. The spaces between the tracks at the intersection of streets shall be brought to a level of the street, and shall be repaired and constructed by planning or paving the same as the council may, from time to time, order and direct. When the tracks cross any sidewalk, they shall keep the sidewalk across their right-of-way and between the tracks in good repair and clean of snow and when new sidewalks are ordered on such crossings or intersections by the council, the railroad companies shall construct and maintain the same in the manner as ordered. 
(Prior Code, § 8.07) 
Secs. 8-32-8-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRADES 

Sec. 8-51. - Street grades and elevation. 
    All grades and elevations fixed and established in the city shall be described in feet, and decimals of a foot above a certain assumed base or datum, which base or datum is the level of the mean tide at New York City, which is below 14 permanent bench marks set in this city at places and elevations shown in the Bench Mark Book of the city surveyor, two of which are at the distances above such base or datum as follows: one on top of iron post bench mark at corner of Oak and Courts Streets, being 793,393; one on top of iron post bench mark at corner of Franklin and Water Streets, being 790,333 above such datum. The grades of streets are listed in the table of street grades on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Prior Code, § 8.02) 
Sec. 8-52. - Minimum street widths. 
    Except where chapter 18 is applicable, all streets shall have a minimum surface width of 32 feet face-to-face of curbs. 
(Prior Code, § 8.025) 
Sec. 8-53. - Additional grade. 
    The city council may from time to time fix additional points or amend those herein established and may change any permanently established grade in the manner and form provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 8.03) 
Sec. 8-54. - Sidewalk grade. 
(a)  The grade of the inner edge of sidewalks shall be as follows: 
(1)  On all streets running east and west, the grade line shall be parallel to and six inches above the center of the street, the elevation at the corner of blocks to be thus established. 
(2)  On streets running north and south, the grade lines shall be on blocks where no break occurs in the street grade, the sidewalk grade shall be a straight line connecting the points of the corner of the blocks thus established. 
(3)  If there is a break in the street grade within any block, the sidewalk grade shall start at the corner elevations as established and run parallel to the street grades to the point at which the two lines meet. 
(4)  If two or more breaks in the street grade occur in any block, the grade of the sidewalk opposite the center portion shall be parallel to and six inches above the street grade between the points where such lines meet the lines running from the corners of the blocks. 
(b)  Exceptions. The above grades shall be subject to such exceptions as the street committee may deem advisable or subject to approval by the council, and a record of the sidewalk grades so established shall be kept by the city clerk in his office. Such sidewalk grades, being the elevation of the sidewalk, or of the sidewalk projected along the line of lots, shall slope downward toward the center of the street at the rate of one and one-quarter inches to each six feet. Exceptions that have been or may be established by the council, are set out in the records in the office of the city clerk, and are not set out herein. This division shall in no way affect such exceptions already established. 
(Prior Code, § 8.04) 
Sec. 8-55. - Alley grade. 
    The grades of the center of all alleys shall be a straight line connecting the grades of the street intersections subject to the same exceptions and recorded in the same manner as provided for sidewalk grades. 
(Prior Code, § 8.05) 
Secs. 8-56-8-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 8-84. - Sidewalk assessments. 
    The initial construction of city sidewalks in developed residential areas shall be the responsibility of the city. The initial construction of sidewalks in new developments shall be governed by chapter 18. Costs for the replacement of city sidewalks in residential areas shall be the responsibility of the city, unless it can be shown that damage was caused by an action of the adjacent property owner. Costs for new or replacement sidewalk in any nonresidential zoning district shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner. 
(Prior Code, § 8.055) 
Sec. 8-85. - Sidewalk construction. 
    All sidewalks rebuilt or constructed in the city shall be constructed according to one of the following standards. Sidewalks of any material shall meet the grade requirements of section 8-54, and shall be no less than four feet wide. City sidewalks shall include any sidewalk running parallel to the street located in city right-of-way. 
(1)  Cast-in-place concrete. All concrete sidewalks shall be constructed according to the following specifications: 
a.  Cement shall be fresh and a standard brand of Portland cement, and shall be mixed in quantities sufficient to provide a 4,000 psi mix. The sidewalk shall be formed and poured on-site. 
b.  Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand or screenings from hard tough crushed rock. It shall be clean and well graded. It shall pass a one-quarter inch screen and 95 percent shall be retained on a 100 mesh screen. 
c.  Coarse aggregate may be pebbles, broken stone or blast furnace slag. It shall be clean, hard, durable and uncoated. All coarse aggregate shall pass a one-inch screen and 95 percent shall be retained on a one-quarter inch screen. 
d.  Pit run may be used only after a screen test is made and sufficient coarse aggregate is added to meet the correct proportions for the mix. 
e.  The water used in the mix shall be clean enough to drink. 
f.  Forms shall be made of lumber two inches thick or of steel of equal strength. Flexible strips may be used on curves. They shall be rigidly held to line and grade by stakes or braces. 
g.  Division plates shall be of one-eighth inch steel as wide as the depth of the slab and as long as the width of the walk. If no division plates are used, creases shall be cut a minimum of one-third of the depth of the concrete. 
h.  Sub-base under all sidewalks shall be a two-inch minimum layer of sand properly tamped to line and grade. The pavement shall be no less than four inches thick, except in driveway approaches where the pavements shall be no less than six inches thick. 
(2)  Brick or concrete pavers (hereinafter referred to as "pavers"). All paver sidewalks shall be constructed according to the following specifications: 
a.  Pavers shall be interlocking and shall provide a strength comparable to cast-in-place concrete. Pavers intended for driveways shall be no less than three inches thick; pavers intended for pedestrian use only shall be no less than two inches thick. 
b.  Pavers shall be installed over soil compacted to 95 percent density and compacted aggregate base of no less than six inches for driveways and no less than four inches for sidewalks. A one-inch layer of bedding sand shall be applied before the pavers are installed. 
c.  The pavers shall be installed in a professional manner. The pavers shall be compacted upon placement, sand shall be swept into the joints, and the pavers shall be compacted again. Edge restraints shall be placed around the edges of the pavers to maintain its strength and stability. 
d.  The installer of pavers shall consult applicable specifications for the material used provided by the manufacturer. Where these specifications differ from this division, the more stringent requirements shall apply. 
e.  Paver installation shall be arranged by the property owner at the property owner's expense. Should the property ownership change, any subsequent property owners shall assume all future responsibility for the paver sidewalk. Should a sidewalk constructed of pavers require repair, maintenance or replacement, this shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The property owner assumes all liability for a sidewalk constructed of pavers. Should the public works director notify the property owner of substandard paver sidewalk by first-class or certified mail, the property owner shall repair or replace the sidewalk within 30 days. If the property owner fails to do so, the city has the authority to replace the sidewalk and charge the property owner for all work. Should the owner refuse or fail to pay these charges, the charges will be placed on the property owner's tax bill. Any sidewalk installed by a city crew shall be cast-in-place concrete. The city crew shall replace only the city sidewalk; replacing any pavers or landscaping disturbed or removed during the installation of the sidewalk shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(3)  All work within city limits which affects existing or potential future city sidewalks shall be regulated by this division. The building inspector shall notify the public works director when a building permit is issued which includes such work. Should a new driveway be constructed in an area lacking city sidewalk, the portion of the driveway which is between six feet and 11 feet from the curb or edge of the road shall meet the grade requirements of a city sidewalk in anticipation of future sidewalk installation. If city sidewalks exist in neighboring properties, the city sidewalk portion of a new driveway shall be made to line up with these segments so that any future sidewalk installation may be straight. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06) 
Sec. 8-86. - Removal of ice and snow from sidewalks. 
    The owner or person in charge of property which includes a city sidewalk shall clean the sidewalk in front of or adjoining their property of snow and ice the entire width of the sidewalk. Removal and cleaning shall be accomplished within 24 hours after snowfall has ceased. When ice has formed and cannot be immediately removed, it shall be sprinkled with salt or sand. No person in the course of removing snow or ice shall cause or permit it to be placed on any pubic way. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06(1)) 
Sec. 8-87. - Obstructions. 
    No property owner or occupant shall allow branches of trees to grow over the sidewalk at a height of less than eight feet or allow any shrubbery or bush to encroach upon the sidewalk. 
(Prior Code, § 8.06(2)) 
Secs. 8-88-8-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 8-118. - Permit required. 
    No person shall open or make excavation in or upon any paved or macadamized street or alley of the city without obtaining a permit hereunder. 
(Prior Code, § 8.10(1)) 
Sec. 8-119. - Application. 
    Application shall be made to the streets committee setting forth in detail the extent of the work, and for what purpose it is desired to make such an opening or excavation, the kind of pavement, curbing and sidewalk to be broken into, and a description of the property by lot, block and addition opposite which such excavation or opening is to be made. 
(Prior Code, § 8.10(2)) 
Sec. 8-120. - Report by streets committee. 
    The streets committee shall within 24 hours after receiving such application, meet and determine the probable cost of refilling and relaying in as good condition as before, all pavement, macadam, sidewalks, and curbing so disturbed, and file a report of their determination with the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 8.10(3)) 
Sec. 8-121. - Deposit of bond. 
(a)  After the estimate has been made and filed with the city clerk, the applicant shall deposit the amount of the estimate with the city treasurer, who shall give his duplicate receipt therefor, one of which shall be presented to and filed with the city clerk, who shall give a permit for the opening or excavation as set forth in the application. 
(b)  In lieu of the deposit, the applicant may file with the city clerk a bond twice the amount of the estimate conditioned for one year against any settling of the street or alley, and any defects in the paving, sidewalk or curbing, and conditioned for one year upon restoration of all pavement and macadam, sidewalks and curbing interfered with to as good condition as prior to the excavation, and conditioned upon his securely refilling and tamping in such excavation, before restoring pavement, etc., and upon the filing of this bond, the city clerk shall give the permit for such opening and excavation as set forth in the application. 
(Prior Code, § 8.10(4)) 
Sec. 8-122. - Shall refill opening. 
    The applicant may then make the opening and excavation set forth in his application, and upon completion of the work he shall refill and tamp all excavations and restore all pavement, macadam, sidewalks and curbing interfered with to as good condition as the same was prior to the excavation and as a guarantee of perfect work for one year, the amount deposited with the city treasurer shall be held by the city treasurer for one year, and if a bond has been given in lieu of the deposit, the bond shall be so held. 
(Prior Code, § 8.10(5)) 
Sec. 8-123. - Notice of defect. 
    If within one year from the date of the opening or excavation, any settling of the street or alley, or any defect appears in the pavement, macadam, sidewalks or curbing, the streets committee shall notify the applicant in writing that the opening and excavation has not been restored to its former condition, and the applicant shall within ten days restore the opening, excavation, pavement, macadam, sidewalk or curbing to its former condition. If the applicant fails or neglects to do so, the streets committee shall restore the same to its former condition, keeping an accurate itemized account of the expense in so doing, which amount shall be paid from the funds on hand deposited with the city treasurer for that purpose. If a bond, as provided by section 8-121, has been given in lieu of the deposit, the city attorney shall collect upon the bond for the amount of the expense. 
(Prior Code, § 8.10(6)) 
Sec. 8-124. - Treasurer and clerk to keep record. 
    The city treasurer and city clerk shall keep a record of all deposits and the residue, if any, of each fund so deposited, after the openings, excavations, pavements, macadam, sidewalk or curbing have been restored to their former condition as determined by the streets committee, shall be repaid to the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 8.10(7)) 
Sec. 8-125. - Openings to be made under direction of street committee. 
    All openings and excavations shall be made under the direction of the streets committee. All pavement, macadam, sidewalk and curbing shall be carefully removed in such manner as to cause the least injury or damage. All dirt excavated shall be placed back into such opening or excavation in such manner as the streets committee shall direct, and all pavement, macadam, sidewalks or curbing shall be carefully replaced and put in as good condition as it was before such opening was made. 
(Prior Code, § 8.10(8)) 
Sec. 8-126. - Extent to be opened at one time; danger signals. 
    At no time shall more than one-half the width of any street be opened. All such openings shall from dusk until daylight have displayed in a conspicuous place, a sufficient number of red signal lights to warn people against danger. All openings or excavations shall be made in such manner as to cause the least obstruction to the street or alley and shall not remain open longer than it is absolutely necessary to make the connections and complete the work in a satisfactory manner. 
(Prior Code, § 8.10(9)) 
Secs. 8-127-8-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY INSTALLATIONS 

Sec. 8-151. - Utility poles and wires. 
(a)  Applicability. Every person setting or maintaining any poles in the city shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Use of spikes, hooks and rounds restricted. No post, telegraph, telephone or electric light pole or any other pole or post in the city shall have any spikes, hooks or iron or wooden rounds driven or placed therein at a distance of less than seven feet above the level of the sidewalk or street. 
(c)  Location. All poles set upon any street shall be so set that the roadside thereof shall be just inside the lot side of the curb line, 18 feet from the lot line and as near the boundary line of lots as shall be feasible and shall be so set as not to unreasonably interfere with public or private use nor with the drainage. If the same shall be feasible, all poles shall be set in alleys, and if so set, shall be as near the lot line as possible so as not to unreasonably interfere with the public or private use of the alleys. 
(d)  Wires carrying dangerous current. All wires carrying dangerous currents shall, if possible, be placed upon the opposite side of the street from telephone wires. If impossible to do so, such wires shall be placed above the other wires and at least two feet distant therefrom. If it is necessary for wires carrying light current to cross over telephone wires, such electric wires shall not be run between the different wires of the telephone leads, but shall, if possible, be placed over the same at least two feet therefrom and the wires carrying the high tension current shall at all times be kept perfectly insulated at such crossing points. 
(e)  Disfiguring of poles and arches prohibited. Except as set forth herein, no person shall post, paint, paste, tack, fasten or attach any handbill, poster, placard, picture, notice, advertising matter, political matter or other thing upon any utility pole or arch in the city. No person shall disfigure any such pole or arch, except as provided in subsection (a) of this section and as required to climb such pole or arch for the purpose of repairs and except the posting of official notices by public officials pursuant to law. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the city from decorating such poles or arches on occasion of a public nature, such as fairs, holidays, etc., upon permission of the utilities and inspections committee. 
(Prior Code, § 8.18) 
Sec. 8-152. - Underground utility wires. 
(a)  Telecommunications wires in first fire district. All telecommunications companies shall lay and construct underground in the public streets, alleys and other places in the first fire district all telecommunications wires and cables as may be necessary for the proper conduct of their business. Such company shall, within the first fire district, construct such manholes, distributing poles and other appliances and fixtures as shall be necessary and proper in laying such conduits and the carrying of wires and cables. 
(b)  Specifications to be approved by the street committee. All conduits, manholes, and other appliances and fixtures shall be of the materials and size and dimensions as shall be approved by the streets committee and shall be laid and constructed under the direction and with the approval of the street committee and the city engineer. 
(c)  Plan submitted to streets committee. Before any telecommunications company shall lay and construct conduits or manholes or erect and distributing poles, it shall submit to the streets committee a written plan in duplicate, showing the route of proposed conduits, and the exact line and location of the proposed conduits, its distance from gutter or lot line, its depth, the manner of laying the same and of carrying such wires and cables and the location of the manholes and distributing poles. No conduit shall be laid without the consent of the streets committee. 
(d)  Disturbing drainage. Such conduits shall be laid so as not to disturb the drainage of any of the streets or alleys, or interfere with drainage of the water or sewer pipes or other public or private property. When a conduit comes in contact with any water, sewer, gas, or other pipe, it shall be laid as directed by the streets committee and the city engineer so that the grade of the conduit is sufficiently deep so it will not be necessary thereafter to relay such conduits in improving the street or alley. If it is necessary to lower or change such conduit it shall be done by the telecommunications companies upon reasonable notice from the streets committee. If the telecommunications companies refuse to lower or change the conduits, it shall be done by the streets committee and the expense shall be assessed against such company. 
(e)  Written consent of council needed. Whenever underground conduits have been laid in the streets and alleys of the city, they shall not be removed, relocated or changed without first obtaining written permission of the council. 
(f)  Refill openings and ditches. The telecommunications company when laying such conduits shall refill the opening of the ditch with reasonable diligence, and the ditch shall be so filled as to leave the street in as good condition as it was before the work commenced. 
(g)  Protection required. All conduits, manholes, wires, or cables shall be so carried and protected as to be free from all danger of communicating fire, by means of contact with other wires or conductors, or in any manner injure persons or property, public or private. 
(h)  Liability of city. All telecommunications companies shall save the city harmless of and from injury and damage of any kind caused or occasioned by reason of laying or constructing such conduits or manholes or distributing poles, or by reason of negligent management in the construction or operation thereof, of wires connected therewith. 
(i)  Not to set poles within territory described. No telecommunications company shall set any poles within the first fire district, except distributing poles, one of which shall be placed about the center of each 300-foot block of the first fire district, unless the streets committee shall decide more are necessary, which the same shall be placed under their direction. No company shall set any poles or string any overhead wires or cables within the first fire district except such as may be absolutely required, temporarily, for actual subscribers, until the completion of the underground system required. 
(j)  Franchises; additional rights. All telecommunications companies shall, in addition to the rights and privileges which they now have in the first fire district, have the right and privilege of laying and constructing underground all conduits necessary for laying and protecting its telecommunication wires and cables, and also the privilege of constructing manholes, distributing poles, appliances and fixtures necessary and proper in the laying of the conduits in any other part of the city, not included in the first fire district, under the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 8.19) 
Secs. 8-153-8-172. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING NUMBERING 

Sec. 8-173. - Applicability; compliance required. 
    All lots and houses in the city shall be numbered in accordance with the plan set forth herein. All principal buildings shall be required to display an address number in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 8.17(1), (8)) 
Sec. 8-174. - Base for numbering. 
    The base or division line for assigning numbers to lots and buildings in the city shall be Water Street and Main Street. 
(Prior Code, § 8.17(2)) 
Sec. 8-175. - How numbered. 
(a)  All lots and buildings north of Main Street shall be known as located at number ___ North ___ Street. 
(b)  All lots and buildings south of Main Street shall be known as located at number ___ South ___ Street. 
(c)  All lots and buildings east of Water Street shall be known as located at number ___ East ___ Street. 
(d)  All lots and buildings west of Water Street shall be known as located at number ___ West ___ Street. 
(Prior Code, § 8.17(3)) 
Sec. 8-176. - One hundred to each block. 
    The number of blocks shall increase from the respective base lines in even hundreds. The first block shall be 100 block, the second shall be 200 block, the third shall be 300 block, etc., and there shall be assigned 100 numbers to each block or square or space that would be one block or square if the streets each way were so extended as to intersect each other, and at least one number shall be assigned to each 30 feet of frontage, except in a portion of the business section of the city, as more particularly set out and defined in the plat book prepared, and filed in the office of the city clerk, there shall be assigned one number to each 20 feet of frontage. 
(Prior Code, § 8.17(4)) 
Sec. 8-177. - Even numbers for north and west side; odd for south and east. 
    All lots and buildings on the north and west side of all streets shall be numbered with the even number numbers and all lots and buildings on the south and east side shall be numbered with odd numbers, each commencing with the 100 assigned to that block, and shall increase from the base line at least one number for each 30 feet of frontage, except in the business section as provided in section 8-176. The second floor of all buildings occupied separately from that of the first floor for business or residential purposes shall have the same number as that of the first floor of the building, except the number one-half shall be added to same. 
(Prior Code, § 8.17(5)) 
Sec. 8-178. - Provision for short streets. 
    All streets, not extending the entire distance between city limits and the base line, shall take the same number of hundreds, that the streets would take if they extended the entire distance between the base line and the city limits, and in case any number is not otherwise determined, it shall be determined by the street committee. 
(Prior Code, § 8.17(6)) 
Sec. 8-179. - Survey and plat book in respect to numbers. 
    The council shall cause the necessary survey to be made and there shall be assigned to each house and building located on any street or alley in the city, its respective number under the uniform system provided for in this and all other city ordinances. In connection with the survey, a plat book of all streets and alleys within the city showing the proper numbers of all lots or buildings fronting all streets or alleys shall be prepared under the supervision of the city clerk. These plats shall be open to inspection of all persons during the office hours of the clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 8.17(7)) 
Sec. 8-180. - Responsibility for display of address numbers. 
    It shall be the responsibility of each and every property owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of each residence, apartment building, business or industry to post and maintain, at all times, address numbers as required under this policy. All addresses shall be displayed in such a way that they are unobstructed and legible from the traveled roadway. 
(Prior Code, § 8.17(4)(a)) 
Sec. 8-181. - Placement of address numbers. 
    When a cluster box is used, it will only be required for the address to be displayed on the structure. 
(1)  Mobile homes or manufactured homes located within a development shall display the address number in numbers of at least 21/2 inches in height and on the side of the home facing the access road. 
(2)  Structures located within a subdivision, condominium or within the city that is within 50 feet from the edge of the road right-of-way shall: 
a.  Display the assigned address number on the structure in such manner that it is visible from the road. The address shall be composed of numbers that are not less than 21/2 inches in height and contrasting in color with the background on which they are affixed. 
b.  The numbers shall be reflective numbers on a contrasting background. 
c.  The address shall not be obstructed in any way by any form of landscape, other mailboxes or newspaper delivery boxes. 
(3)  Standards for structures located more than 50 feet from the road. 
(4)  Failure to display the address for new construction, following city standards in this article, will be grounds for withholding issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Additionally, the owner of any building required to be numbered who shall fail or neglect to comply with this section in respect to attaching and maintaining the proper numbers on such building or buildings shall be notified by the city by written notice to comply with the terms of this section and if he neglects to so comply for ten days after the service of the notice they shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 8-3. 
(Prior Code, § 8.17(4)(b)) 
Secs. 8-182-8-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TREES AND OTHER VEGETATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Property means any premises owned or controlled by the city, including but not restricted to, public sites, parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards and terrace strips between the lot line and the curb or improved portion of any public way. 
    Public nuisance means and includes: 
(1)  Emerald ash borer (EAB) disease. 
(2)  Dutch elm disease. 
(3)  Elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Marsh) or Hylurgopinus Rufipes (Eichh). 
(4)  Any living or standing elm tree infected with Dutch elm disease fungus or in a weakened condition which harbors any of the elm bark beetles. 
(5)  Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, firewood, stumps or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle destroying concentrate. 
(Prior Code, § 8.09(3)) 
Sec. 8-202. - City forester; powers and duties of forester and public works director regarding city trees. 
(a)  A city forester shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council, and shall receive such compensation as shall be determined by the council. 
(b)  The public works director also plays a crucial role in the management of the urban forest. The city forester and public works director shall have the authority and jurisdiction of regulating the planting, maintenance and removal of trees on public property and, subject to private property tree and vegetation regulations, to ensure safety or preserve the aesthetics of the public sites. The city forester or public works director may inspect all trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, plants, logs or branches existing or growing upon any property within the city. The city forester and public works director shall enforce such rules, regulations, permits, and penalty procedures as deemed necessary and may do so by the issuance of municipal citations to effectuate the intent of this article. 
(c)  No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the city forester, public works director, or their agents while engaged in the execution of this article. 
(d)  The city forester shall have the powers and perform the duties enumerated in this section together with those provided by Wis. Stats. ch. 27. 
(Prior Code, § 8.09(2)) 
Sec. 8-203. - Firewood movement. 
    No person may possess firewood within the city that originates from outside the borders of the county unless certified as free of emerald ash borer. Firewood includes all wood, processed or unprocessed, intended for use in a campfire. City may seize and dispose of firewood possessed in violation of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 8.08(8)) 
Secs. 8-204-8-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY TREES 

Sec. 8-230. - Spacing. 
    All trees hereafter planted in any street shall be planted midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the event a curb line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line between the outer line of the sidewalk (or property line) and the edge of the vehicular travel-way, and at a place reasonably consistent with the pattern of those plantings that are adjacent to hard-surface streets. 
(Prior Code, § 8.08(1)) 
Sec. 8-231. - Planting. 
(a)  A planting permit shall first be obtained from the city, at no cost to the owner, if the owner will be planting a tree upon or within a street right-of-way or easement area. Tree planting in utility easement areas will normally not be permitted. If the city contractor plants the trees, no permit will be necessary, however, the city crews when possible will locate their utility lines, and the street supervisor will work with the contractor, digger's hotline, and the property owner for placement of the plantings. 
(b)  Size. All trees planted on the streets shall be of sufficient size to warrant satisfactory results and stand the abuse common to street trees. 
(c)  Grade. Unless otherwise allowed for substantial reasons, all standard sized trees shall have comparatively straight trunks, well-developed leaders, and top and root characteristics of the species or variety showing evidence of proper nursery pruning. To compensate for any serious loss of roots, the top of the tree should be reduced by thinning or cutting back as determined by the growth characteristics of the tree species. The leader shall not be cut off in such trimming. 
(d)  Only ornamental or dwarf tree varieties may be planted on the boulevard if it is less than six feet in width, or contains less than 64 square feet of exposed soil surface. Trees shall not be planted closer than 25 feet to street intersection (property lines extended) and ten feet to driveways. City trees may be planted on private property with the following guidelines and intentions. Planting of trees behind right-of-way is to allow the trees to grow larger and eliminate excessive trimming, reduce the chance of curb, street and sidewalk heaving from the roots and allow the tree to grow larger and live longer. Planting of city trees should be limited to no more than 15 feet behind the right-of-way in order to maintain the aesthetics and shade for residents using the street and sidewalk. The property owner and public works director both must agree on the planting location. Once a tree is planted by the city behind the right-of-way it becomes property of that landowner. Because the tree was paid for by the city, the property owner agrees not to remove the tree without permission from the city. When needed, the property owner would be responsible for trimming and removal. 
(e)  Method of support. Trees may be guyed or supported in an upright position according to accepted arboricultural practices. The guys or supports shall be fastened in such a way that they will not girdle or cause serious injury to the trees or endanger public safety. 
(Prior Code, § 8.08(2); Ord. No. 924, § 1, 11-16-2016) 
Sec. 8-232. - Trimming or pruning. 
(a)  City to replace boulevard trees. Should the city become aware of trees in city right-of-way which are dead or dying, impede traffic visibility or safety, cause severe and recurring damage to city sidewalks, impair snow plowing operations, interfere with overhead power lines, or in some other way constitute a public nuisance, the city street department may remove such a tree at city expense. The city shall not remove trees solely for the convenience of personal wishes of adjoining property owners. The city reserves the right to interpret this article to determine which trees are to be removed. The street department shall maintain a list of trees to be replaced. Should the city be notified of the a tree by the adjoining property owner, the city shall not be required to provide special removal notice to that property owner. If, however, the city chooses to remove a tree without prior knowledge of the property owner, the city shall notify such a person in writing or by personal contact no less than three working days prior to the removal of the tree. Should the property owner contest the city's decision to remove the tree, the tree shall not be removed until the property owner has been provided the opportunity to address the issue before the board of public works. Should the property owner desire that the removed tree be replaced, this shall be performed under the annual tree planting contract in the year following removal. 
(b)  Owner to replace dead trees on private property. All owners or persons in charge of any lot or premises upon which ornamental or shade trees are standing shall remove all trees which shall die, or otherwise pose a threat to public safety and when any such person neglects to do so the council may require him to replace the same within a reasonable time specified in the resolution. 
(1)  Thirty days' time to replace. A notice requiring such trees to be removed shall be served upon the owner or person in charge of the lot or premises affected thereby, at least 30 days before the expiration of the time limited for complying herewith. 
(2)  Failure to replace. If such owner or person in charge neglects to comply with such order within the time specified, the city forester shall cause such trees to be so removed and report the expense to the city clerk and such expenses shall be placed in the tax roll as a special assessment on such lot or premises. 
(3)  Replacement of removed trees. In keeping with the purposes of this article, the city public works department must replace removed trees with new trees, but only if the tree was a public hazard due to location or if the tree must be removed due to street widening or street construction. This shall be performed under the annual tree planting contract in the year following removal. 
(c)  Trees and shrubs to be trimmed. All trees and shrubs set out and planted in city right-of-way or growing upon private property in such a manner as to obstruct the view of traffic, and to overhand or protrude on any portion of the street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, shall be trimmed or eliminated so as not to obstruct the view of traffic. All trees shall be trimmed and keep trimmed so that the lowest branch or limb thereof overhanging any portion of the sidewalk shall not be less than eight feet above and the lowest limb or branch overhanging any portion of any street, gutter or alley or other public way, outside the line of the boulevard, shall not be less than 15 feet above. No tree or shrub shall substantially interfere with the diffusion of light from any arc light in the city. The city street department shall trim trees overhanging streets and alleys, and adjacent property owners shall be responsible for trimming trees or shrubs overhanging sidewalks. 
(d)  Cutting method. All cuts are to be made at a proper proximity to the parent stem so that healing can readily start under normal conditions. All dead and diseased wood shall be removed. 
(Prior Code, § 8.08(3)) 
Sec. 8-233. - Trimming of trees under supervision of city public works department. 
    Except as allowed in section 8-232, no person may trim or cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is done under the personal supervision of the public works department, by a designated employee. 
(Prior Code, § 8.08(4)) 
Sec. 8-234. - Diversification and desirability. 
    The city public works department shall develop goals and plans for long-term tree planting and reforestation and shall encourage public awareness of the aesthetic and ecological importance of tree planting, development, and care. 
(Prior Code, § 8.08(5)) 
Sec. 8-235. - Box elder trees. 
(a)  All box elder trees in the city which become infected with box elder bugs are declared to be a nuisance, and the owner of each parcel of land in the city upon which such trees are located, shall remove all such box elder trees so infested within five days after notice from the city forester, declaring any tree thereon to be so infested, and shall remove such trees from the premises. 
(b)  If the owner of the premises on which are located box elder trees, which are infested with the box elder bugs, fails to comply with subsection (a) of this section, the city, through its officers and employees, may enter upon the premises and cut and remove such box elder trees, and the cost of the cutting and removal shall be assessed to the property as a special assessment on such parcel of land. 
(c)  No person shall plant any box elder trees in the city. 
(d)  Any person who fails to comply with this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 8-3. 
(Prior Code, § 8.08(6)) 
Sec. 8-236. - Prohibited trees for planting. 
(a)  Certain entire tree species are periodically threatened by a pervasive insect or disease, threatening that entire population within the city. Such trees shall be prohibited from being planted anywhere within the city as long as such trees are included on the list in subsection (b) of this section, which may be updated from time to time. 
(b)  The current list, as of April 21, 2009, of Prohibited Trees for Planting is: all variety of ash; box elder; willow and black locust. 
(Prior Code, § 8.08(7)) 
Secs. 8-237-8-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISEASED, INFESTED AND DANGEROUS TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 8-266. - Public nuisances declared. 
    The city forester or his designee shall have the right to declare as a public nuisance any tree or shrub or part thereof, including firewood, existing anywhere in the city which is: 
(1)  Interfering with the use of any public area; 
(2)  Infected with a plant disease; 
(3)  Infested with insects; or 
(4)  Endangering the life, health or safety of other trees, shrubs, persons, or property. 
(Prior Code, § 8.09(1)) 
Sec. 8-267. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city forester shall inspect at least twice a year all premises and places within the city to determine whether any public nuisance exists thereon. He shall also inspect any elm tree reported or suspected to be infected with the Dutch elm disease or any elm bark bearing material reported or suspected to be infested with elm bark beetles. 
(b)  Whenever necessary to determine the existence of Dutch elm disease or elm bark beetles in any tree, the city forester shall remove or cut specimens from the tree in such manner as to avoid permanent injury thereto and forward them to the state department of agriculture for analysis to determine the presence of the nuisances. 
(c)  The forester and his agents or employees may enter upon private premises at reasonable times for the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 8.09(4)) 
Sec. 8-268. - Abatement of nuisances: duty of forester. 
(a)  The forester shall order, direct, supervise and control the abatement of public nuisances by spraying, removal, burning or other means which he determines to be necessary to prevent as full as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease fungus or the insect pests or vectors known to carry such disease fungus. 
(b)  Whenever the forester determines that a public nuisance exists on public property in the city, he shall immediately abate or cause the abatement of the nuisance in such a manner as to destroy or prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease or the insect, pest or vectors known to carry such a disease fungus. All trees, shrubs, or parts thereof on public property shall be subject to treatment or removal when it is determined by the city forester or his designee that the trees or shrubs constitute an immediate or future health or safety hazard or when they have become unsightly, infested, diseased or dead. The city forester or his designee shall have the discretion to determine the most appropriate course of action to prevent or treat such conditions. 
(c)  When the forester determines with reasonable certainty that a public nuisance exists upon private premises, he shall immediately serve personally or by registered mail upon the owner of the property, if he can be found, or upon the occupant thereof, a written notice of the existence of the nuisance and shall direct that the nuisance be abated within ten days after service of the notice. Such notice shall describe the nuisance and recommended procedure for its abatement, shall further state that unless the owner abates the nuisance as specified in the notice, the forester will cause the abatement thereof at the expense of the property served. If the owner cannot be found, such notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 8.09(5)) 
Sec. 8-269. - Spraying. 
(a)  Whenever the forester determines that any elm tree or part thereof is infected with Dutch elm disease fungus or is in a weakened condition and harbors elm bark beetles, he may cause all elm trees within a 1,000-foot radius thereof to be sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle destroying concentrate. 
(b)  To facilitate the work and minimize the inconvenience to the public of any spraying operation conducted under this section, the forester shall cause to be given advance public notice of the operation by newspaper, radio, television public service announcements, or other effective means and shall also cause the posting of appropriate warning notices in the areas and along the streets where trees are to be sprayed at least 24 hours in advance of spraying. When any residue or concentrate from municipal spraying operations can be expected to be deposited on any public street, the forester shall also notify the police chief, who shall make and enforce temporary parking and traffic regulations on such streets as conditions require. Temporary no parking notices shall be posted in each block of any affected street at least 24 hours in advance of spraying conditions. 
(c)  When appropriate warning notices and temporary no parking notices have been given and posted in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, the city shall not allow any claim for damages to any vehicle caused by such spraying operations. 
(d)  When the trees on private property are to be sprayed, the forester shall notify the owner of the property and proceed in accordance with section 8-268(c). 
(Prior Code, § 8.09(6)) 
Sec. 8-270. - Cost of tree care: special assessments. 
(a)  The cost of abatement of a public nuisance or spraying elm trees or elm wood at the direction of the forester if the nuisance, tree or wood is located on public parks or grounds shall be borne by the city. 
(b)  The cost of abating a public nuisance or spraying elm trees or elm wood located on private premises or in the public right-of-way when done at the direction and under the supervision of the forester shall be assessed to the property on which such nuisance tree or wood is located or which abuts on the public right-of-way in which such nuisance tree or wood is located, as follows: 
(1)  The forester shall keep account of the cost of the work or spraying and the amount chargeable to each lot or parcel and shall report such work charges, description of lands to which chargeable and the names and addresses of the owners of the lands to the city clerk on or before October 15 of each year. 
(2)  The city clerk shall mail notice of the amount of the final assessment to each owner of property assessed at his last known address, stating that unless paid within 30 days of the date of the notice, such assessment shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per annum and will be entered on the tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property, and all proceedings in relation to the collection, return and sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such assessment. 
(3)  The city declares that in making assessments under this section, it is acting under its police power. No damages shall be awarded to any owner for the destruction of any diseased or infested elm tree or elm wood or part thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 8.09(7)) 
Sec. 8-271. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Transport any bark bearing elm wood bark or material or any ash, wood or material on public streets or highways or other public premises without first securing the written permission of the forester. 
(2)  Interfere with or prevent any act of the forester or his agents or employees while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this section. 
(3)  Refuse to permit the forester or his duly authorized representative to enter upon his premises at reasonable times to exercise the duties imposed by this section. 
(4)  Permit any public nuisance to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him when ordered by the forester to abate such nuisance. 
(Prior Code, § 8.09(8)) 
Chapter 9 - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Offenses against state law subject to forfeitures. 
    The following statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order of the state are adopted by reference to define offenses against the peace and good order of the city, provided the penalty for commission of the offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under section 25-11. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this section to secure a uniform statewide definition and description of the offenses described. 
23.33 All-terrain vehicles. 101.123 Smoking prohibited. 134.71 Pawnbrokers and secondhand article and jewelry dealers. 939.22 Words and phrases defined. 940.19(1) Battery. 941.10 Negligent handling of burning materials. 941.12(2), (3) Interfering with firefighting. 941.13 False alarms. 941.24 Possession of switchblade knife. 943.01(1) Criminal damage to property. 943.13 Criminal trespass to land. 943.14 Criminal trespass to dwellings. 943.20 Theft (value under $2,500.00). 943.21 Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper (value under $2,500.00). 943.34 Receiving stolen property (value up to $2,500.00). 943.45 Theft of telecommunication service. 943.455 Theft of commercial mobile service. 943.46 Theft of video service. 943.47 Theft of satellite cable programming. 943.50 Shoplifting (value under $500.00). 943.61 Theft of or damage to library materials. 944.20 Lewd and lascivious behavior. 946.40 Refusing to aid officer. 946.41 Resisting or obstructing officer. 946.72(2) Tampering with public records and notices. 947.01 Disorderly conduct. 947.011 Disrupting a funeral or memorial service. 947.012 Unlawful use of telephone. 947.0125(3) Unlawful use of computerized communication systems. 947.013 Harassment. 947.06 Unlawful assemblies. 951.01 to 951.15 Crimes against animals.  
(Prior Code, § 9.01) 
Sec. 9-2. - Juvenile justice code provisions adopted. 
    The following provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 938, the state Juvenile Justice Code, are adopted by reference and any amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this section in order to secure the uniform application of the laws therein. 
938.01 Title, legislative intent and purposes. 938.02 Definitions. 938.09 Representation of the interests of the public. 938.17(2) Jurisdiction over traffic, boating, snowmobile and all-terrain vehicle violations and over civil law and ordinance violations. 938.237 Civil law and ordinance proceedings initiated by citation. 938.27 Notice; summons. 938.273 Service of summons or notice; expense. 938.275 Parents' contribution to cost of court and legal services. 938.28 Failure to obey summons; capias. 938.299 Procedures at hearings. 938.30 Plea hearing. 938.31 Fact-finding hearing. 938.315 Delays, continuance and extensions. 938.343 Disposition of juvenile adjudged to have violated a civil law or an ordinance. 938.344 Disposition; certain intoxicating liquor, beer and drug violations. 938.346 Notice to victims of juveniles' acts. 938.361 Payment for alcohol or other drug abuse services. 938.37 Costs. 938.396 Records. 938.78 Confidentiality of records.  
(Prior Code, § 9.015) 
Sec. 9-3. - Sale and discharge of fireworks restricted. 
    Wis. Stats. § 167.10, regulating the sale and use of fireworks exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby, is adopted by reference and made a part of this section as though set forth in full. 
(Prior Code, § 9.04) 
Sec. 9-4. - Loitering prohibited. 
(a)  Loitering or prowling. No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for safety or persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this subsection if the police or peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the police or peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(b)  Obstruction of highway by loitering. No person shall obstruct any street, bridge, sidewalk or crossing by lounging or loitering in or upon the same after being requested to move on by any police officer. 
(c)  Obstruction of traffic by loitering. No person shall loaf or loiter in groups or crowds upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges or in any other public place within the city in such manner as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct the ordinary free use of the public streets, sidewalks, street crossings and bridges or other public places by persons passing along and over the same. 
(d)  Schools and public buildings. No person shall loiter in or about any public or private school or public building. For purposes of this subsection, the term "loiter" means to delay, linger, idle or present oneself within a school or upon school grounds or a public building without a lawful purpose for being present and shall further include being present without permission of school or public authorities or being present for a purpose not directly related to the normal conduct of education or business within or around a school or public building. 
(e)  Loitering after being requested to move. No person shall loaf or loiter in groups or crowds upon the public streets, sidewalks or adjacent doorways or entrances, street crossings or bridges or in any other public place or on any private premises without invitation from the owner or occupant, after being requested to move by any police officer or by any person in authority at such places. 
(f)  Loitering in public place. No person shall loiter, lounge or loaf in or about any depot, theater, dance hall, restaurant, store, public sidewalk, public parking lot or other place of assembly or public use after being requested to move by any police officer. Upon being requested to move, a person shall immediately comply with such request by leaving the premises or area thereof at the time of the request. 
(Prior Code, § 9.05) 
Sec. 9-5. - Obstruction of aisles and exits prohibited. 
    No person shall obstruct the aisle or entrance or exit of a place of public assemblage when such place is being used for a public assembly. 
(Prior Code, § 9.06) 
Sec. 9-6. - Unlawful assemblies prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall fail or refuse to withdraw from an unlawful assembly which he knows has been ordered to disperse. 
(b)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Unlawful assembly means an assembly of three or more persons which causes such a disturbance of public order that it is reasonable to believe that the assembly will cause injury to persons or damage to property unless it is immediately dispersed. The term "unlawful assembly" includes an assembly of persons who block or obstruct the lawful use by any other person of any private or public thoroughfare, property or any position of access or exit to or from any private or public building, or dwelling place, or any portion thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 9.07) 
Sec. 9-7. - Intoxicating liquor on public property prohibited. 
    No person shall possess, consume, sell or convey any fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor in or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or public way or property, building or other structure which is owned by or under the control of the city or the school district school board, except in such places as may be designated by the city or the school board. 
(Prior Code, § 9.08) 
Sec. 9-8. - Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or disturb a person of ordinary sensibilities in or about any public street, alley or park or any private residence. 
(b)  Operation of motor vehicle. No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as to cause the tires thereof to squeal, the horn to blow excessively or the motor to race excessively. 
(Prior Code, § 9.10) 
Sec. 9-9. - Littering prohibited. 
    No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the city or upon any private property or upon the surface of any body of water within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 9.11) 
Sec. 9-10. - Open cisterns, wells, basements or other dangerous excavations prohibited. 
    No person shall have or permit on any premises owned or occupied by him any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations or other dangerous opening. All such places shall be filled, securely covered or fastened, to prevent injury to any person. Any cover shall be of a design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed by small children. 
(Prior Code, § 9.12) 
Sec. 9-11. - Abandoned or unattended ice boxes, etc., prohibited. 
    No person shall leave or permit to remain outside any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside without first removing such door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from such ice box, refrigerator or container unless such container is displayed for sale on the premises of the owner or his agent and is securely locked or fastened. 
(Prior Code, § 9.13) 
Sec. 9-12. - Hospital quiet zone. 
    No person while within the Mayo Health Systems Hospital quiet zone shall make any unnecessary or unusual noise reasonably likely to disturb the occupants of the hospital. The hospital quiet zone shall consist of all areas within one-half block of the hospital building. 
(Prior Code, § 9.14) 
Sec. 9-13. - Cruelty to animals. 
    No person shall abuse or injure any animal within the city unless such animal is likely to endanger the life or limb of any person. 
(Prior Code, § 9.15) 
Sec. 9-14. - Abuse or interference with police department dogs. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously torture, harass, tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the police department of the city in the performance of the functions of the department, or to interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by the department or any officer or member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of the department, or of the member or officer. Violations of this section are punishable as provided in sections 9-70 and 25-11. 
(Prior Code, § 9.155) 
Sec. 9-15. - Radio and television interference prohibited. 
    No person shall operate any machine or equipment which causes interference with radio or television reception, when such interference can be prevented by repairs, adjustments, the installation of corrective appliances or other practicable alterations, at a reasonable expense. 
(Prior Code, § 9.16) 
Sec. 9-16. - Damage to library materials. 
(a)  No person shall mar, deface or in any other way damage or mutilate any book, periodical, pamphlet, picture, or other article or property belonging to or in charge of the Sparta Free library. 
(b)  The penalty for violation of this subsection is a forfeiture of not less than $20.00 and not more than $500.00. Each book, periodical, picture or other article or property damaged constitutes a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 9.17) 
Sec. 9-17. - Fair and open housing. 
(a)  The common council of the city adopts Wis. Stats. § 106.50 and all subsequent amendments hereto. 
(b)  The officials and employees of the city shall assist in the orderly prevention and removal of all discrimination in housing within the city, by implementing the authority and enforcement procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. § 106.50. 
(c)  The municipal clerk shall maintain forms for complaints to be filed under Wis. Stats. § 106.50 and shall assist any person alleging a violation thereof in the city to file a complaint thereunder with the state department of work force development, equal rights division, for enforcement of Wis. Stats. § 106.50. 
(Prior Code, § 9.21) 
Secs. 9-18-9-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 9-38. - Firearms and weapons, use of. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Prohibited. No person shall discharge any firearm or hunt with a firearm within the city. 
(2)  Exceptions. Firearms may be discharged or carried within the city as follows: 
a.  By an authorized police or peace officer. 
b.  By any person in lawful defense of person or property. 
c.  Under permit granted by the police chief. Such permits granted hereunder may be revoked by either the police chief or the city council. The police chief may grant permits to the following organizations and individuals under regulations imposed by him to ensure protection of person and property: 
1.  Organized rifle or sporting clubs. 
2.  Shooting galleries and ranges constructed and maintained as required by the building inspector. 
d.  When permitted by federal, state and local law. 
(b)  Firearms prohibited in government buildings. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Firearm means any weapon designed or redesigned, or made or remade, and intended to be fired via the energy of an explosive, gas or air to expel a projectile through a smooth or rifled bore. 
    Government building means any structure, including exterior platform or steps providing means of ingress and egress owned by the city and open to the public. 
(2)  Prohibited. No person shall wear, carry or go armed with a firearm in any government building in the city, except those authorized or licensed to do so in accordance with state law. 
(3)  Penalty. Any person violating this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $200.00 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(Prior Code, § 9.02) 
Sec. 9-39. - Throwing or shooting of arrows, stones and other missiles prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall, with intent to cause injury to persons or damage to property, project missiles by any means at any person, or property, located in a building or on a street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park, playground or other public place within the city. 
(b)  No person shall shoot a bow and arrow in a public place, or into or in a building, within the city, except as follows: 
(1)  In archery class conducted on school district property under the supervision of a qualified instructor; 
(2)  At any designated archery range located in the city; 
(3)  At any bona fide business location where the manufacture or sale of archery equipment takes place; 
(4)  In undeveloped areas (defined as agricultural, wooden or open fields away from public buildings), at least 300 feet from any building or public street, when hunting with a valid archer's license; or 
(5)  Allowed bow fishing for rough fish. 
(Prior Code, § 9.03) 
Secs. 9-40-9-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 9-67. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  No person may use, or possess with primary intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Wis. Stats. ch. 161. Any person who violates this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section who is under 17 years of age is subject to the following disposition: 
(1)  The court shall suspend the juvenile's operating privilege, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40), for not less than six months nor more than five-years and, in addition, shall order one of the following penalties: 
a.  For a first violation, a forfeiture of not more than $50.00 or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5)(g), or both. 
b.  For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, a forfeiture of not more than $100.00 or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5)(g), or both. 
c.  For a violation committed within 12 months of two or more previous violations, a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5)(g), or both. 
(2)  Whenever a court suspends a juvenile's operating privilege under subsection (b)(1) of this section, the court shall immediately take possession of any suspended license and forward it to the department of transportation, together with the notice of suspension clearly stating that the suspension is for violation under Wis. Stats. § 961.573(2) or this section. 
(3)  If the juvenile's license or operating privilege is currently suspended or revoked or the juvenile does not currently possess a valid operator's license issued under Wis. Stats. ch. 343, the suspension under this subsection is effective on the date on which the juvenile is first eligible and applies for issuance or reinstatement of an operator's license under Wis. Stats. ch. 343. 
(Prior Code, § 9.18) 
Sec. 9-68. - Possession of marijuana. 
    It is unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of tetrahydrocannabinols, marijuana, hashish or marijuana derivative listed at Wis. Stats. § 961.14 Any person who violates this article may be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00. 
(Prior Code, § 9.19) 
Sec. 9-69. - Synthetic cannabinoid prohibited. 
    It shall be illegal for any person to use, possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, publically display for sale or attempt to sell, give, or barter any one or more of the chemicals listed in Wis. Stats. § 961.14(4)(tb), whether under the common street or trade names such as Spice, K2, Genie, Yucatan Fire, fake or new marijuana, or by any other name, label, or description. 
(Prior Code, § 9.195) 
Sec. 9-70. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 25-11. In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of Wis. Stats. § 943.01(1) adopted herein, any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the costs of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parent of any un-emancipated minor child who violates Wis. Stats. § 943.01(1) adopted herein may also be held liable for the cost of repairing such damaged or destroyed property in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 895.035. 
(Prior Code, § 9.20) 
Secs. 9-71-9-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 9-99. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm business means any business in which the owners or employee engage in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, or servicing alarm systems. 
    Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices or single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into 110-volt AC line or otherwise receives electrical energy arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the police or fire department is expected to respond. In this article, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms "automatic holdup alarm systems," "burglar alarm systems," "holdup alarm systems" and "manual holdup alarm systems" as those terms are hereinafter defined, and fire alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity or any other condition directly related to the detection of fire. Excluded from the term "alarm system" and from the coverage of this article are alarm systems used to alert or signal persons within the premises which the alarm system are located of an attempted, unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt or fire. 
    Annunciator means the instrumentation of an alarm console at the receiving terminal of a signal line through which both visual and audible signals show when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated or which, in the event of malfunction, may also indicate line trouble. 
    Answering service means a telephone answering service providing among its services the service of receiving on a continuous basis through trained employees emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately relaying the message by live voice to the dispatch center of the police or fire department. 
    Automatic dialing device means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
    Automatic holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of the robber. 
    Burglar alarm system means an alarm system which signals an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
    Central station means an office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits. 
    Direct connect means an alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to the police or fire department. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents or other undetermined cause. The term "false alarm" does not include alarms caused by tornadoes or other violation climatic conditions. 
    Interconnect means to connect an alarm system to a voice grade telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
    Manual holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attached or by an observer thereof. 
    Primary trunk line means a telephone line leading directly into the dispatch center of the police or fire department that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis and which is identified as such by a specific number included among the emergency numbers listed in the telephone directory or numbers in sequence thereafter. 
    Subscriber means a person who buys or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor or service the alarm system. 
(Prior Code, § 9.22(1)) 
Sec. 9-100. - Administrative rules. 
    The police chief shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this section. Such rules shall require the approval of the common council and shall be open to inspection by the public. 
(Prior Code, § 9.22(2)) 
Sec. 9-101. - Automatic dialing devices. 
    No person shall interconnect any automatic dialing device to a police or fire department primary trunk line. No person shall permit such devices, which were installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, to remain interconnected from any property owned or controlled by that person. Such devices may be connected to a central station or an answering service. Relaying messages so received to the police or fire department shall only be done person to person on the telephone line. 
(Prior Code, § 9.22(3)) 
Sec. 9-102. - Direct connections to the police department. 
    Direct connections to the police or fire department are prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 9.22(4)) 
Sec. 9-103. - Testing. 
(a)  No alarm business or alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages to the police department shall be tested or demonstrated without prior notification and approval of the county central dispatch center. 
(b)  No alarm system relayed through intermediate services to the county central dispatch center will be tested to determine the police department's response without first notifying the appropriate authority. However, the police department may inspect or test on-site alarm systems authorized under this section. 
(c)  Alarm systems shall be in compliance with all pertinent response policies of the police department. 
(Prior Code, § 9.22(5)) 
Sec. 9-104. - Penalties for answering false alarms. 
(a)  Generally. Each false alarm requires response of public safety personnel, involves unnecessary expense to the city, increases the risk of injury to persons or damage to property and dilutes the overall public safety protection to the city. Such false alarms constitute a public nuisance and must be abated. 
(b)  Intentional false alarms; penalty. No person shall intentionally cause the activation of a burglar/fire alarm device knowing that no criminal activity, fire or other emergency exists. The penalty for violation of this subsection shall be as set forth in section 25-11. 
(c)  Other false alarms; penalty. Each false alarm as described in section 9-99 in excess of two in a calendar year shall be a violation and the owner or lessee of an alarm system shall be subject to forfeiture at the following schedule: 
(1)  Responded to by police department: 
First two false alarms for a location No Charge Third false alarm per location $50.00 Fourth false alarm per location $100.00 Fifth and subsequent false alarm per location $200.00  
(2)  All false alarms responded to by fire department firefighting personnel and apparatus, in addition to a police response: 
First two false alarms for a location No Charge Third and subsequent false alarm per location $100.00 Fourth and subsequent false alarm per location $200.00  
(d)  Exception. None of the provisions of this section shall apply to any official governmental body or subdivision thereof which owns, operates and maintains its own alarm equipment. 
(Prior Code, § 9.22(6)) 
Sec. 9-105. - City liability. 
    The city shall be under no duty or obligation to a subscriber or to any other person concerning any provision of this section, including, but not limited to, any defects in an alarm system or any delays in transmission or response to any alarm; however, this in no way shall be construed that it is not the proper function of law enforcement to respond to alarms. 
(Prior Code, § 9.22(7)) 
Secs. 9-106-9-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 9-124-9-144. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOBACCO PRODUCTS 

Sec. 9-145. - Possession of tobacco by children. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Child means a person who is less than 18 years of age. 
    Cigarette has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 139.30(1). 
    Law enforcement officer has the meaning specified in Wis. Stats. § 165.85(2)(c) and includes a person appointed as a conservation warden by the department under Wis. Stats. § 23.10(1). 
    Tobacco products has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 139.75(12). 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a child may not do any of the following: 
(1)  Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette or tobacco product. 
(2)  Falsely represent his age for the purpose of receiving any cigarette or tobacco product. 
(3)  Possess any cigarette or tobacco product. 
(c)  A child may purchase or possess cigarettes or tobacco products for the sole purpose of resale in the course of employment during his working hours if employed by a retailer licensed under Wis. Stats. § 134.65. 
(d)  A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette or tobacco product involved in any violation of subsection (b) of this section committed in his presence. 
(Prior Code, § 9.085) 
Sec. 9-146. - Tobacco use prohibited on school district premises. 
    No person shall use any tobacco products on-premises owned or rented by, or under the control of, the city school district pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 120.12(20). 
(Prior Code, § 9.086) 
Sec. 9-147. - Sale or gift of tobacco products to persons under age 18. 
    No retailer, manufacturer or distributor may sell or give cigarettes or tobacco products to any person under the age of 18 in violation of Wis. Stats. § 134.66. Violation of this section shall result in penalties as provided in Wis. Stats. § 134.66(4). 
(Prior Code, § 9.087) 
Sec. 9-148. - Purchasing cigarettes on behalf of, or providing to, any person under age 18. 
    No person may purchase cigarettes on behalf of, or provide to, any person who is under 18 years of age, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 254.92(2m). Violation of this section shall result in penalties as provided in Wis. Stats. § 254.92(2m). 
(Prior Code, § 9.088) 
Secs. 9-149-9-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WITH UNDERAGE PERSONS PRESENT 

Sec. 9-180. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage and product means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage or consumption purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
    Event or gathering means any group of three or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity. 
    Host or allow means to aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control or permit a gathering or event. 
    In control means the power to direct, manage, oversee or restrict the affairs, business, or assets of a person or entity. 
    Parent means any person having legal custody of an underage person: 
(1)  As a natural, adoptive parent or stepparent; 
(2)  As a legal guardian; or 
(3)  As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court. 
    Residence, premises or public or private property means any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit; shed, trailer, or garage; or a hall or meeting room, park or any other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation. 
    Underage person means any individual who has not attained the legal drinking age as determined in Wis. Stats. § 125.02(8m). 
(Prior Code, § 9.089(1)) 
Sec. 9-181. - Prohibited acts. 
    It is unlawful for any persons to host or allow an event or gathering at any residence, premises or on any other private or public property where alcohol or alcoholic beverages or product are present when the person knows that an underage person may, or does, consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage or product; or possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage or product with the intent to consume it; and the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption by the underage persons. 
(1)  In addition, a person violates this division if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit any prohibited act. 
(2)  A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be responsible. 
(Prior Code, § 9.089(2)) 
Sec. 9-182. - Exception. 
(a)  This division does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his parents while the parent is present and in control of the underage person. 
(b)  This division does not apply to legally protected religious observances. 
(c)  This division does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment. 
(Prior Code, § 9.089(3)) 
Sec. 9-183. - Penalty. 
    A person who violates any provision of this division is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 nor more than $5,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(Prior Code, § 9.089(4)) 
Secs. 9-184-9-204. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TRUANCY 

Sec. 9-205. - Truancy prohibited. 
    A person under 18 years of age is prohibited from being a truant as defined in Wis. Stats. § 118.163(1)(d). Penalties available to the court for violation of this division are as provided in Wis. Stats. § 118.163(1m). 
(Prior Code, § 9.095(1)) 
Sec. 9-206. - Habitual truancy prohibited. 
    A person under 18 years of age is prohibited from being an habitual truant as defined in Wis. Stats. § 118.163(1)(b). The penalty available to the court for violation of this division are as provided in Wis. Stats. § 118.163(2). 
(Prior Code, § 9.095(2)) 
Sec. 9-207. - Contributing to truancy. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, any person 17 years of age or older is prohibited, by any act or omission, from knowingly encouraging or contributing to the truancy, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 118.16(1)(c), of a person 17 years of age or under. This subsection does not apply to a person who has under his control a child who has been sanctioned under Wis. Stats. § 49.26(1)(h). 
(b)  An act or omission contributes to the truancy of a child, whether or not the child is adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the natural and probable consequences of that act or omission would be to cause the child to be truant. 
(Prior Code, § 9.096) 
Secs. 9-208-9-237. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CURFEW 

Sec. 9-238. - Children in street at night. 
(a)  No child under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle or remain upon any street, alley, or other public place in the city between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next day, Sunday through Friday, or between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays, unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of the child. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a child: 
(1)  Performing an errand as directed by parents, guardian or person having lawful custody. 
(2)  Who is on his own premises or the areas immediately adjacent thereto. 
(3)  Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alley, public places or any motor vehicle after such hour. 
(4)  Returning home from a supervised school, church or civic function. 
These exceptions, however, shall not permit a child to unnecessarily loiter about the streets, alleys, or public places or be in a parked motor vehicle on the public street. 
(Prior Code, § 9.09(1)) 
Sec. 9-239. - Parental violation. 
(a)  No parent, guardian, or other person having legal custody of a child under the age of 17 years, shall permit or suffer such child to loiter, idle, or remain upon any street, alley, or other public place in the city between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next day, Sunday through Friday, or between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays, unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of the child. 
(b)  Other party violation. No person age 17 or over shall aid, abet, assist, enable or conspire to permit or suffer such child to loiter, idle, or remain upon any street, alley, or other public place in the city between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next day, unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of the child. 
(Prior Code, § 9.09(2)) 
Sec. 9-240. - Responsibility of operators of places of amusement. 
    No person operating a place of amusement or entertainment within the city, or any agent, servant or employee of the person, shall permit a child under the age of 17 years to enter or loiter in such place of amusement or entertainment between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next day, Sunday through Thursday and between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the next day, Friday and Saturday unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of the child. 
(Prior Code, § 9.09(3)) 
Sec. 9-241. - Responsibility of hotels, motels and roominghouse. 
    No person operating a hotel, motel, lodginghouse or roominghouse within the city or any agent, servant or employee of the person, shall permit any child under the age of 17 years to visit, idle, wander or stroll in any portion of the hotel, motel, lodginghouse or roominghouse between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the next day, unless such child is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of the child. 
(Prior Code, § 9.09(4)) 
Sec. 9-242. - Loitering in school and playground areas. 
    No person, not in official attendance or on official school business, shall enter into, congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in any school building or in or about any playground area adjacent thereto within the city between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on official school days. 
(Prior Code, § 9.09(5)) 
Sec. 9-243. - Detaining a child. 
    A child believed to be violating the provisions of this section shall be taken to the police department or the sheriff's department for the county for proper identification. Every law enforcement officer while on duty may detain any child violating sections 9-238, 9-240, 9-241 and 9-242 until such time as the parent, guardian, or other adult person having legal custody of the child shall be immediately notified. The person so notified shall, as soon as reasonably possible thereafter, report to the police department or the sheriff's office to take the child into custody and shall sign a release for him. 
(Prior Code, § 9.09(6)) 
Sec. 9-244. - Warning. 
    The first time a child is detained by law enforcement officers as provided in section 9-243, a parent, guardian, or person having legal custody shall be advised as to the provisions of this section and any violation of this section occurring thereafter by this child or any other child under his care or custody, shall result in a penalty being imposed as herein provided. 
(Prior Code, § 9.09(7)) 
Sec. 9-245. - General penalty. 
(a)  Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child described in sections 9-238, 9-240, 9-241 and 9-242, who has been warned in the manner provided in section 9-244, and who thereafter violated any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 25-11. 
(b)  Any child who violates this section after being detained and released under section 9-243 shall be dealt with under Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(Prior Code, § 9.09(8)) 
Chapter 10 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 10.01) 
Sec. 10-2. - Defined. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public nuisance means a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public. 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property. 
(3)  Greatly offend the public morals or decency. 
(4)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way or the use of public property. 
(Prior Code, § 10.02) 
Sec. 10-3. - Affecting health. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of section 10-2: 
(1)  Adulterated food. All decayed, adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public. 
(2)  Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or food which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
(3)  Breeding places for vermin, etc. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed. 
(4)  Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply. 
(5)  Privy vaults and garbage can. Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not fly-tight. 
(6)  Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation. 
(7)  Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances. 
(8)  Noxious odors, etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the city emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the city. 
(9)  Street pollution. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the city. 
(10)  Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric pollutants within the city or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 10.03) 
Sec. 10-4. - Offending morals and decency. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things are specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency within the definition of section 10-2: 
(1)  Disorderly house. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses of ill-fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling. 
(2)  Gambling device. All gambling devices and slot machines. 
(3)  Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer. All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by the ordinances of the city. 
(4)  Continuous violation of city ordinance. Any place or premises within the city where city ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated. 
(5)  Illegal drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of state laws. 
(Prior Code, § 10.04) 
Sec. 10-5. - Affecting peace and safety. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the definition of section 10-2: 
(1)  Signs, billboards, etc. All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. 
(2)  Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of city ordinances relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within the city. 
(3)  Unauthorized traffic sign. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interferes with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal. 
(4)  Obstruction of intersection. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(5)  Tree limbs. All limbs of trees which project over and less than ten feet above any public sidewalk, street or other public place. 
(6)  Dangerous tree. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are the cause of substantial annoyance to the general public. 
(7)  Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks, except as provided by state laws and city ordinances. 
(8)  Dilapidated buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human use. 
(9)  Wires and cables over streets. All wires and cables over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface thereof. 
(10)  Noisy animals or fowl. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises shall greatly annoy any person or the public within the city. 
(11)  Obstructions of street; excavation. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks, and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by this Code, or which, although made in accordance with such municipal Code, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished or do not conform to the permit. 
(12)  Unlawful assemblies. Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks. 
(13)  Engine braking systems. Use of engine braking systems which utilize engine exhaust to reduce large vehicle speed and exceed noise parameters established in Wis. Admin. Code ch. TRANS 405, commonly referred to as compression or Jake brakes provided that this subsection shall not apply in cases of emergency or under the following grade conditions: 
a.  Downgrade of five percent and more than 3,000 feet long. 
b.  Downgrade of six percent and more than 2,000 feet long. 
c.  Downgrade of seven percent and more than 1,000 feet long. 
d.  Downgrade of eight percent and more than 750 feet long. 
e.  Downgrade of nine percent and more than 500 feet long. 
f.  Any downgrade steeper than nine percent, regardless of length. 
(14)  Outdoor wood burning stove. Outdoor wood burning stoves, used primarily to provide a heat source to a building, are declared a public nuisance and prohibited within the city limits. Any existing outdoor wood burning stoves, as of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, are declared public nuisances when used between April 1 and October 15. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05) 
Sec. 10-6. - Grass and weed height restricted. 
(a)  All weeds and grass shall be kept cut to a height not to exceed six inches. The city may cause all weeds and grass to be cut and removed and brush to be removed and the cost thereof charged to the property under Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0703 and 66.60(16). 
(b)  Upon notice of a violation of subsection (a) of this section, the weed commissioner for the city, appointed pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0517 shall investigate, and if any person neglects or refuses to destroy noxious weeds within the time allowed by written notification pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0407, the weed commissioner may destroy or cause all such weeds to be destroyed in the manner deemed to be the most economical method. The property owner will be allowed seven days from the date of notification to remove weeds upon the first notice of the year. If subsequent notices are sent within the calendar year, the property owner will be allowed 48 hours to comply. 
(c)  In addition, the owner of property in violation of subsection (a) of this section who shall fail to comply with this chapter after verbal or written warning from the weed commissioner or code enforcement officer shall be subject to penalties, fines and forfeitures as set forth in section 25-11. 
(Prior Code, § 10.03(6)) 
Secs. 10-7-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT 

Sec. 10-31. - Enforcement. 
    The police chief, the chief of the fire department, the building inspector and code compliance officer shall enforce those provisions of this article that come within the jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this article to abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and has satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(Prior Code, § 10.07(1)) 
Sec. 10-32. - Summary abatement. 
    If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists within the city and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the mayor may direct the proper officer to cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance 
(Prior Code, § 10.07(2)) 
Sec. 10-33. - Abatement after notice. 
    If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of the nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall serve notice on the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same within ten days. If the nuisance is not removed by the person, such nuisances shall be removed as provided in section 10-32. 
(Prior Code, § 10.07(3)) 
Sec. 10-34. - Other methods not excluded. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the city or its officials in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Prior Code, § 10.07(4)) 
Sec. 10-35. - Court order. 
    Except when necessary under section 10-32, no officer hereunder shall use force to obtain access to private property to abate a public nuisance but shall request permission to enter upon private property if such premises are occupied, and, if such permission is denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of the public nuisance. 
(Prior Code, § 10.07(5)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Cost of abatement. 
    In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the city shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. 
(Prior Code, § 10.08) 
Secs. 10-37-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 10-61. - Prior approval. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, all persons shall obtain authorization from the fire chief before kindling or maintaining any open burning or authorizing the kindling or maintaining of any open burning within the limits of the city. 
(b)  The following open burning shall be permitted without authorization from the fire chief: 
(1)  Outdoor cooking using charcoal or liquid propane as a fuel. 
(2)  Training for fire departments. 
(3)  Campfires or outdoor fireplaces. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05(15)(a)) 
Sec. 10-62. - Size of the piles. 
    The size of the pile of material to be burned shall not exceed three feet by three feet high. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05(15)(b)) 
Sec. 10-63. - Location. 
    The location of the open burning shall be approved by the fire chief and either: 
(1)  The pile of material being burned shall be at least 15 feet from any structure, wood or lumber pile, wooden fence, trees or bushes, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 15 feet of the items; or 
(2)  The fire shall be contained in an approved burner located at least 15 feet from any structure, wood or lumber pile, wooden fence, tree or bush. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05(15)(c)) 
Sec. 10-64. - Material for burning. 
(a)  Fuel for open burning shall consist of dry material only and shall not be ignited with flammable or combustible liquids. 
(b)  Material for open burning may not include rubbish, garbage, trash, leaves or grass clippings, and textile products or material made of or coated with rubber, plastic, leather or petroleum based materials and may not contain any flammable or combustible liquids. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05(15)(d)) 
Sec. 10-65. - Fire chief to issue permits. 
    Permits required by this article may be obtained from the office of the fire chief with a copy to the fire department. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05(15)(e)) 
Sec. 10-66. - Supervision. 
    Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent person at least 18 years of age until such fire is extinguished. This person shall have readily available for use fire extinguishing equipment deemed necessary by the fire chief. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05(15)(f)) 
Sec. 10-67. - Time to burn. 
    Open burning shall be permitted only from 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight or as permitted by the fire department having jurisdiction. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05(15)(g)) 
Sec. 10-68. - Other regulation. 
    Open burning shall also be subject to the administrative rules of the department of natural resources. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05(15)(h)) 
Sec. 10-69. - Prohibition. 
    Outdoor burning shall be prohibited when the wind velocity exceeds nine mph or local circumstances make the fires potentially hazardous. Local circumstances include, but are not limited to, thermal inversions, ozone alerts, and very dry conditions. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05(15)(i)) 
Sec. 10-70. - Penalty. 
    The penalty for violating the provisions herein contained shall be as provided in section 25-11. 
(Prior Code, § 10.05(15)(j)) 
Secs. 10-71-10-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 10-99. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which, through disuse and failure to be used, remains in one location for a period of seven days or more, or a motor vehicle which has been reported as stolen to any police department, or a motor vehicle which does not have affixed a current motor vehicle license. 
    Discarded or abandoned personal property means movable property such as, but not limited to, appliances and other or similar household items left unattended and apparently no longer used or usable for the purpose intended and remaining, more or less, in one location for a period of seven days or more. 
    Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is partially dismantled or wrecked and which cannot safely or legally be operated. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled land vehicle which can be used for towing or transporting people or materials, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motorized campers, motorcycles, motor scooters, tractors, snowmobiles, etc. 
    Motor vehicle accessories means any part of any motor vehicle. 
    Private property means any real property not owned by federal, government, state, county, city, school board, or other public subdivisions. 
    Removal means the physical relocation of a motor vehicle to an authorized location. 
(Prior Code, § 10.06(1)) 
Sec. 10-100. - Storage prohibited. 
(a)  No person owning or having custody of any junked motor vehicle, abandoned motor vehicle, motor vehicle accessories, or discarded or abandoned personal property shall store or permit any such vehicle, accessories, or personal property to remain on any private property within the city for a period of more than seven days. No person owning any private property in the city shall store or permit to remain any such junked or abandoned motor vehicle, motor vehicle accessories, or discarded or abandoned property on his property for more than a seven-day period. Such storage is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated or removed and penalties imposed as provided in this article. 
(b)  No person, after notification to remove any abandoned motor vehicle, junked motor vehicle, or motor vehicle accessories from any private property has been given pursuant to this article, shall move the same to any other private property upon which such storage is not permitted or onto any public highway or other public property for purposes of storage. 
(Prior Code, § 10.06(2)) 
Sec. 10-101. - Storage, permitted when. 
    This article shall not apply to any junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories or any abandoned motor vehicle stored within an enclosed building, licensed automobile salvage yards, or auto repair and auto body shops, but this article shall apply to automobile service stations or tire, battery and accessory sale stores. 
(Prior Code, § 10.06(3)) 
Sec. 10-102. - Investigation of premises. 
    The police department, on routine patrol or upon receipt of a complaint from the building inspector of any other person, may investigate a suspected abandoned motor vehicle, junked motor vehicle, or motor vehicle accessories and record the make, model, style, and identification numbers and its situation. 
(Prior Code, § 10.06(4)) 
Sec. 10-103. - Notice of removal. 
    Whenever the police chief, or any member of his department, shall find or be notified that any abandoned motor vehicle, junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories has been stored or permitted to remain on any private property within the city, other than those permitted instances described in section 10-101, the police chief shall send by certified mail a notice to the owner of record of the motor vehicle or accessories, if such owner can be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence, and also to the owner of the private property, as shown on the tax assessment records of the city, on which the same is located, to remove the junked motor vehicle, abandoned motor vehicle, or motor vehicle accessories within seven days. Such notice shall also contain the following information: 
(1)  Nature of complaint. 
(2)  Description and location of the motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories. 
(3)  Statement that the motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories shall be removed from the premises not later than seven days from the date of notification. 
(4)  Statement that removal from the location specified in the notification to another location upon which storage is not permitted is prohibited and shall subject the person to additional penalty. 
(5)  Statement that if removal is made within the time limits specified, notification shall be given in writing to the police chief. 
(6)  Statement of the penalties provided for noncompliance with such notice. 
(Prior Code, § 10.06(5)) 
Sec. 10-104. - Penalty. 
    Each violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense, and each and every day any provision of this section is violated shall constitute a separate offense for which a forfeiture may be imposed. 
(Prior Code, § 10.06(6)) 
Sec. 10-105. - Restricted parking on residential properties. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Improved surface means cement, brick, asphalt, pavers, recycled asphalt, or stone consisting of a coarse and fine aggregate with sufficient binder to produce a stable base for surfacing, free from vegetable matter, shale, and lumps of clay. Gradation shall be number two as per section 304.2.6 of the state department of transportation standard specifications, installed so it does not drain onto neighboring property. It is not a sufficiently improved surface if only the areas under the tires are paved; provided, however, that existing cement strips leading to a parking area are permitted to remain in use. 
    Vehicle means any land or water vehicle which can be used for towing or transporting people or materials, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, campers, boats, trailers and tractors. 
(b)  Parking restrictions. 
(1)  No person shall keep, store or park any vehicle on any portion of a front yard or corner lot side yard facing a street of a property designed or used as a residence, except on an area that is an improved surface. 
(2)  No owner, tenant, manager, or occupant of property used as a residence shall allow or suffer another person to keep, store or park any vehicle on any portion of a front yard or corner lot side yard facing a street, except on an area that is an improved surface. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit. 
(1)  An owner, lessee, or occupant of the property from repairing, washing, cleaning, or servicing personal property that is owned, leased, or rented by the owner, lessee, or occupant of the property; or 
(2)  Repairing or servicing of a motor vehicle or part thereof within a completely enclosed building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(d)  Improved surface limitations. 
(1)  No more than 50 percent of the required front setback for any lot containing a one- or two-family dwelling or any lot located in any R-1, R-2, or R-3 or R-6 residential district with a frontage width of 40 feet or greater shall contain an improved surface. 
(2)  For lots which have a frontage width less than 40 feet, improving the surface in the front setback area is limited to ten feet in width or 50 percent of the width of the lot at any given point, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (d)(1) of this section for lots which have a frontage width less than 40 feet, an improved surface area directly contiguous with, and providing primary access to, two side by side required parking spaces, may exceed the 50 percent limitation as long as it is no more than 25 feet long and 18 feet wide. 
(Prior Code, § 10.65) 
Chapter 11 - PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Compulsory connection to sewer and water. 
    Whenever sewer and water become available to any public, commercial, mercantile or business building, or building used for human habitation, the building inspector shall notify in writing the owner, agent or occupant thereof, to connect thereto all facilities required by the building inspector. If such person to whom notice has been given shall fail to comply for more than ten days after notice, the building inspector shall cause the necessary connections to be made and the expense thereof shall be assessed as a special tax against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.45. 
(Prior Code, § 11.07) 
Sec. 11-2. - Privies and cesspools prohibited. 
    After connection of any building to a sewer main hereunder, no privy, cesspool or waterless toilet shall be used in connection with such building. 
(Prior Code, § 11.07(3)) 
Sec. 11-3. - Health and sanitation permits. 
(a)  Administrative code sections adopted. The following regulations of the Wisconsin Administrative Code are adopted and incorporated by reference in this section as the same may be amended from time to time: 
(1)  Campgrounds as contained in Wis. Admin. Code ch. ATCP 79. 
(2)  Recreational and educational camps as contained in Wis. Admin. Code ch. ATCP 78. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  From and after the date on which this regulation takes effect, no operator of a manufactured home park, campground or recreational and educational camp shall operate unless he has in his possession a valid license issued by the state department of health and social services, division of health. The license shall be displayed in public view in the registration office. 
(2)  Violation of this regulation shall be prosecuted and punished as provided by state law and the city health regulations. 
(3)  The public safety committee shall have the authority to refuse issuance or revoke a manufactured home park license when the establishment or facility does not meet standards set forth in the applicable administrative code. 
(Prior Code, § 11.11) 
Sec. 11-4. - Feeding waterfowl in certain areas prohibited. 
    Feeding waterfowl in the city is prohibited on public or private lands with water frontage commencing at the railroad bridge over the La Crosse River in Evans Bosshard Park and eastward to the east city limits. 
(Prior Code, § 11.13) 
Sec. 11-5. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order or regulation made hereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 25-11. 
(Prior Code, § 11.15) 
Secs. 11-6-11-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 11-29. - Duties of property owners and occupants. 
(a)  Generally. Every household, occupant of any dwelling house, boardinghouse, restaurant, hotel or any place of business having garbage shall dispose of the garbage in a sanitary manner approved by the public safety committee. 
(b)  Refuse containers. They shall provide one or more metal cans, paper bags (bags made of recyclable and biodegradable Kraft paper, especially designed for garbage) or plastic containers sufficient to receive all garbage that may accumulate between collections. Each can, bag or plastic container, except when otherwise especially permitted, shall have a capacity not to exceed 30 gallons and shall be provided with a bale or handles and a tight-fitting cover. The paper bag shall be rolled down at the top of the bag and crimped securely. 
(c)  Placement for collection. These containers shall be so placed that they shall be at all times readily accessible for removing or emptying the same and shall not be more than 30 feet from the street line when collection is made from the street and not more than 40 feet from the alley line when collection is made from the alley. No other receptacle shall be used for garbage. Garbage receptacles shall be placed on boulevards not more than 24 hours before normal collection time and shall be removed from boulevards not more than 24 hours after collection. 
(d)  Maintenance of refuse between collections. All garbage accumulation between collections shall be well drained. Food containers consisting of tin cans, bottles and wrappers may be placed in the garbage containers. 
(Prior Code, § 11.09(1)) 
Sec. 11-30. - Limited collection of garbage and other refuse. 
    The city or its designate shall collect garbage and other refuse from churches and residential dwellings including single-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings of four units or less, manufactured homes, and individual apartment units. Such refuse shall be collected one time each week. 
(Prior Code, § 11.09(2)) 
Sec. 11-31. - Residential community refuse receptacles. 
    The public safety committee may provide at one or more locations within the city a receptacle for deposit of refuse for use only by residents of the city for disposal of the resident's own personal, family or household refuse. 
(1)  No person shall deposit refuse at any such location or in any such receptacle where the refuse deposited has been obtained as the direct or indirect result of any business or commercial venture or other enterprise, or any other enterprise, transaction or undertaking for gain, profit or compensation. 
(2)  No person shall deposit refuse at such location or receptacle where such refuse has not been obtained from the depositor's residence or household located within the city as a result of the depositor's personal, family or household use. 
(3)  No person who is not a resident of the city shall deposit refuse at any such location. 
(4)  Deposits shall be restricted to refuse only, and no person shall deposit garbage which is defined as the remains of food, other consumable products or their packaging including cans, bottles, boxes and similar food packaging. 
(5)  The public safety committee may prescribe other limitations, rules and regulations for use of the refuse pickup site, and such rules and regulations shall be posted at the site. No person shall violate any such rules or regulations established by the public safety committee. 
(Prior Code, § 11.09(3)) 
Sec. 11-32. - Large item pick up. 
(a)  The city or its designate shall pick up and dispose of unwanted large items of personal property not normally included in the weekly garbage collection during the first full week of each month. Such items shall be placed for collection as described in section 11-30. Objects too large for removal may be rejected at the discretion of the collector. 
(b)  The monthly large item pick up applies to items disposed of by residents occupying residential dwellings as described in section 11-30 and from churches. 
(c)  Lumber or boards shall not exceed four feet and shall be bundled and shall not be more than 75 pounds. 
(Prior Code, § 11.09(4)) 
Sec. 11-33. - Mandatory separation of recyclable material. 
(a)  The term "recyclable material," as used in this section, shall mean and include all glass containers, tin cans, newspapers (matter printed on newsprint including daily or weekly publications and advertising circulars, but excluding books, catalogs or similar publications), corrugated boxes, paper boxes, plastic bottles, magazines, scrap aluminum. 
(b)  All persons, organizations or entities subject to the provisions of this section shall separate recyclable materials from garbage or other refuse and shall place such recyclable material on the curb or alley line for collection the same day as collection of garbage or other refuse by the city or its designate. Curb or alley line placement shall be made in 18-gallon bins provided by the city or its designate. 
(c)  All recyclable materials must be separated from other garbage or refuse and securely placed in clear plastic bags. Bags containing both garbage and recyclable materials shall not be collected by the city or its designate. Recyclable materials shall be prepared for collection as follows: 
(1)  Glass. Remove caps, covers, metal rings and rinse out; labels may be left on. Do not break glass jars and bottles. 
(2)  Tin cans. Remove labels, rinse out and flatten if possible. 
(3)  Newspapers. Tie in bundles or put in a paper grocery sack. 
(4)  Corrugated boxes. Flatten, tie in bundles or put in easy to handle box. 
(5)  Magazines. Place magazines, catalogs and other glossy paper in a paper grocery sack or small cardboard box. 
(6)  Plastic bottles. Rinse out and flatten if possible. 
(7)  Aluminum scrap. Trays, pans and foil should be rinsed off and stacked together. 
(8)  Aluminum cans. Accepted without payment. 
All recyclable materials may be placed in the same clear plastic bag with other recyclable materials. 
(Prior Code, § 11.09(5)) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Licenses required; fees. 
    A license shall be required for the sale of each of the following or the conduct of business or activity at the indicated license fee. The license fees shall be for one year unless otherwise indicated. 
(1)  Cigarette license: $100.00. 
(2)  Dogs. 
a.  Neutered males and spayed females: $11.00. 
b.  Unspayed females or males: $20.00. 
(3)  Fermented malt beverage. 
a.  Class "A" beer: $250.00. 
b.  Class "B" beer: $100.00. 
c.  Wholesaler's beer license: $25.00. 
d.  Operator's license: $60.00. The license fee shall be prorated on the basis of the number of months remaining in the license period of issuance. 
e.  Class "C" wine license: $100.00. The license fee shall be prorated on the basis of the number of months remaining in the license year. 
f.  Provisional operator: $15.00. 
g.  Temporary operator: $15.00. 
h.  Temporary Class "B:" $10.00. 
i.  Reserve "Class B:" initial issuance fee for each new owner; $10,000.00. 
(4)  Filling station: see article VIII of this chapter. 
(5)  Intoxicating liquor. 
a.  Retail "Class A" liquor license: $500.00. 
b.  Retail "Class B" liquor license: $500.00. 
c.  Temporary Class "B:" $10.00. 
(6)  Junk and salvage yards: $10.00. 
(7)  Manufactured homes and parks. 
a.  Manufactured home parks: $2.00 per space but not less than $25.00. 
b.  Manufactured homes: as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 
(8)  Direct sellers: $15.00. 
(9)  Public amusements: see article III of this chapter. 
(10)  Taxicabs: see article VI of this chapter. 
(11)  Pawnbrokers, secondhand article dealers, secondhand jewelry dealers and secondhand article dealer malls; licenses issued pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 134.71 shall be subject to fees as scheduled in Wis. Stats. § 134.71(11). 
(Prior Code, § 12.01; Ord. No. 922, § 1, 6-15-2016) 
Sec. 12-2. - Issuance and revocation of license. 
(a)  License required. No person shall engage in any business or activity enumerated in section 12-1 without a license or permit therefor as provided by this chapter. The terms "license" and "permit" as used throughout this chapter shall be considered interchangeable. 
(b)  Application. Application for a license under this chapter shall be made to the city clerk on a form furnished by the city. Such application shall contain such information as may be required by the provisions of this chapter or as may be otherwise required by the city council. 
(c)  Payment of license fee. License fees imposed under section 12-1 shall accompany the license application. If a license is granted, the city clerk shall issue the applicant a receipt for his license fee. 
(d)  Refund of license fee. No fee paid shall be refunded unless the license is denied, except in the case of retail Class "B" liquor licenses, upon the surrender and reissuance of the license the surrendering license holder shall receive as a refund a sum equal to the prorated license fee under section 12-26. 
(e)  Granting of license. The city clerk may issue the following licenses subject to the standards established by this chapter without prior approval of the council: 
(1)  Auctions. 
(2)  Dog licenses. 
(3)  Public amusements and entertainments. 
All other licenses shall be issued by the council unless otherwise designated. 
(f)  Terms of license. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on June 30 in the year of issuance unless issued for a shorter term, when they shall expire on 12:00 midnight of the last effective day of the license, or unless otherwise provided by these ordinances or state laws. 
(g)  Form of license. All licenses issued hereunder shall show the date of issue, the activity licensed, and the term of the license, and shall be signed by the city clerk. 
(h)  Record of license. The city clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued. 
(i)  Display of license. All licenses hereunder shall be displayed upon the premises or vehicle for which issued, or if carried on the person shall be displayed to any officer of the city upon request. 
(j)  Compliance with ordinances required. It shall be a condition of holding a license under this chapter that the licensee comply with all ordinances of the city. Failure to do so shall be cause for revocation of the license. 
(k)  Transfer of license. All licenses issued hereunder shall be personal to whom issued and shall not be transferred except with the consent of the council. 
(l)  Exemption. No license other than a liquor or beer license shall be required under this section for any nonprofit educational, charitable, civic, military, or religious organization where the activity which would otherwise be licensed is conducted for the benefit of the members or for the benefit of the public generally. 
(m)  Renewal of license. All applications for renewal of licenses hereunder shall be made to the city clerk by April 15. For any renewal applications received and accepted after April 15, renewal fees will be double the fee set forth in the city clerk's fee schedule. For any fee received and accepted after June 30, renewal fees will be triple the fee set forth in the city clerk's fee schedule. 
(n)  Consent to inspection. An applicant for a license under this chapter thereby consents to the entry of police or authorized city representatives upon licensed premises at all reasonable hours for inspection and search, and consents to removal from the premises and introduction into evidence in prosecutions for violations of this chapter all things found therein in violation of this chapter or state law. 
(o)  Revocation of license. 
(1)  Except as provided in section 12-33, any license issued under this chapter may be revoked for cause by the city council. No license shall be revoked except upon written verified complaint filed with the city council, by the mayor, a member of the council, the police chief or a city resident. The licensee shall be served with a copy of the written charges and shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the city council. The licensee shall be given notice of the hearing before the city council which shall be not more than 20 nor less than five days after notice, except as otherwise agreed between the parties. 
(2)  At such hearing the licensee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, shall have the right to present and cross-examine witnesses and, upon request, may have subpoenas issued by the mayor or presiding officer of the city council to compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(3)  After hearing the evidence, the city council may revoke such license or impose a limited period of suspension. The determination of the council shall be final. 
(4)  The mayor or city council may suspend the license of a licensee hereunder without hearing for not to exceed ten days. 
(5)  The police department shall repossess any license revoked hereunder. 
(p)  Payment of fee. No license under this chapter shall be issued to applicants with unpaid, overdue, delinquent or otherwise outstanding fines, forfeitures, penalties, assessments, personal property taxes or user fees owed to the city. 
(Prior Code, § 12.02; Ord. No. 932, § 2, 6-21-2017) 
Secs. 12-3-12-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 12-23. - State statutes adopted. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125, relating to intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages, inclusive of any provisions thereof relating to the penalty to be imposed or the punishment for violation of the statutes, are adopted and made a part of this section by reference. A violation of any such provision shall be a violation of this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the state statutes are incorporated herein and are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation in the area of intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(1)) 
Sec. 12-24. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol beverages means fermented malt beverages, wine and intoxicating liquor. 
    Brewer means any person who manufactures fermented malt beverages for sale or transportation. 
    Brewery premises means all land and buildings used in the manufacture or sale of fermented malt beverages at a brewer's principal place of business. 
    Club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose but not for pecuniary gain and that only sells alcohol beverages incidental to its operation. 
    Department means the state department of revenue. 
    Fast food restaurant means a restaurant serving food primarily prepared in advance and sold to its customers at a counter, or a restaurant utilizing a drive-through facility. 
    Fermented malt beverages means any beverage made by the alcohol fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley malt and hops, with or without un-malted grains or decorticated and de-germinated grains or sugar containing one-half percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
    Full-service restaurant means a restaurant where meals are primarily prepared individually for the customer and are served to customers at their table by wait staff. A restaurant that is a fast food restaurant, or that has drive-through facilities is not considered a full-service restaurant. 
    Intoxicating liquor means all ardent, spirituous, distilled or vinous liquors, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, and by whatever name called, containing one-half percent (0.5 percent) or more of alcohol by volume, which are beverages, but does not include fermented malt beverages that contain less that five percent of alcohol by weight. 
    Legal drinking age means 21 years of age. 
    License means an authorization to sell alcohol beverages issued by a municipal governing body under this article. 
    North premises means the area described in a license or permit. 
    Permit means any permit issued by the department under this article. 
    Person means a natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or association. 
    Principal business means the primary activity as determined by analyzing the amount of capital, labor, time, attention and floor space devoted to each business activity and by analyzing the sources of net income and gross income. The name, appearance and advertising of the entity may also be taken into consideration if they are given less weight. 
    Restaurant has the meaning as defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.61(5) and applies to establishments whose sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of the establishment's gross receipts. 
    Sell, sold, sale or selling means any transfer of alcohol beverages with consideration, or any transfer without consideration if knowingly made for purposes of evading the law relating to the sale of alcohol beverages, or any shift, device, scheme or transaction for obtaining alcohol beverages, including the solicitation of orders for, or the sale for future delivery of, alcohol beverages. 
    Under the influence means, not only all the well-known and easily recognized conditions and degrees of intoxication, but any abnormal mental or physical condition that is the result of indulging to any degree in alcohol beverages and that tends to deprive a person of the clearness of intellect and control of himself that he would otherwise possess. 
    Underage person means a person who has not attained the legal drinking age. 
    Wholesaler means a person, other than a brewer, manufacturer or rectifier, who sells alcohol beverages to a licensed retailer or to another person who holds a permit or license to sell alcohol beverages at wholesale. 
    Wine means products obtained from the normal alcohol fermentation of the juice or must of sound, ripe grapes, other fruits or other agricultural products, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry, mead and sakes, is such products contain one-half percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(2)) 
Sec. 12-25. - Licenses required. 
    No person, except as provided by section 12-23, shall distribute, vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale, deal or traffic in or for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage or cause the same to be done without having procured a license or permit as provided in this section nor without complying with all the provisions of this section and all statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and city applicable thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(3)) 
Sec. 12-26. - Classes of license. 
    There shall be the following classes of licenses which, when issued by the city clerk under the authority of the city council after payment of the fees specified in section 12-1, shall permit the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 125.17, 125.25, 125.26, 125.28, 125.51 and 125.57. 
(1)  Class A licenses. 
a.  A Class "A" license authorizes retail sales of fermented malt beverages within the city, for consumption elsewhere than on the premises where sold. 
b.  A "Class A" license authorizes retail sales of all alcohol beverages within the city, for consumption elsewhere than on the premises where sold. 
c.  A "Class A" license for the retail sale of cider, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(2)(e)1 subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(e). 
(2)  Class "B" licenses. 
a.  Class "B" license authorizes retail sales of fermented malt beverages to be consumed either on the premises where sold or off the premises, provided that only fermented malt beverages in original packages or containers may be removed from the premises where sold. 
b.  A "Class B" license authorizes retail sales of wine, fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises where sold by the glass and to be consumed on the licensed premises where sold and the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package or container in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time and to be consumed off the licensed premises, except that wine may be sold in the original container or otherwise in any quantity to be consumed off the premises. 
c.  Reserve "Class B" license as defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(a)4, counted under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(br), and subject to a $10,000.00 initial issuance fee under the circumstances required by Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(e)2 authorizes retail sales of wine, fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises where sold by the glass and to be consumed on the licensed premises where sold and the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package or container in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time and to be consumed off the licensed premises, except that wine may be sold in the original container or otherwise in any quantity to be consumed off the premises. 
d.  Temporary Class "B" licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, to county or local fair associations or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges or societies that have been in existence for at least six months before the date of application and to posts of veterans' organizations authorizing the sale of fermented malt beverages at a particular picnic or similar gathering. 
e.  Temporary "Class B" licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, to county or local fair associations or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges or societies that have been in existence for at least six months before the date of application and to posts of veterans' organizations authorizing the sale of wine in an original package, container or bottle or by the glass if the wine is dispensed directly from an original package, container or bottle at a particular picnic or similar gathering. No fee may be charged to a person who at the same time applies for a temporary Class "B" license for the same event. 
(3)  "Class C" license. A "Class C" license authorizes the retail sale of wine by the glass or in opened original containers for consumption on the premises where sold. A "Class C" license may be issued for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of gross receipts and which does not have a barroom or for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of gross receipts and which has a barroom in which wine is the only intoxicating liquor sold. 
(4)  Wholesaler's license. A wholesaler's license shall permit its holder to sell and keep for sale, within the city, alcohol beverages in their original packages or containers to dealers to be consumed elsewhere than on the premises where stored or sold. 
(5)  Operator's license. 
a.  Regular operator's licenses may be issued to a qualified person by the public safety committee for a period of up to two years. All licenses will expire bi-annually on June 30 in even numbered years. 
b.  Provisional operator's licenses may be issued to a qualified person by the city clerk for a period not to exceed 60 days. No provisional license may be issued to any person who has been denied an operator's license. The city clerk may revoke the license if the city clerk discovers that the holder of the license made a false statement on the application or is not otherwise qualified. 
c.  Temporary operator's licenses may be issued to a qualified person employed by, or donating their services to, nonprofit corporations. Temporary operator's licenses are issued by the city clerk for a period not to exceed 14 days. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(4)) 
Sec. 12-27. - License application. 
(a)  Licenses for premises. All applications, except for operator's license, shall be made in writing on the form prescribed by the state department of revenue and shall be sworn to by the applicant as provided by Wis. Stats. § 887.01 and shall be filed with the city clerk not less than 15 days before the next meeting of the public safety committee. The premises shall be physically described on the application to include every room and storage space to be covered by the license, including all rooms not separated by a solid wall or joined by connecting entrances. 
(1)  The city clerk shall notify the police department, fire chief and building inspector of all license and permit applications, and these officials shall review or cause to be inspected each original application and premises to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. These officials shall furnish to the approving authority in writing any reasons why the license or permit should not be issued. No license or permit provided for in this section shall be issued until such premises are in compliance with applicable regulations, ordinances and laws. The above officers may also review or cause to be inspected all renewal applications and any premises being licensed. 
(2)  A license for a premises may be denied unless the applicant meets the following requirements: 
a.  Has been a resident of the state for at least 90 days prior to applying for such license. 
b.  Is at least 21 years of age. 
c.  Has successfully completed a responsible beverage server training course pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5)(a)5. 
d.  Provides documentary proof of his right to possession of the premises sought to be licensed upon request by the city. 
e.  Provides proof under Wis. Stats. § 77.61(11) that he is the holder of a seller's permit. 
f.  Does not have an arrest or conviction record of offenses which substantially relate to the circumstances of the licensed activity. For purposes of this section the term "offenses which substantially relate to the circumstances of the licensed activity" shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Any non-felony alcohol related conviction or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
2.  A history of non-felony alcohol related convictions as long as the most current conviction or arrest is within the last 24 months. 
3.  Any non-felony drug related convictions or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
4.  Any non-felony conviction or pending charges within the last 12 months which involve resisting arrest, battery to a police officer or obstructing a judge in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
5.  Two or more non-felony convictions or pending charges in the last 24 months for disorderly behavior type offenses if they occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
6.  One or more felony convictions in the last five years involving alcohol, drugs or other behavior if it occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
7.  Any other arrest or conviction that is reasonably determined to be substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity. The reasons for such a determination shall be stated in writing with particularity by the governing body making the determination. 
(3)  No retail Class "A," "Class A," Class "B" or "Class B" license shall be issued for a premises when: 
a.  It is located less than 300 feet from any established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. Such distance shall be measured via the shortest route along the highway from the closest point of the boundary of such school, hospital or church to the closest entrance to such premises. This paragraph shall not apply to premises licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of real property within 300 feet thereof by any school, hospital or church building. 
b.  It fails to conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the state department of health and social services applicable to restaurants set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.68(5). 
c.  It is intended to be used to sell intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages by drive thru window. 
(4)  Temporary Class "B" and temporary "Class B" license applications shall include a plan for the area to be licensed. The city clerk shall submit the plan to the police chief, fire chief and building inspector for review and comment. The plan shall address the following issues: 
a.  Location. 
b.  Fencing. 
c.  Entrance and exits. 
d.  Tables, chairs and trash receptacles. A seating plan should be submitted and reviewed by the fire department to establish occupancy load. Seating capacity should be clearly posted. Trash receptacles will be required. 
e.  Use of right-of-way. No outdoor area shall be located on a dedicated public right-of-way. 
f.  Setback from public right-of-way. A minimum 20 feet setback from the public right-of-way. Exceptions may be requested for those lots not able to accommodate 20 feet. 
g.  Hours of operation. 
h.  Staffing. At least one licensed bartender must be staffing the area. 
(b)  Regular operator's licenses. Application for operator's licenses shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city clerk and filed with the city clerk not less than seven days before the next meeting of the public safety committee. 
(1)  The city clerk shall refer the application to the police chief for a records check. The police chief shall report his findings to the public safety committee. 
(2)  An operator's license may be denied to any person who: 
a.  Is under the age of 18. 
b.  Has not successfully completed a responsible beverage server training course. 
c.  Has an arrest or conviction record of offenses which substantially relate to the circumstances of the licensed activity. For purposes of this section, the term "offenses which substantially relate to the circumstances of the licensed activity" shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Any non-felony alcohol related conviction or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
2.  A history of non-felony alcohol related convictions as long as the most current conviction or arrest is within the last 24 months. 
3.  Any non-felony drug related convictions or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
4.  Any non-felony conviction or pending charges within the last 12 months which involve resisting arrest, battery to a police officer or obstructing a judge in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
5.  Two or more non-felony convictions or pending charges in the last 24 months for disorderly behavior type offenses if they occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
6.  One or more felony convictions in the last five years involving alcohol, drugs or other behavior if it occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
7.  Any other arrest or conviction that is reasonably determined to be substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity. The reasons for such a determination shall be stated in writing with particularity by the governing body making the determination. 
d.  Has outstanding fines, forfeitures, penalties, assessments or user fees owed to the city. 
(c)  Provisional operator's licenses. Application for provisional operator's licenses shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city clerk. The city clerk may issue a provisional operator's license to any person provided the applicant has: 
(1)  Not previously been denied a license. 
(2)  Has applied for a regular operator's license. 
(3)  Has enrolled in a responsible beverage server training course. 
(4)  Received approval of the city police department that they do not have an arrest or conviction record of offenses which substantially relate to the circumstances of the licensed activity. For purposes of this section, the term "offenses which substantially relate to the circumstances of the licensed activity" shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Any non-felony alcohol related conviction or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
b.  A history of non-felony alcohol related convictions as long as the most current conviction or arrest is within the last 24 months. 
c.  Any non-felony drug related convictions or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
d.  Any non-felony conviction or pending charges within the last 12 months which involve resisting arrest, battery to a police officer or obstructing a judge in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
e.  Two or more non-felony convictions or pending charges in the last 24 months for disorderly behavior type offenses if they occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
f.  One or more felony convictions in the last five years involving alcohol, drugs or other behavior if it occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
g.  Any other arrest or conviction that is reasonably determined to be substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity. The reasons for such a determination shall be stated in writing with particularity by the governing body making the determination. 
(d)  Temporary operator's license. Application for temporary operator's licenses shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city clerk. The city clerk may issue a temporary operator's license to any person provided the applicant is employed by, or donating their services to, nonprofit corporations. Temporary operator's licenses are issued by the city clerk for a period not to exceed 14 days. No person may hold more than one license of this kind per year. 
(e)  Incomplete or false applications. Applications submitted to the city clerk which are incomplete or which contain false or misleading information may be denied unless there is strong mitigating circumstances. If an applicant is denied because of an incomplete or false application, such applicant must wait six months before resubmitting an application. 
(f)  Amendments to applications. Whenever anything occurs to change any fact set out in the application of any license, such licensee shall file with the city clerk a notice in writing of the change within ten days after the occurrence thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(5); Ord. No. 939 , § 1, 11-15-2017) 
Sec. 12-28. - Licenses restriction. 
(a)  License issued in violation. No license or permit may be issued to any person except as provided in this article. Any license or permit in violation of this article is void. 
(b)  License quota. The number of persons and places that may be granted a retail "Class B" liquor license under this section is limited as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4). 
(c)  Issuance for sales in dwelling prohibited. No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering for sale any alcohol beverages in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment. 
(d)  Gambling and disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed and permitted premises shall, at all times, be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous, indecent conduct or gambling shall be allowed at any time on any such premises. 
(e)  Employment of minors. No licensee shall employ any person under 18 years of age to serve, sell, dispense or give away any alcohol beverage. 
(f)  Servers not to be intoxicated. No person serving alcoholic beverages shall be intoxicated. Intoxication shall mean having a breath or blood alcohol content of 0.08 or more. 
(g)  Servers to submit to preliminary breath test (PBT). A person serving alcoholic beverages at a licensed establishment shall submit to a PBT at the request of a law enforcement officer who has reasonable suspicion to believe the server is intoxicated. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(6)) 
Sec. 12-29. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  From person to person. 
(1)  Licenses to sell alcohol beverages may not be transferred to persons other than the licensee without city council approval. If the licensee, or an applicant for a subsequently granted license, dies, becomes bankrupt or makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors during the license year or after filing the application, then under such circumstances or others deemed sufficient by the city council in its discretion, the city council may, upon application, transfer the license to the licensee's designee provided such designee complies with all the requirements under this article applicable to original applicants, except that a surviving spouse shall be exempt from payment of the license fee for the year in which the transfer takes place. 
(2)  Upon the happening of any of the events under subsection (1) of this section, the personal representative, the surviving spouse, if a personal representative is not appointed, the trustee, or the receiver may continue to sell or assign the business. 
(b)  From place to place. A license may only be transferred to another place or premises with the city council's approval. The city council may permit one transfer during the license year provided the licensee proves to the city council's satisfaction the new premises is in full and complete compliance with all state and city laws, regulations and ordinances; the owner or lien holder of the existing premises consents to the transfer in writing, and that such transfer is not detrimental to the public interest. Application to transfer shall be filed with the city clerk along with payment of a transfer fee in the amount of $10.00. In the event the city council approves the transfer, the city clerk shall promptly notify the department of all transfers. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(7)) 
Sec. 12-30. - Closing hours. 
    No premises for which an alcohol beverage license has been issued shall remain open for the sale of alcohol beverage: 
(1)  If a wholesale license, between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on Saturday when the closing hour shall be 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  If a retail Class "A" license, between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  If a retail "Class A" license, between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(4)  If a retail Class "B" or "Class B" license, between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays. On January 1, premises operating under a Class B license are not required to close. No package, container or bottle sales may be made after 12:00 midnight. 
(5)  Hotels and restaurants whose principal business is the furnishing of food or lodging to patrons, and bowling alleys and golf courses, may remain open for the conduct of their regular business but no intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages shall be sold during prohibited hours. 
(6)  If a premises which includes outdoor premises, between 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. for the outdoor portion of the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(8)) 
Sec. 12-31. - Revocation of alcohol beverage license for failure to operate business. 
(a)  Any holder of an alcohol beverage license issued by the city is required to use the issued license on the premises to which it applies no less than 120 days during the term of the license and at least once every 30 days. 
(b)  The city may revoke or refuse to renew the license of any person who fails to use an alcohol beverage license for the minimum period required in subsection (a) of this section. The proceedings for the revocation or such license or refusal to renew such license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure established in Wis. Stats. § 125.12 and this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(9)) 
Sec. 12-32. - Underage persons in places of sale. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.07(3)(a)8, a person under the legal drinking age may enter and remain on Class "B" or "Class B" premises provided as follows: 
(1)  Such person enters or remains in a room on such licensed premises separate from any room where alcohol beverages are sold or served. 
(2)  Prior to the specific date for which authorization is sought, the Class "B" or "Class B" licensee submits a written request to the office of the city clerk for written authorization from the police department. 
(3)  The public safety committee of the city approves such written request. The police department makes a determination that the presence of persons under the legal drinking age on the licensed premises will not endanger their health, welfare or safety or that of other members of the community and issues written authorization. 
(4)  No alcohol beverages are furnished or consumed by any person in the room where the underage person is present. 
(5)  The licensee obtains a separate authorization for each date on which persons under the legal age will be present on the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(10)) 
Sec. 12-33. - License revocation, suspension or non-renewal. 
    The following provisions shall apply to the revocation, suspension or non-renewal of any license issued pursuant to this article. 
(1)  Complaint. Any city resident may file a sworn written complaint with the city clerk alleging one or more of the following about any person or other entity licensed pursuant to this article: 
a.  The person has violated any provision of this article. 
b.  The person keeps or maintains a disorderly or riotous, indecent or improper house. 
c.  The person has sold or given away any intoxicant to any underage person, or to persons intoxicated or bordering on intoxication, or to known habitual drunkards. 
d.  The person has failed to maintain the premises according to standards prescribed for sanitation by the state division of public health, or in whose premises persons are permitted to loiter for purposes of prostitution. 
e.  The person has not observed and obeyed any lawful order of the city council or city police officers. 
f.  The person does not possess the qualifications required under this article to hold the license. 
g.  The person has been convicted of manufacturing or delivering a controlled substance; of possessing, with intent to manufacture or deliver, a controlled substance; or of possessing, with intent to manufacture or deliver, or of manufacturing or delivering a controlled substance under a substantially similar federal law or a substantially similar law of another state. 
h.  The person knowingly allows another person, who is on the premises for which the license under this article is issued, to possess, with the intent to manufacture or deliver, or to manufacture or deliver a controlled substance. 
(2)  Notice of hearing on complaint. Upon the filing of the complaint, the city shall issue a notice of hearing on complaint, signed by the clerk and directed to any peace officer in the municipality who shall serve the notice upon the licensee in the manner provided under Wis. Stats. ch. 801 for service in civil actions in circuit court. The notice shall set forth the nature and content of the complaint filed with the city and shall command the licensee complained of to appear before the city council on a day and time and at a place named in the notice, not less than three days and not more than ten days from the date of issuance, and show cause why the license should not be revoked or suspended. The notice and a copy of the complaint shall be served on the licensee at least three days before the time at which the licensee is commanded to appear. 
(3)  Hearing procedure. 
a.  If the licensee does not appear as required by the summons, the allegations of the complaint shall be taken as true and if the city council finds the allegations sufficient, the license shall be revoked. The clerk shall give notice of the revocation to the person whose license is revoked. 
b.  The mayor, or their designee, shall conduct the hearing, administer oaths to all witnesses and may issue subpoenas. So far as practicable, the rules of evidence provided in Wis. Stats. § 227.45 shall be followed. The complainant shall have the burden of proving the charges by a preponderance of the evidence. 
c.  If the licensee appears as required by the notice and denies the complaint, both the complainant and the licensee may produce witnesses, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by counsel. The licensee shall be provided a written transcript of the hearing at his expense. All proceedings and testimony shall be transcribed. The city clerk shall mark and receive all exhibits admitted into the record. 
(4)  City council decision. 
a.  Within 20 days of the hearing completion, the city council shall submit its findings of fact, conclusions of law and decision. The city clerk shall provide the complainant and the licensee with a copy of the decision and any sanctions imposed. 
b.  The city council decision shall be a final determination for purposes of judicial review. 
c.  If the city council finds the complaint is true, it shall determine the sanctions to be imposed against the licensee. Sanctions include a warning, a fine not to exceed $500.00, suspension of license or revocation of license. The licensee shall pay to the city the actual cost of the proceedings. 
d.  If the city council finds the complaint untrue, the proceeding shall be dismissed without cost to the accused. 
(5)  Effect of revocation. When a license is revoked under this subsection, the city clerk shall record the revocation and no other license issued under this article shall be granted to such licensee or for such premises for a period of 12 months from the date of the revocation. 
(6)  Judicial review. The city council action in granting or failing to grant, suspending or revoking any license, or the failure of the city council to revoke or suspend any license for good cause, may be reviewed by the circuit court for the county in which the application for the license was issued, upon application by any applicant, licensee or city resident. 
(7)  Non-renewal of license. The city attorney, or special counsel appointed for such purposes may, after investigation, commence an action before the city council to hear evidence that a license issued pursuant to this article should not be renewed. The city council shall, in writing, notify the licensee of the consideration of non-renewal. Such notification shall be in the form of and shall serve as the summons and complaint and shall include a statement of the reasons for the consideration of the non-renewal of the license in the same specificity required for a summons and complaint for revocation or suspension. If the license is recommend for non-renewal, costs may be assessed against the licensee and any renewal application fee shall be forfeited. The commencement of this action shall stay action by the city council on the licensee's application until the decision of the city council is final. 
(8)  Other provision. Any license issued pursuant to this order shall be subject to such further regulations and restrictions as the city council may impose by amendment to this section or by the enactment of new ordinances. If any licensee shall fail or neglect to meet the requirements imposed by such new restrictions and regulations his license may be revoked in accordance with this section. In case of revocation of any license or any violation of any provision of this article in accordance with this section or by the court or for any reasonable cause except the imposition of new restrictions, no refund shall be made of any part of the license fee. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(11)) 
Sec. 12-34. - Nudity, nude entertainment banned. 
    This section and the next section bans nude, semi-nude and other sexually explicit performances on-premises that have municipal liquor and beer licenses. Persons who violate these sections are subject to penalties and license revocation. In enacting this section, the city finds as follows: 
(1)  There is a direct relationship between alcoholic beverage consumption and nude and semi-nude activities and an increase in criminal activities, moral degradation and the disturbances of the peace and the good order of the community. The concurrences of these activities are hazardous to the health and the safety of those persons in attendance and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining property and harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole. 
(2)  The combination of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages with the performance of nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions and entertainment is adverse to the public's interest and the quality of life, tone of commerce and total community environment in the city. 
(3)  In order to promote and preserve the public peace and good order and to safeguard the health, safety, morals and welfare of the community and the citizens thereof, it is necessary and advisable for the city to prohibit certain forms of nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions, entertainment at commercial establishments at which alcoholic beverages are, or are available, to be sold or consumed. 
(4)  The particular combination of liquor, nudity and sex could be construed as a subliminal endorsement of unlawful sexual harassment. 
(5)  There are significant secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments including prostitution, sexual assault and other criminal activity. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(12)) 
Sec. 12-35. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, or for any licensee, manager or agent of the licensee to permit any employee, entertainer or patron to engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the licensed premises that: 
(1)  Expose his genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; 
(2)  Expose any devise, costume or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; 
(3)  Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof; or 
(4)  To engage in or simulate sexual intercourse or sexual contact, including the touching of any portion of the female breast or the male or female genitals. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager or agent of the licensee knowingly to permit any exhibition prohibited by subsection (a) of this section to be exposed for viewing by persons within the licensed premises. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(13)) 
Sec. 12-36. - Extension of Class "B"/"Class B" license beyond the building premises. 
(a)  Any retail Class "B" or "Class B" license issued shall limit and restrict the consumption of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 125 to the building premises so defined on the liquor license application unless, prior to the application of a liquor license or renewal thereof, approval has been obtained from the plan commission for an outdoor facility. 
(b)  Upon making application to the plan commission, the person shall submit a site and landscape plan of the entire parcel showing the outdoor facility designating its location with respect to the main premises and other buildings on the site, designating entrances and exits of both the main structure and outdoor facility and the location of the outdoor facility with respect to buildings on adjoining sites and such other information as the plan commission may require to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(c)  The plan commission shall consider the following guidelines when reviewing an application for an outdoor facility: 
(1)  Location. The outdoor area may not be within a 150-foot setback from properties zoned residential. 
(2)  Fencing. The outdoor area should be enclosed with a fence. The height and style of fencing will depend on location. 
(3)  Overall appearance. The overall appearance must be attractive. 
(4)  Exits. The normal entry and exit should be from inside the building. However, an emergency exit must be available from the outdoor facility. The fire department will review the emergency exit systems. 
(5)  Tables, chairs and trash receptacles. A seating plan should be submitted and reviewed by the fire department to establish occupancy load. Seating capacity should be clearly posted. Trash receptacles will be required. 
(6)  Trash. The outdoor area must be patrolled for trash and cleaned on a daily basis. 
(7)  Liquor availability. The availability of liquor shall be consistent with the liquor license of the applicant. The approved liquor license must include the outdoor area as part of the premises. 
(8)  Use of right-of-way. No outdoor area shall be located on a dedicated public right-of-way. 
(9)  Size limitation. An outdoor area shall not be larger than the inside area of its parent building. 
(10)  Setback from public right-of-way. A minimum 20 foot setback from the public right-of-way. Exceptions may be requested for those lots not able to accommodate 20 feet. 
(11)  Hours of operation. Outdoor facility hours may only occur during open hours under Wis. Stats. § 125.32(3). 
(12)  Music allowed. As a general rule, music should not be allowed; however, applicants may make a special request. 
(13)  Bartender required. Whenever the outdoor facility is open to customers and intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, at least one licensed bartender must be staffing the area. 
(d)  The plan commission shall conduct a public hearing and make a recommendation to the city council. Notice shall be given by ordinary mail of the proposed establishment of an outdoor facility to the owners of property immediately adjacent to the area to be considered for the new use extending 200 feet therefrom and to the owners of properties extending 200 feet from the street frontage of the opposite property and also by a Class I publication in the official newspaper. The recommendation shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Approve without special conditions; 
(2)  Approve with special conditions taking into consideration the above guidelines; or 
(3)  Deny. 
(e)  Upon recommendation from the plan commission, the city council shall consider the application and any special conditions recommended by the plan commission. If final approval is granted by the city council, a special use permit shall be issued with any restrictions stated thereon. Any violation of the stated restrictions shall subject the special use permit to automatic revocation without further notice or public hearing. 
(Prior Code, § 12.03(14)) 
Secs. 12-37-12-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-61. - License required. 
    No person shall conduct a public amusement or entertainment within the city without a license as required hereunder. 
(Prior Code, § 12.06(1)) 
Sec. 12-62. - Public amusement or entertainment defined. 
    A public amusement or recreation is any activity or exhibition to which admission by the public is gained upon payment of money or other thing of value. It includes, without limitation by reason of enumeration, carnivals, circuses, exhibitions of animals or fowl, rides, games of chance or skill, public exhibitions, theatrical performances, shows, concerts, lectures, pool halls, billiard halls, bowling alleys, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, ice or roller skating rinks and the like. 
(Prior Code, § 12.06(2)) 
Sec. 12-63. - License fee. 
(a)  Circuses, carnivals, etc. 
(1)  Seating capacity of more than 400: $15.00 for the first day and $10.00 for each day thereafter. 
(2)  Seating capacity for less than 400: $10.00 for the first day and $8.00 for each day thereafter. 
(b)  Theatrical performances, shows, exhibitions, etc.: $5.00 for each day. 
(c)  Bowling alleys: $5.00 for each alley. 
(d)  Pool and billiard halls: $5.00 for each table. 
(e)  Miniature golf courses: $25.00 per year. 
(f)  Golf driving ranges: $25.00 per year. 
(g)  Ice and roller skating rinks: $50.00 per year. 
(h)  Rides, games of chance and skill, etc.: $5.00 per day for each ride or game or the like. 
(i)  Sales of goods, wares and merchandise. Where any event or activity licensed under this section is accompanied by the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, the licensee shall pay an additional fee of $10.00 if the license is an annual one or $5.00 per day if the license is a daily license. 
(Prior Code, § 12.06(3)) 
Sec. 12-64. - Exemption. 
    No license shall be required for nonprofit activities or exhibitions which would otherwise be licensed under this section or activities or exhibitions for which an admission charge is made but where the proceeds thereof are devoted to a civic, educational or charitable purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 12.06(4)) 
Sec. 12-65. - Application. 
    Any person who wishes to license an activity or exhibition under this section shall file an application with the city clerk upon a form furnished by the clerk. Such application shall contain such information as shall be required by the clerk to determine whether the applicant and the premises to be licensed are suitable for licensing. The clerk may refer the application to such city officers as necessary for investigation and report. 
(Prior Code, § 12.06(5)) 
Sec. 12-66. - Issuance. 
    The city clerk may issue any license hereunder if the reports on the application as referred to the city officers are favorable. If the city clerk denies the application, he shall refer it to the city council for consideration. The applicant shall have an opportunity to appear before the city council with respect to such application. 
(Prior Code, § 12.06(6)) 
Secs. 12-67-12-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE 

Sec. 12-91. - Defined. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mechanical or electronic amusement device means any machine, device or game, which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token or similar item, permits a person or operator to use the device as a game or contest of skill or amusement, whether or not the device registers a score and which is not a gambling device. The term "mechanical or electronic amusement device" shall include, but not be limited to, electronic or mechanical game machines and pinball machines. 
(Prior Code, § 12.065(1)) 
Sec. 12-92. - Registration and licensing. 
    Any person maintaining, operating or permitting the operation of a mechanical or electronic amusement device shall obtain a license to operate such device from the clerk. The fee for operation of a mechanical or electronic amusement device shall be $10.00 per machine per year. Such license shall expire on June 30 of each year. The applicant shall submit an application for each place where the device is to be operated and such other information as the clerk may reasonably require. If the clerk is satisfied that the applicant meets all the requirements of this section, he shall issue the license. Such license shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises at all times while the device is operable. 
(Prior Code, § 12.065(2)) 
Sec. 12-93. - Restrictions applicable to mechanical or electronic amusement device. 
(a)  Premises to be safe and sanitary. No license shall be granted for any mechanical or electronic amusement device unless the premises complies with all fire and building code requirements of the city and the state, provides adequate room for operation of the devices without blocking access and is an otherwise safe and sanitary environment. 
(b)  Premises to be supervised. No mechanical or electronic amusement device license shall be granted unless the applicant therefor shows that the premises will be adequately supervised. 
(c)  Orderly conduct required. The licensee shall maintain supervision of the premises in such a manner as to ensure that no disorderly conduct, gambling or other activity prohibited by local ordinance, state or federal law is permitted on such premises. 
(d)  Department of justice registration required. No mechanical or electronic amusement device may lawfully be operated in the city unless there is affixed thereto a department of justice amusement device number, if required by law. If any device is found in the city without such registration number, any police officer is authorized to summarily revoke the license of the premises where the offense is committed. 
(e)  Offering of prizes or awards prohibited. No licensee under this section shall offer, advertise, make or give any reward, prize, money or thing of value to any person by reason of the operation of any mechanical or electronic amusement device. 
(f)  Consent to inspection. An applicant for a license under this section thereby consents to the entry of police of authorized representatives of the city upon the licensed premises at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection and search, and consents to removal from the premises and introduction into evidence in prosecutions for violations of this section all things found therein in violation of this section or state law. 
(Prior Code, § 12.065(3)) 
Sec. 12-94. - Transferability of license. 
    Mechanical or electronic amusement device licenses may be transferred from premises during the license year without charge. The holder of the license shall notify the clerk within ten days of the time such transfer is made. 
(Prior Code, § 12.065(4)) 
Secs. 12-95-12-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES 

Sec. 12-117. - State law and definitions adopted. 
    Wis. Stats. § 66.0435 and the definitions therein are adopted by reference. The term "manufactured home park," as used herein, shall include a mobile home condominium. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(1)) 
Sec. 12-118. - Parking fee. 
    There is imposed on each occupied, non-exempt manufactured home located in the city a monthly parking fee as determined in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. Such fees shall be paid to the city treasurer by the manufactured home park owner on a monthly basis, no later than ten days following receipt of a billing statement from the office of the city treasurer. The manufactured home park owner shall be allowed to deduct two percent of the monthly billing statement for the cost of collection. The monthly parking permit fees shall be prorated for the month when the owner of a non-exempt manufactured home shall remove the same from the city as follows: The manufactured home park owner shall pay one-half of the monthly parking permit fee if the non-exempt manufactured home is removed before the 15th day of the month and the full amount of the parking permit fee if the manufactured home is removed after the 15th day of the month. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(2)) 
Sec. 12-119. - Park license required. 
(a)  No person shall establish or operate upon property owned or controlled by him within the city a manufactured home park without having first secured a license therefor from the city clerk and the council under section 12-2. The application for such license shall be accompanied by a fee of $2.00 for each space in the existing or proposed park, but not less than $25.00. The license shall expire on June 30 in the year of issuance. For any license issued during the license year, the fee shall be prorated to the first day of the month during which the license was issued, provided, however, that the fee shall not be less than the prorated portion of the $25.00 minimum fee. Such parks shall comply with applicable state administrative regulations. 
(b)  Licenses of manufactured home parks and owners of land on which are parked any occupied, nonexempt manufactured homes shall furnish information to the city clerk on such homes added to their park or land within five days after arrival of the home on forms furnished by the city clerk in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 
(c)  Manufactured home park owners shall remit parking fees directly to the city treasurer as provided in subsection (2) of this section. Any parking permit fees not paid when due shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(3)) 
Sec. 12-120. - License for park: application and issuance. 
    The application for a license or a renewal thereof shall be made on forms furnished by the city clerk and shall include the name and address of the owner in fee of the tract (if the fee is vested in some person other than the applicant, a verified statement by that person, that the applicant is authorized by him to construct or maintain the park and make the application), and such a legal description of the premises, upon which the park is or will be located as will readily identify and definitely locate the premises. The application shall be accompanied by two copies of the park plan showing the following, either existing or as proposed: 
(1)  The extent and area used for park purposes; 
(2)  Roadways and driveways; 
(3)  Location of units; 
(4)  Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets, washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of units, if required; 
(5)  Method and plan of sewage disposal; 
(6)  Method and plan of garbage removal; 
(7)  Plan for water supply; 
(8)  Plan for electrical lighting of units, if required. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(5)) 
Sec. 12-121. - Inspection and enforcement. 
    No park license shall be issued until the city clerk shall notify the police chief, the health officer, the fire chief and the building inspector or their authorized agents of the application, and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the premises to determine whether the applicant and the premises on which manufactured homes will be located comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. These officials shall furnish to the city council in writing the information derived from such investigation, and a statement as to whether the applicant and the premises meet the requirements of the department for which the officer is certifying. No license shall be renewed without a reinspection of the premises. To make inspections and secure enforcement, such officials or their authorized agents may enter on any premises on which a manufactured home is located, or is about to be located, and inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(6)) 
Sec. 12-122. - Location of parks. 
(a)  No manufactured home or manufactured home park shall be located in any fire district. 
(b)  No occupied manufactured home within the city shall be located less than ten feet from any building or other manufactured home or from the boundary line of the premises on which located. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(7)) 
Sec. 12-123. - Park plan. 
(a)  Every manufactured home or manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained area, and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or other waters. No manufactured home or manufactured home park shall be located in any area that is situated so drainage from any barnyard, outdoor toilet or other source of filth can be deposited in its location. 
(b)  Home spaces shall be clearly defined and consist of a minimum of 1,000 square feet and a width of not less than 20 feet. The park shall be so arranged that all spaces shall face or abut on a driveway of not less than 20 feet in width, giving easy access from all units to a public street. Such driveway shall be graveled or paved and maintained in good condition, having natural drainage, be well lighted at night, and shall not be obstructed. 
(c)  Walkways shall be graveled or paved and well lighted at night. 
(d)  Every space shall be furnished with an electric service outlet. Such outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse of not less than 30-amp capacity, and a heavy duty outlet receptacle. Electrical outlets shall be weatherproof, and no power lines shall be less than 15 feet above ground. 
(e)  Off-street parking areas for motor vehicles shall be provided in the ration of one lot for each unit. 
(f)  No unit shall be parked in a park outside of a designated space. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(8)) 
Sec. 12-124. - Water supply. 
(a)  An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution system connected directly and domestic purposes in all parks. 
(b)  Individual water service connections shall be so constructed that they will not be damaged by the parking of the units. Such system shall be adequate to provide 20-pounds of pressure per square inch and capable of furnishing a minimum of 125 gallons per day per space. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(9)) 
Sec. 12-125. - Waste and garbage disposal. 
(a)  All liquid waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets, lavatories, etc., shall be discharged into a sewer system extended from and connected with the public water system where available. 
(b)  Every space shall be provided with sewer connections which shall comply with the state plumbing code. The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings so watertight connections can be made. Such connections shall be so constructed so they can be closed when not connected and trapped in such a manner as to be maintained in an odor-free condition. 
(c)  All sanitary facilities in any unit which are not connected with a public sewer system, where available, by approved pipe connections shall be sealed and their use is prohibited. 
(d)  Each faucet shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste and excess water. 
(e)  Every unit shall be provided with a substantial fly-tight, watertight metal garbage depository from which the contents shall be removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner by the camp custodian at least twice weekly between May 1 and October 15, and otherwise weekly. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(10)) 
Sec. 12-126. - Management. 
(a)  In every park there shall be located the office of the attendant or person in charge. A copy of the license and of this section shall be posted therein and the park register shall be kept in such office. 
(b)  The attendant or person in charge, together with the licensee, shall: 
(1)  Keep a register of all guests, to be open at all times to inspection by city, state and federal officers, which shall show for all guests: 
a.  Names and addresses. 
b.  Number of children of school age. 
c.  State of legal residence. 
d.  Dates of entrance and departure. 
e.  License numbers of all manufactured homes and towing or other vehicles. 
f.  States issuing such licenses. 
g.  Purpose of stay in park. 
h.  Place of last location and length of stay. 
i.  Place of employment of each occupant. 
(2)  Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
(3)  Ensure that this section is complied with and enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of this section or any other violations of law which may come to his attention. 
(4)  Report to the health officer all cases of persons or animals affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable disease. 
(5)  Maintain in convenient places, approved by the fire chief, hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each eight units. 
(6)  Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(11)) 
Sec. 12-127. - Applicability of chapter 14. 
    All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any park licensed under this section shall be in accordance with this Code and the requirements of the state department of health and social services. Licenses and permits granted under this section grant no right to erect or repair any structure, to do any plumbing or electrical work. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(12)) 
Sec. 12-128. - Revocation and suspension. 
    The city council may revoke any license or permit issued pursuant to the terms of this section in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(13)) 
Sec. 12-129. - Health and sanitation permit required. 
    In addition to all other requirements outlined in this section, each mobile home park shall have in full force and effect a health and sanitation permit issued by the state department of health and social services, division of health. 
(Prior Code, § 12.08(14)) 
Secs. 12-130-12-156. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DIRECT SELLERS 

Sec. 12-157. - Registration required. 
    No person shall engage in direct sales within the city without being registered for that purpose as provided herein. 
(Prior Code, § 12.09(1)) 
Sec. 12-158. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable organization means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation or one purporting to be such. 
    Direct seller means any individual who for himself or for a partnership, association or corporation sells goods or takes sales orders for the later delivery of goods at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of the individual, partnership, association or corporation and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. 
    Goods means personal property of any kind and shall include goods provided incidental to services offered or sold. 
    Permanent merchant means a direct seller who, for at least one year prior to the consideration of the application of this article to such merchant: 
(1)  Has continuously operated an established place of business in the city; or 
(2)  Has continuously resided in the city and now does business from his residence. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this section: 
(1)  Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes. 
(2)  Any person selling goods to permanent merchants. 
(3)  Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in their regular course of business. 
(4)  Any person who has an established place of business where the goods are sold or offered for sale on a regular basis and in which the buyer has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by such person. 
(5)  Any person who has had or one who represents a company which has had a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement with the prospective customer. 
(6)  Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of goods. 
(7)  Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale, pursuant to law. 
(8)  Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of the organization, provided that there is submitted to the police chief proof that such charitable organization is registered under Wis. Stats. § 202.11 or which is exempt from that statute's registration requirements shall be required to register under this article. 
(9)  Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom complaint has been made to the police chief that such person is a transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the police chief proof that such person has leased for at least one year or purchased the premises from which he is conducting business or proof that such person has conducted such business in the city for at least one year prior to the date the complaint was made. 
(Prior Code, § 12.09(2)) 
Sec. 12-159. - Registration. 
(a)  Applicants for registration must complete and return to the police chief a registration form furnished by the police chief, which shall require the following information: 
(1)  Name, permanent address, telephone number, temporary address, if any, and Social Security Number. 
(2)  Date of birth, weight, color of hair and eyes. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by or whose merchandise is being sold. 
(4)  Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any. 
(5)  Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered and any services offered. 
(6)  Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable. 
(7)  Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the conduct of his business. 
(8)  Last cities, villages or towns, not to exceed three, where applicant conducted similar business. 
(9)  Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving the city. 
(10)  Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant business within the last five-years, the nature of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(b)  Applicant shall present to the clerk for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
(2)  A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and measures where applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities. 
(3)  A state health officer's certificate where applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law. 
(4)  Such certificate to state that applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is made. 
(c)  At the time the registration is returned, a fee as prescribed in section 12-1 shall be paid to the police chief to cover the cost of processing such registration. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the police chief his agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. Upon payment of the fee and the signing of the statement, the police chief shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in section 12-160(b). 
(Prior Code, § 12.09(4)) 
Sec. 12-160. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon receipt of each application, the police chief may refer it immediately to public safety director, who may make and complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration. 
(b)  The police chief shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation, that the application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five-years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of section 12-159(b). 
(Prior Code, § 12.09(5)) 
Sec. 12-161. - Appeal. 
    Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the city council or, if none has been adopted, under the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 68.07 through 68.16. 
(Prior Code, § 12.09(6)) 
Sec. 12-162. - Direct sellers. 
(a)  Prohibited practices. 
(1)  A direct seller shall be prohibited from calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the terms "no peddlers," "no solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(2)  A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character or any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or the identity of the organization he represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the goods. 
(3)  No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
(4)  No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the source. 
(5)  No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he is conducting business. 
(b)  Disclosure requirements. 
(1)  After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he offers to sell. 
(2)  If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller or any sales orders for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel such transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.00 in accordance with the procedure as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 423.203. The seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 423.201(1)(a), (b) and (c), (2) and (3). 
(3)  If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, he shall at the time the order is taken provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement; the amount paid in advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made; the name, address and telephone number of the seller; the delivery or performance date; and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 12.09(7)) 
Sec. 12-163. - Records. 
    The police chief shall report all convictions for violation of this article and shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted. 
(Prior Code, § 12.09(108 
Sec. 12-164. - Revocation of registration. 
(a)  Registration may be revoked by the police chief if the registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for registration; made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sale; violated any provision of this section; or was convicted of any crime, ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct selling; the registrant may request a hearing on a revocation by filing written request therefor with the clerk and such hearing shall be scheduled by the public safety committee of the common council of the city. 
(b)  Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement of the facts upon which the hearing will be based. 
(Prior Code, § 12.09(9)) 
Sec. 12-165. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 for each violation, plus costs of prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 12.09(10)) 
Secs. 12-166-12-183. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 12-184. - License required. 
    No person shall operate upon the streets of the city a motor vehicle for the transportation of passengers or baggage for hire without a license under this section. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(1)) 
Sec. 12-185. - Exemption. 
    No license shall be required for vehicles operating on fixed routes or between fixed termini or funeral vehicles. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(2)) 
Sec. 12-186. - Application. 
    Application for a license hereunder shall be made to the city clerk upon a form furnished by the clerk. Such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant and if a partnership, association or corporation, the names of all participants, officers and directors. 
(2)  Number of vehicles to be licensed. 
(3)  A description of each vehicle. 
(4)  Motor vehicle license number of each vehicle. 
(5)  Name of insurance carrier. 
(6)  Proposed rates. 
(7)  Such other information as the city council may require. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(3)) 
Sec. 12-187. - Certificate by automobile mechanic to accompany application or renewal thereof. 
    Each application for a taxicab license, or renewal thereof, shall be accompanied by a certificate of inspection by a certified auto mechanic that the vehicle is equipped in compliance with the provisions of the state traffic code. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(4)) 
Sec. 12-188. - Liability insurance. 
    The application shall be accompanied by proof of liability and property damage insurance issued by a company licensed to do business in the state, approved by the city council, which shall insure each licensed vehicle for liability of not less than $50,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident, to a limit of not less than $100,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident and, if the accident has resulted in injury to or destruction of property, to a limit of not less than $25,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. Such insurance shall be maintained in effect while any license hereunder is in effect. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(5)) 
Sec. 12-189. - License fee. 
    The license fee shall be $50.00 for the first vehicle licensed and $25.00 per year for each additional vehicle so licensed. License fees for licenses issued during the license year shall be prorated. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(6)) 
Sec. 12-190. - Required number of vehicle. 
    No license shall be granted unless the licensee shall have one vehicle equipped and ready to operate during the term of the license. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(7)) 
Sec. 12-191. - Conditions of license. 
(a)  Place of business. Any person licensed to transport passengers for hire shall maintain an established place of business within the city and shall provide taxi service from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Thursdays; 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Fridays; 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Saturdays; and 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on Sundays. Holiday service is not required. The place of business shall be designated in the application for the license. 
(b)  Vehicles to be kept in repair. Every vehicle licensed hereunder shall be kept in a state of repair and equipped in compliance with the state traffic code and chapter 7. Vehicles not in compliance with the state traffic code or chapter 7 shall be removed from service and a taxicab licensed activity until necessary repairs have been made. 
(c)  Tampering with odometer prohibited. No licensee or his employee or agent shall tamper with or change the reading of any odometer on any vehicle licensed hereunder. 
(d)  Licensee accountable for violations. A licensee hereunder shall be responsible for the operation of all motor vehicles licensed hereunder and for the conduct of the drivers of each such vehicle. 
(e)  License not transferable. No license hereunder shall be assigned without the permission of the city council. 
(f)  Vehicles to be marked. Every vehicle licensed hereunder shall be marked on the outside with the words "taxicab" or "taxi" and the name and address of the licensee, of the size or illumination as to be seen at a distance of 50 feet in clear weather. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(8)) 
Sec. 12-192. - Taxi drivers. 
    All taxi drivers shall be licensed drivers of the state and at least 18 years of age. All drivers shall submit their driver's license to the police department for inspections before driving or operating a taxicab. Each driver shall give courteous service to the public and shall comply with all state traffic laws and chapter 7. The driver's traffic and criminal record shall be reviewed by the police department for substantial relation to licensure and operation of a public conveyance vehicle, as permitted under state law. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(9)) 
Sec. 12-193. - Annual applications for taxi drivers. 
    Taxi drivers are required to apply annually for a city issued taxi driver's license, which shall be either displayed in the taxicab being operated or on the operator's person at all times while operating the taxicab. Taxi driver license applicants or holders shall pay an annual fee for police background checks. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(10)) 
Sec. 12-194. - Failure to pay fares. 
(a)  No person shall fail or refuse to pay for the service of any taxicab with the intention of defrauding the driver, providing the rates charged conform with those set forth in this chapter or as posted in the vehicle. 
(b)  Every driver shall have the right to demand payment of the posted fare in advance and may refuse to convey unless so prepaid, but no driver shall otherwise refuse to convey any orderly person upon request. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(11)) 
Sec. 12-195. - Penalty. 
    Any person in violation of this section shall be subject to a penalty under section 25-11. A second violation within 12 months shall receive a penalty double the amount of the first offense and a third offense within 12 months shall receive a penalty triple the amount of the first offense, notwithstanding maximum penalties set forth therein. 
(Prior Code, § 12.11(12)) 
Secs. 12-196-12-213. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - JUNK AND SALVAGE YARDS 

Sec. 12-214. - License required. 
    No person shall maintain in the city any structure or premises for the storing or the buying or selling at retail or wholesale of used or secondhand materials or personality, which from its worn condition renders it virtually useless for the purpose for which made, commonly classed as junk, without obtaining a license therefor from the city council as provided herein. 
(Prior Code, § 12.12(1)) 
Sec. 12-215. - Application. 
    Every applicant for a license hereunder shall file with the city clerk a written application upon a form prepared and provided by the city, signed by the applicant. Such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and residence of the applicant, whether he is a sole proprietor, partnership or corporation, and if a partnership shall disclose all members thereof, and if a corporation, shall disclose their registered agent in the state and its principal place of business. 
(2)  The length of time such applicants have resided in the city and prior address. 
(3)  A detailed nature of the business conducted and the kind of materials collected, bought or sold or otherwise handled. 
(Prior Code, § 12.12(2)) 
Sec. 12-216. - Referral of application. 
    The city clerk shall refer the application to the police chief, the fire chief, the health officer and the building inspector, who shall investigate the licensee and the premises proposed to be licensed to determine whether the licensee and the premises conform to state laws and city ordinances and that the premises are adequate and suitable for conducting a junk or salvage yard. Such officers shall report to the city council so that their reports may be considered at the next regular meeting after referral. 
(Prior Code, § 12.12(3)) 
Sec. 12-217. - License fee. 
    The license fee for every license issued hereunder shall be $10.00 per year. 
(Prior Code, § 12.12(4)) 
Sec. 12-218. - Action on application. 
    The city council shall grant or deny a license on the basis of the application and the reports of the officers. The prospective licensee shall be entitled to be heard on his application. 
(Prior Code, § 12.12(5)) 
Sec. 12-219. - Conditions of license. 
(a)  Each of the premises upon which the business of junk dealer is carried on must have a conditional use permit pursuant to city zoning regulations. 
(b)  Each of the premises upon which the business of junk dealer is carried on shall be completely enclosed by a property fence or other structure, approved by the council, not less than seven feet high. 
(c)  Each fence or other structure shall be constructed so no dust or other material may pass through. 
(d)  The enclosure shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
(e)  No articles shall be piled so as to protrude above the enclosure. 
(f)  No articles shall be placed on the outside of the enclosure. 
(g)  The fence, structure or building shall be painted in a uniform color and the paint shall be kept in proper condition at all times. 
(h)  There shall be no burning of any type. 
(i)  There shall be no storage of unprocessed car bodies. 
(j)  There shall be no storage of any materials emitting offensive odors. 
The licensee shall comply with any rules or regulations prescribed by the health officer for the conduct of the junk or salvage yard. 
(Prior Code, § 12.12(6)) 
Secs. 12-220-12-246. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FILLING STATIONS 

Sec. 12-247. - License required. 
    No person shall erect or maintain any bulk storage station or petroleum or gasoline service station within the city without a license therefor obtained from the city council under this section. 
(Prior Code, § 12.13(1)) 
Sec. 12-248. - Application. 
    Application for a license hereunder shall be made to the city council on a form furnished by the city clerk. Such application shall be accompanied by site plans showing the location of all proposed structures and all points of ingress and egress and such other information as may be required by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 12.13(2)) 
Sec. 12-249. - Hearing. 
    A license hereunder may be granted or denied by the city council after a public hearing, notice of which shall be given by publication of a Class I notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985. 
(Prior Code, § 12.13(3)) 
Secs. 12-250-12-276. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ANIMALS 

Sec. 12-277. - Keeping pets/animals 
    No person shall keep a rooster, horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, goat, swine, sheep, or animal raised for fur-bearing purposes within the city, except of agriculturally zoned property. 
(Prior Code, § 12.14(1); Ord. No. 921, § 1, 6-15-2016) 
Sec. 12-278. - Exotic animals. 
    No exotic animals shall be housed, quartered, stabled, pastured, kept, or in any manner maintained within the city limits except temporarily during special events or as otherwise specifically approved by the city council. Animals prohibited by this section include any animal that in wild state is carnivorous or that, because of its nature or physical makeup, is capable of inflicting harm on human beings or property, including, but not limited to, animals that belong to the cat family, snakes (either poisonous or that otherwise present a risk of physical harm to human beings as a result of their nature or physical makeup, including constrictors), bears, wolves, wolverines, badgers, lions, tigers and any hybrids of the same. 
(Prior Code, § 12.14(2); Ord. No. 921, § 1, 6-15-2016) 
Sec. 12-279. - Beekeeping. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beekeeping means intentionally creating, fostering or maintaining a colony of honeybees. 
    Colony means an aggregate of honeybees consisting principally of workers, but having when perfect, one queen and at times many drones including brood, combs, honey and the receptacle inhabited by honeybees. 
    Hive mean a structure built specifically to accommodate a colony of honeybees 
    Honeybee means all life stages of the common domestic honeybee, Apis mellifera species 
(b)  Residential and general agricultural zoning districts. 
(1)  Hives may be located only on lots with residential use. 
(2)  Colony densities: 
a.  One-fourth acre or less in size; two colonies. 
b.  More than one-fourth acre but less than one-half acre; four colonies. 
c.  More than six colonies maximum. 
(3)  No hive shall exceed 20 cubic feet in volume. 
(4)  No hive shall be located closer than three feet from any property line. 
(5)  No hive shall be located closer than ten feet from a public sidewalk or 25 feet from a principal building on an abutting lot. 
(6)  A constant supply of water shall be provided for all hives. 
(7)  A flyway barrier at least six feet in height shall shield any part of a property line that is within 25 feet of a hive. The flyway barrier shall consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation or a combination thereof and it shall be positioned no more than eight feet from the hive. 
(8)  The beekeeper shall notify all residents of the property and the owner or operator of the property if the applicant is not the owner or operator. 
(9)  All hives shall be kept in sound and usable condition. 
(10)  All abandon hives are to be removed from the property 
(11)  No hive may house a colony of insects other than honeybees. 
(Prior Code, § 12.14(3); Ord. No. 921, § 1, 6-15-2016) 
Sec. 12-280. - License required. 
    Every person residing in the city who owns a dog which is more than five months of age on January 1 of any year shall annually at the time and in the manner prescribed by law for the payment of personal property taxes obtain a license therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(1)) 
Sec. 12-281. - Fee. 
    Such owner shall pay to the city treasurer a fee as prescribed in section 12-1. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(2)) 
Sec. 12-282. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon payment to the city clerk of the required fee, the clerk shall issue to such person a license to keep such dog for one year and such person shall, upon procuring the license, place upon the dog a collar with a tag furnished to him by the city clerk or the county clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(3)) 
Sec. 12-283. - State regulation. 
    Wis. Stats. ch. 174 shall apply so far as applicable. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(4)) 
Sec. 12-284. - Dogs not to run at large. 
    Owners, harborers or custodians of dogs are required to keep their dogs firmly secured by leash when off the premises of the owner, harborer or custodian and unleashed dogs on-premises are required to be under the direct control of a responsible person or prohibited from leaving the property through fencing, restraints, or other devices that restrict movement when within six feet of a public way. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(5)) 
Sec. 12-285. - Harboring certain dogs prohibited. 
    No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog which: 
(1)  Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway. 
(2)  Assaults or attacks any person or domesticated animal. 
(3)  Is vicious. A showing that a dog has bitten, attacked or injured any person shall constitute a prima facie showing that such dog is vicious. 
(4)  By frequent, repeated or habitual howling, barking or yelping, disturbs the peace of any person or the public. 
(5)  Is required to be licensed, but is not. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(6)) 
Sec. 12-286. - Certificate of inoculation required. 
    No license shall be issued hereunder for any dog unless the applicant exhibits a certificate of a qualified veterinarian showing that the dog has been inoculated for rabies and distemper with the two years prior to application. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(7)) 
Sec. 12-287. - Dog pound. 
    The police department or any other officer appointed by the council shall apprehend any dog running at large within the city or which does any of the things prohibited under section 12-285 and confine the same in the county animal shelter. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(8)) 
Sec. 12-288. - Limit of dogs. 
    No individual owner or family unit living together, firm or corporation shall keep more than two dogs over the age of six months, excepting bona fide animal hospitals in which the dogs are confined and kennels. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(9)) 
Sec. 12-289. - Sanitation. 
    Every person with a dog under his control off the premises of the owner, keeper or custodian shall be responsible for collecting and disposing of in a sanitary manner any fecal matter left by such dog. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(10)) 
Sec. 12-290. - Proper shelter requirement. 
    Every person in charge of or control of any dog which is tied or caged outside or prohibited access to existing buildings for shelter shall provide the dog with shelter and bedding as prescribed in this section. 
(1)  Minimum outdoor standards of shelter shall include: 
a.  When sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion of a dog tied or caged outside, sufficient shade by natural or artificial means shall be provided to protect the dog from direct sunlight. As used in this section, the term "caged" does not include farm fencing used to confine farm animals. 
b.  If a dog is tied or confined unattended outdoors under weather conditions which adversely affect the health of the dog, a shelter of suitable size to accommodate the dog shall be provided. The shelter shall be: 
1.  A moisture proof structure. 
2.  Made of durable material. 
3.  Suitable in size to provide sufficient space to allow each dog adequate freedom of movement and allow for retention of heat. 
4.  Maintained in good repair to protect the dog from injury. 
5.  A solid floor raised at least two inches off the ground. 
6.  The shelter shall contain a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding material to provide insulation and protection against the cold and dampness as well as promote retention of body heat. 
7.  If the shelter does not provide the dog with protection from the wind blowing directly into the shelter, the entrance shall be covered by a self-closing covering. 
8.  The requirements of subsections (1)(b)6 and 7 of this section will be suspended the months of May through September, inclusive. 
(2)  A monetary forfeiture or possible impoundment of the dog shall be imposed on anyone found in violation of the shelter requirements contained in this subsection. The amount of the monetary forfeiture shall be in accordance with the state standards for ordinance violations. 
(Prior Code, § 12.15(11)) 
Secs. 12-291-12-313. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

Sec. 12-314. - Weights and measures license required. 
    No person shall operate or maintain weights and measures, weighing or measuring devices, systems or accessories relating thereto which are used commercially within the city in determining the weight, measure or count of commodities or items sold, offered or exposed for sale on the basis of weight, measure or count, unless licensed by an annual weighing or measuring device license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 12.18(1)) 
Sec. 12-315. - Definitions. 
(a)  Commercial weighing or measuring devices are those used or employed in establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, items, produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or payment for services rendered on the basis of weight or measure. 
(b)  Enforcing authorities: 
(1)  City sealer (sealer of weights and measures). 
(2)  Building inspector (supervisor of city sealer). 
(3)  Public safety committee (review board). 
(Prior Code, § 12.18(2)) 
Sec. 12-316. - Application. 
    The application for a weighing or measuring device license shall be made in writing on the form provided for such purpose by the city sealer. Such application shall state the type and number of weighing and measuring devices to be licensed, the location of the devices, the applicant's full name and post office address, whether such person is an individual, firm or corporation and if a partnership, the names of the partners including their addresses and the signatures of the applicants. 
(Prior Code, § 12.18(3)) 
Sec. 12-317. - Fees. 
    The city sealer shall receive the following fees for services as sealer of weights and measures: 
(a) Base Annual Fee No charge (b) Scales up to 30 lbs. $20.00 (c) Scales 30 lbs. to 1,000 lbs. $44.00 (d) Scales over 1,000 lbs. $80.00 (e) Point of Sale Systems $30.00 (f) Person Weighing Scales $44.00 (g) Hopper Scales $50.00 (h) High Accuracy Scales $36.00 (i) Scanner $200.00 (j) Taxi Meters $40.00 (k) Recycling Machines $60.00 (l) Linear Meters $16.00 (m) Timing Devices $10.00 (n) Petroleum Pumps/Dispensers $24.00 (o) Vehicle Tank and Bulk Plant Meters $36.00  
(Prior Code, § 12.18(4)) 
Sec. 12-318. - Suspension for nonrenewal. 
    It shall be the duty of the city sealer to notify the supervisor and appropriate city officials and to order the immediate enforcement of the provisions of this article in cases involving failure to renew a weighing and measuring device license. The licensee shall be prohibited from operating or maintaining a weighing or measuring device until such time as valid license has been applied for and obtained under the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 12.18(5)) 
Sec. 12-319. - Display of license. 
    All licenses issued under this article shall be displayed in a prominent, visible area of the premises where the business is carried on and the same shall remain posted during the period for which the license is in force. 
(Prior Code, § 12.18(6)) 
Sec. 12-320. - License suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Suspension of license. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, whenever the city sealer finds that any licensed premises is conducted or managed in such a manner that there are serious or repeated violations of this article, or a violation of any of the ordinances or regulations of the city, state law or regulations of the national bureau of standards relating to weights and measures, he may without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the license holder, operator or employee in charge of the licensed premises citing such condition and specifying the corrective action to be taken. The public safety committee can review the record of the city sealer and if deemed necessary, shall order that the license be immediately suspended and all weighing and measuring operations are to be discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately, but upon written petition to the city clerk, shall be afforded a hearing before the public safety committee within 30 days of the petition. Failure to allow an inspector immediate access to the premises to determine whether such grounds exist shall be grounds for suspension. 
(b)  Revocation of licenses. For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article, or for interference with the city sealer in the performance of his duties, the license may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the public safety committee and supervisor. Prior to such action, the city sealer or supervisor shall notify the license holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the license is subject to revocation, and advising that the license shall be permanently revoked at the end of ten days following service of the notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the city clerk's office, by the license holder within the ten day period. 
(c)  Hearings. The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the chairman of the public safety committee at a time and place designated by the chairman. Based upon the record of the hearing, the city sealer or supervisor shall be charged with enforcing the decisions of the public safety committee. A written record of the hearing shall be furnished to the license holder by the city sealer if requested by the license holder. 
(Prior Code, § 12.18(7)) 
Sec. 12-321. - Other weighing or measuring device costs. 
    Whenever a special request is made for the inspection or testing of an uncategorized weighing or measuring device or a consultation, the actual expense of the same may be charged to the person or firm receiving the service. Such payment or charge shall be based on a current hourly rate. 
(Prior Code, § 12.18(8)) 
Chapter 13 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 13-1-13-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER UTILITY (RESERVED) 

Secs. 13-19-13-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER UTILITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-40. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contributor, as used in connection with the extension of water mains, means the owner of property at the time of a contribution or refund unless otherwise specified by written agreement. 
    Customer, as used in connection with the extension of water mains, means the owner of the premises to which water is now furnished or is to be furnished unless specific written agreements specify otherwise. The customer at all times means the property owner at the time a contribution is to be made or a refund becomes available. 
    Fire protection service means the use of water only for the purpose of extinguishing fire. 
    Free limit, as used in connection with the extension of water mains, means one-half the average cost of 50 feet of main in any extension where six inch or larger main is used and 100 feet of the average cost of two inch or larger main used for general use only. 
    General service means the use of a water service for all purposes except water used for extinguishing fire. 
    Main or mains means any pipe, conduit, or other conveyance through which water for public use may be transmitted or distributed. It shall include trenches or other structures in or upon which such pipe, conduit or other conveyance is carried and also land, easements, or other right of occupancy or use requisite for the construction and operation of the pipe, conduit or other conveyance. 
    PSC means the state public service commission. 
    Service pipe means the pipe parts of a water service. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the water utility or his authorized deputy, agent, representative or utility personnel. 
    Utility means the city water utility, a department of the city. 
    Water service (lateral or water lateral) means the pipe, fittings, meter and other accessories as may be required to extend a water supply from a distribution or transmission water main to the owner's or customer's point of use. 
(Prior Code, § 13.01(1)) 
Sec. 13-41. - Public service commission rules adopted. 
    The following provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 185 are adopted by reference and made a part of these rules as if set forth in full. A violation of any such rules shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be punishable as provided in section 13-304. 
185.11 Authorization For and Application of Rules. 185.12 Definitions. 185.13 General Requirements. 185.15 Free or Discriminatory Service Prohibited. 185.16 Protection of Water Utility Facilities. 185.17 Interference With Public Service Structures. 185.18 Location of Records. 185.19 Retention of Records. 185.21 Schedules to be Filed with the commission. 185.22 Information Available to Customers. 185.31 Metered Service. 185.32 Meter Readings and Billing Periods. 185.33 Billing. 185.35 Adjustment of Bills. 185.36 Deposits for Residential Service. 185.361 Deposits for Nonresidential Service. 185.37 Disconnection and Refusal of Service. 185.38 Deferred Payment Agreement. 185.39 Dispute Procedures. 185.41 Employees Authorized to Enter Customers' Premises. 185.42 Customer Complaints. 185.43 Construction Records. 185.44 Records and Reports of Service Interruptions. 185.45 Pumpage records. 185.46 Metering Equipment Records. 185.47 Other Records. 185.51 Requirement for Good Engineering Practice. 185.52 General Construction Requirements. 185.61 Meters. 185.65 Accuracy Requirements for Meters. 185.71 Meter Testing Facilities and Equipment. 185.72 Calibration of Meter Testing Equipment. 185.73 Testing of Customers Meters. 185.74 Test Flows. 185.75 Required Tests of Customer Meters. 185.76 Periodic Tests. 185.77 Request and Referee Tests. 185.79 Testing of Metering Installations Having Remote Registers. 185.795 Jumpering Meter Settings. 185.81 Quality of Water. 185.82 Pressure Standards. 185.83 Station Meters. 185.85 Water Audits and Water Loss Control. 185.86 Flushing Mains. 185.88 Frozen Laterals. 185.89 Adequacy of Water Supply; Emergency Operations and Interruptions of Service.  
(Prior Code, § 13.01(2)) 
Sec. 13-42. - Compliance required. 
    Any person now receiving a water supply from the water utility or who may hereafter make application therefor, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by these rules and regulations and also by the rules and regulations as filed with and approved by the public service commission. 
(Prior Code, § 13.02) 
Sec. 13-43. - Powers and duties of the board of public works as they relate to the water utility. 
    The board of public works shall, in addition to the general powers and duties set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.14, exercise the following powers and duties in respect to the city water utility: 
(1)  Protect the utility plant and any property pertaining thereto from unnecessary damage and loss, and keep such plant in good running order and repair. 
(2)  Appoint a manager who shall also be known as the superintendent, and fix his compensation. 
(3)  Employ, supervise, direct, or suspend any officer or employee in the service of the water utility. 
(4)  Make all contracts for and procure at the expense of the city, all power, materials, supplies and labor necessary to make extensions, additions, changes, alterations and attachments, and manage and maintain the utility plant, except in matters of public works, the estimated cost of which shall exceed $10,000.00, they shall be governed by Wis. Stats. § 62.15, and shall submit a concise statement of the necessity of the public works to the council for its approval, which shall be acted upon by the council as soon as convenient thereafter. 
(5)  Upon request of the council, show a fully itemized account of the kind and amount of materials used and the costs thereof on all works under their control. 
(6)  Call upon any other department or city officers for such assistance as may be necessary, and for the best interests of the city in the economical management of the utility plant. 
(7)  Establish, keep up-to-date, and have audited annually, a "uniform system of accounts" as presently prescribed by the public service commission, for this class of municipally owned water utilities. 
(8)  Audit and approve all bills incurred by them or by their authority, and, if approved by the president and secretary of the commission, shall be paid by the city clerk-treasurer as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0607. 
(9)  Prepare or cause to be prepared, and keep on file, permanent and adequate records, in the form of maps or clearly descriptive tabular statements, or both, showing the size, kind and location of all its underground distribution and transmission mains, water services, and other hidden construction, and definite locations of all valves and curb stops and other shutoffs. For all new construction work done the records shall show the date of construction by year and month. 
(10)  Make all such rules and regulations as to the use of water and the taking of water from the system, and such other rules and regulations relating to the system as they shall deem necessary, including the fixing or rates to be charged for the use of water, which rates, however, shall be submitted to and approved by the PSC and the council before the same shall be in force and effect, and provided further, the rates now in force shall be and remain the rates to be charged therefor until the same shall be changed as herein provided. 
(11)  Require the utility to furnish water of the quality as will comply with the requirements of the state board of health and social services. 
(12)  Enforce all city ordinances and all rules and regulations as they relate to the water utility. 
(13)  They shall require that all materials, pipes, valves, fittings, valve boxes, corporation stops, curb stops, adaptors, flanges, gaskets, couplings, parts, supplies, appurtenances, apparatus, and other applicable items without further enumeration and specifications therefor and standards at the time of purchase or contract, and all labor, at the time of performance or contract when used for or applied to repairing, maintaining, rebuilding, and additions to the utility plant, shall, in so far as possible, equal or exceed the applicable design specifications and installation standards for water works materials, supplies, and construction as published by the U.S.A. Standards Institute and by the American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
(14)  Require all hydrants to be kept in good state of repair and usable at all times of the year. All hydrants shall be so turned that steamer and hose connections can be readily made and attached to the hydrant in case of fire. 
(15)  Require that all city hydrants be tested and examined at least once a month from October 1 to May 1, and at least once every two months from May 1 to October 1 in each year, to determine that each hydrant is in good working condition. 
(16)  Require dead-end mains, or other portions of distributing systems to be flushed at sufficiently frequent periods as to eliminate or minimize complaints from consumers arising from foul or offensive conditions of the water due to stagnation. Proper provisions shall be made for flushing all parts of a system which need flushing. 
(17)  Require records to be kept of all flushing of mains, showing date, place and duration, and such records shall be used as a guide, in determining the necessary frequency of flushing of the same mains thereafter, to avoid well-founded complaints from consumers. 
(18)  Apply, to the extent economically feasible, the recommendations for improvements to the water supply system as outlined in the latest suggested guide by the Fire Insurance Rating Bureau of Wisconsin. 
(Prior Code, § 13.06) 
Sec. 13-44. - Consumer complaints. 
    Properly classified records shall be kept of all complaints received from consumers relative to character of service, low pressure, bad water, unusually high bills, or other matters, together with the disposition of or remedy provided for each complaint, if any, and the dates of complaint, and shall be complete and explicit. 
(Prior Code, § 13.70) 
Sec. 13-45. - Inspection of plumbing. 
    The utility personnel shall not make inspections of internal plumbing or fixtures. Such are the responsibility of the owner or consumer. The Utility shall furnish and maintain only the meter and the couplings on either side of the meter. All other facilities and appurtenances, including the meter service valve, are the owner's or consumer's responsibility. 
(Prior Code, § 13.71) 
Sec. 13-46. - Service calls. 
    Consumers requesting special service from the water utility regarding pressure, complaints, no water, noisy meter and pipes, leaky meters, and various other queries shall first ascertain that the fault does not lie within the plumbing on the consumer's premises, such as a closed valve, condensation, defective water heater, leak from pipes on either side of the meter rather than from the meter or meter connections, and so forth. 
(Prior Code, § 13.72) 
Sec. 13-47. - Inspection of premises. 
(a)  Inspection. Any officer or authorized employee of the water utility may enter during reasonable hours the premises supplied with water service, for inspection and maintenance or for the enforcement of the water utility's rules and regulations. 
(b)  Refusing entry. No person shall, upon receipt of a notification stating the need for entry to the premises or any part thereof, refuse an authorized agent of the water utility free access thereto as required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 13.73) 
Sec. 13-48. - No claims for damage. 
    No person shall enter a claim for damage against the city as a water utility or any officer thereof, for damage to any pipe, fixture, appurtenance or to laundry by reason of interrupted water supply, variation of pressure or temperature, discolored water, or for damage caused by turning off or turning on, either wholly or partially, the water supply for the extension, alteration, repair of any water main or premises supply or for the extension, alteration, repair of any water main or premises supply or for the discontinuance of the premises water supply for the violation of any rules or regulations of the water utility. No claims shall be allowed against the city as a water utility on account of the interruption of the water supply caused by the breaking of pipes or machinery, or by stoppage for repairs, on account of fire or other emergency. No claims shall be allowed for the damage caused by the breakage of any pipe or machinery. 
(Prior Code, § 13.74) 
Sec. 13-49. - Hydrants. 
(a)  Opening. No person shall open fire hydrants unless authorized by the city water utility or the fire department. 
(b)  Operation of valves and hydrants. No person shall, without authority of the city water utility or the fire department, operate any curb stop or any valve connected with the street or supply mains, or open any fire hydrant connected with the water utility distribution system, except for extinguishing fire, or wantonly injure or impair the same. 
(c)  Damages to. Owners and operators of motor vehicles and equipment shall be liable for the cost of repair or replacement to any hydrant damaged by being hit by same. The water utility is not responsible for damage to the motor vehicle or equipment by reason of the accident. 
(d)  Moving. Anyone who requests moving a hydrant shall pay for such moving, including the cost of materials, labor and overhead, less salvage and accrued depreciation. Requests of a governmental unit made in connection with street or highway improvement are not included with the above. 
(Prior Code, § 13.75) 
Sec. 13-50. - Unauthorized water use. 
(a)  Permit required. Property owners or consumers shall not allow contractors, masons or other persons to take water from their premises without first showing a permit from the water utility. 
(b)  Disconnection. No person shall disconnect or allow any person, other than authorized utility personnel, to disconnect or interfere with the water meter being used to measure the water furnished to a premises. 
(c)  Penalty. Any consumer failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 13-304. 
(Prior Code, § 13.76) 
Sec. 13-51. - Public safety at excavation. 
(a)  The superintendent shall see that all ditches for water mains, hydrants, and service pipes are properly guarded to prevent accident to any person or vehicle. At night there shall be displayed red signal lights to, so far as possible, ensure the safety of the public. 
(b)  All open ditches for water mains, hydrants, and service pipes shall be opened to cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter, of the street. The street and pavement shall be restored to as good condition as it was prior to excavation. All debris shall be immediately removed after the completion of the work. Should any excavation by contractor or others in any street or alley be left open and unfinished for 24 hours or the work improperly done, the enforcing personnel shall finish or correct the work; and the expense incurred shall be charged to the person whose work is finished or corrected and shall be paid by the person before receiving another permit. Applicable regulations in chapter 8 shall also apply. 
(Prior Code, § 13.77) 
Sec. 13-52. - Contractor and construction responsibility. 
    Contractors and others making excavations shall ascertain location of all water mains, water services, valves, valve boxes and other underground facilities of the water utility. Any damage to such pipes, appurtenances, or facilities shall be reported to the water utility who shall make the necessary repairs and bill all costs to the contractor or person liable for the damage. Should such contractor or person fail to pay for the repair of the damages, the charges shall become a lien against the property which it serves. 
(Prior Code, § 13.78) 
Sec. 13-53. - Repairs to water main. 
    The city water utility may shut off the water mains temporarily to make repairs, alterations or additions to the plant or system. When the circumstances permit sufficient delay, the water utility shall notify by newspaper publication or otherwise of the discontinuance of the supply. No rebate or damages shall be allowed to customers for such temporary suspension of supply. 
(Prior Code, § 13.79) 
Sec. 13-54. - Protective device. 
    The owner or occupant of any premises receiving water supply shall apply and maintain protection of the premises' supply and all appliances thereof against damage from the use of the water supply, variation of water pressure, or any interruption of water supply. Particularly, such owner or occupant shall protect water-cooled compressors for refrigeration systems by means of high pressure safety cutout devices. They shall provide a means for the prevention of the transmission of water ram or noise of operation of any valve or appliance through the piping of their own or adjacent premises. 
(Prior Code, § 13.80) 
Sec. 13-55. - Relief valves; closed systems. 
    On all closed systems (i.e., systems having a check valve, pressure regulator, reducing valve, water filter or softener) an effective pressure relief valve shall be installed in the top tapping of the hot water tank. A one-half inch drain pipe shall be connected to the relief valve for discharge on the floor or into a sink or open drain through an air gap. No stop valve shall be placed between the hot water tank and the relief valve or on the drain pipe. 
(Prior Code, § 13.81) 
Sec. 13-56. - Air chambers. 
    An air chamber or approved shock absorber shall be installed at the terminus of each riser, fixture branch, or hydraulic elevator main for prevention of undue water hammer. The air chamber shall have a diameter not less than the pipe it serves and a length not less than 15 diameters of the supply pipe. Where possible, the air chamber should be provided at its base with a valve and drain cock for water drainage and replenishment of air. 
(Prior Code, § 13.82) 
Secs. 13-57-13-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 13-86. - Application. 
(a)  Application for extension of a water main shall be made in writing to the city water utility by the owner of the property to be benefited or his authorized agent. The application shall state the location of the premises to be served using the officially recorded description. The petitioner may obtain the signatures of all owners of the land abutting such main extension to support the application. 
(b)  Compliance required. Installation of water main extensions will be considered by the city water utility only when the conditions of this division are complied with. 
(Prior Code, § 13.10) 
Sec. 13-87. - Location of property to be served. 
    The property to be served shall front on an official city street as described in the city ordinance fixing the area in which water service is to be furnished and shall conform to all applicable platting and zoning regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 13.11) 
Sec. 13-88. - Grade requirements. 
    The street in which the main is to be placed shall have an established grade set and approved by the city. City streets shall be graded in accordance with the city's standard cross section according to chapter 8. 
(Prior Code, § 13.12) 
Sec. 13-89. - Winter installation. 
    Installation of water main extensions shall not be made when the ground is frozen unless applicant will pay for all additional costs involved. The city water utility reserves the right to decide when frost conditions are encountered and shall notify the property owner or his authorized agent in advance when such condition and practice is in effect. 
(Prior Code, § 13.13) 
Sec. 13-90. - Connection to transmission main. 
    When customers connect to a transmission main or connecting loops laid at the utility's expense, there shall be a contribution of an amount equivalent to the applicable assessment as determined in section 13-94(1). 
(Prior Code, § 13.16) 
Sec. 13-91. - Development period. 
    The development period during which refunds shall be made will be limited to 20 years. 
(Prior Code, § 13.17) 
Sec. 13-92. - Suburban extension. 
    Main extensions may be made in areas outside the city only when such areas are included in the water service area of the city, as established by ordinance. Such main extensions, when permitted, shall be governed by the same regulations that apply to extensions within the city except financing can be handled only on a customer finance basis, as in section 13-94(2). 
(Prior Code, § 13.18) 
Sec. 13-93. - Exceptions for extensions ordered by city council or state public service commission. 
(a)  By council. Where, in the public interest, a main extension has been ordered by the council, such extension shall be made even though requirements as set forth in this division have not been accomplished and irrespective of approval by the commission. 
(b)  By the public service commission. Where a main extension has been ordered by the public service commission pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 196.58, such extension shall be made even though conditions contrary to those set forth in this division may exist, and irrespective of approval by the council or the commission. 
(Prior Code, § 13.14) 
Sec. 13-94. - Financing procedure. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide rules for financing the extension of water mains for the benefit of new customers. The city water utility will extend water mains for new customers and will decide whether the extension is to be six-inch or larger pipe where fire-protection service is needed or two-inch pipe as a minimum size or larger where only general service is needed, according to the following: 
(1)  Special assessment basis. Where the cost of the extension is to be immediately assessed against the abutting property, the procedure set forth under Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 shall apply. 
(2)  Customer finance basis. In lieu of the special assessment, water main extension may be made on a customer-financed basis where there is a low density of prospective consumers or for some other reason. 
a.  Basis for determining contributions from original customer. The applicant shall advance the amount that would have been assessed under subsection (1) of this section. The contribution shall be paid in advance of construction. 
b.  Additional customers and refunds. 
1.  When additional customers' premises are connected to a water main that was originally financed in part by customers, the utility shall require a contribution from each new customer equal to the existing average contribution. The amount of customer contribution computed under subsection (2) of this section is less than would have been assessed under subsection (1) of this section, the applicant for service shall pay an amount equivalent to the assessment. This amount shall then be refunded pro-rata to all contributors along the extension whose remaining contribution still exceeds what would have been assessed under subsection (1) of this section. 
2.  When refunds have reduced the contribution of any contributor to the applicable assessment per front foot, no further refund shall be made to that individual. After all refunds have been made, the remaining premises that may connect shall be charged at the rate per front foot established for the extension. 
c.  Limit of extension. When an extension beyond an existing extension is required to serve a new customer, and the cost to that customer exceeds the average remaining contribution in the original extension, then the new extension shall be considered as an entirely new project, without refunds, or other connections with the original extension. 
(Prior Code, § 13.15) 
Sec. 13-95. - Water main installations in platted subdivision. 
(a)  Application for installation of water mains in regularly platted real estate development subdivisions shall be filed with the clerk and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision. 
(2)  Legal description. 
(3)  Map showing streets, lots and sizes of proposed mains and hydrants and street laterals. 
(4)  Date of approval of subdivision plan by state department of development. 
(5)  Date of approval of proposed mains by state department of development. 
(6)  Number of houses presently under construction. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application, the city water utility will prepare detailed estimates of the cost of extending water mains and hydrants of the size deemed necessary in the subdivision and submit same to the city council for approval of the extension as it pertains to public fire protection service requirements. 
(c)  The applicant for water service to be supplied to a subdivision shall be required to advance to the water utility, prior to the beginning of the construction, the total estimated cost of the extension. If the final costs exceed estimated costs, an additional billing will be made for the balance of the cost due. This balance is to be paid within 30 days. If final costs are less than estimated, a refund or overpayment will be made by the city water utility. 
(d)  If the developer, or a contractor employed by the developer, is to install the water mains (with approval of the water utility), the developer shall be responsible for the total cost of construction. 
(Prior Code, § 13.32) 
Secs. 13-96-13-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER SERVICE INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 13-119. - Application for water service. 
(a)  Application for water service, or for any extension or alteration of any existing service, shall be made in writing by the owner of the property, or his authorized agent, on a form furnished by the water utility. The application shall contain the legal description of the property to be served, name of the owner, the exact use to be made of the service, and the size of the supply pipe and meter desired. The application shall also note particularly any special refrigeration, air conditioning, or other large water-consuming appliances. 
(b)  The superintendent may withhold approval of any incomplete application or any application for service that he deems detrimental to the city utility system. 
(Prior Code, § 13.20) 
Sec. 13-120. - Conditions to obtain service. 
    Water service shall be furnished only if: 
(1)  The premises have a frontage on a properly platted street or public strip in which a cast iron or other long-life water main has been laid, or where the property owner has agreed to and complied with the provisions of the main extension rule in this division. 
(2)  The property owner has installed or agrees to install a water service from the curb line to the point of use, laid not less than 61/2 feet below the surface of an established or proposed grade according to the water utility's specifications. 
(3)  There will be no extension and independent meterage of the supply to an adjoining lot or parcel of land, whether owned by the same or different parties. 
(4)  There will be no division of the water service at the curb stop for separate supplies therefrom for two or more separate premises having frontage on any street or public strip whether owned by the same or different parties. 
(5)  The premises have adequate piping beyond the metering point. 
(6)  The premises are located within the area described by the city fixing the area in which water service is to be furnished by the city water utility. 
(Prior Code, § 13.21) 
Sec. 13-121. - Service outside the city limits. 
    Water service shall be furnished to applicants living outside the city only when such service is authorized by the council by inclusion of the property to be served within the water service area designated by city ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 13.60) 
Sec. 13-122. - Water service size and location. 
(a)  The size and location of the water service shall be agreed upon by the customer and the city water utility but, in case of a difference, the water utility shall be the final judge. 
(b)  Each water service shall have no other outlets or connections and shall be of undiminished size from the water main in the street to the point of meter placement unless utility specifications require a variance. 
(c)  The piping on the customer's side of the meter shall be sized and proportioned to provide on all floors, at all times, an ample and equitable distribution of water supply for the greatest probable number of fixtures or appliance units operating simultaneously, shall stand a pressure of 300 pounds to the square inch, and be subject to all the standards of the state plumbing code, the owner or consumer being subject to all damages. 
(Prior Code, § 13.22) 
Sec. 13-123. - Water service connections. 
(a)  Taps, cut-ins, or other attachments made to any water main shall conform to the water utility specifications and shall be made only by or under the supervision of the superintendent. 
(b)  Water services from the water main in the street to the street line of the lot of the property owner applicant shall conform to utility specifications and shall be installed under the direction and supervision of the superintendent. 
(c)  All services shall be inspected by the superintendent before concealment or burial. 
(d)  Curb stops shall ordinarily be located on the street side of the sidewalk. If cast iron piping or other large piping is used, the curb stop shall be of the street valve and box type located near the attachment to the water main. 
(e)  Each property shall have a single city owned curb stop located in the right-of-way. Duplexes, zero lot line structures and multi-family residential buildings with separately owned units, such as condominiums, shall have separate curb stops for each dwelling unit, located between the city owned curb stop and the building and accessible to city employees; this requirement shall also be applied when single owner buildings are converted to separately owned units. 
(Prior Code, § 13.23) 
Sec. 13-124. - Copper piping from main required. 
    Water service piping from water mains to three feet behind the curb stop on the customer's side shall be copper. 
(Prior Code, § 13.845) 
Sec. 13-125. - Trenching. 
    No water service shall be laid through any trench having cinders, rubbish, rock or gravel fill, or any other material which may cause injury to or disintegration of the service pipe and fittings, unless adequate means of protection are provided by sand filling or such other insulation as may be approved by the superintendent. Services passing through curb or retaining walls shall be adequately safeguarded by provision of a channel space or pipe casing, not less than twice the diameter of the service piping. The space between the service pipe and channel or pipe casing shall be filled and lightly caulked with an oakum, mastic cement, or other resilient material, and made impervious to moisture. 
(Prior Code, § 13.24) 
Sec. 13-126. - Backfilling trenches, mains and service. 
(a)  Trenches and excavations for water services and mains in public strips or streets shall be refilled with moist, damp earth, or by means of water tamping. 
(b)  The pipe shall be protected against injury by carefully hand tamping the ground filling free from hard lumps, rocks, stones or other injurious materials, around and at least six inches over the pipe. 
(c)  When water tamping is used, the water shall be turned into the trench after the first one-half inch of backfill has been placed, and then the trench shall be kept flooded until the remainder of the backfill has been put in. 
(Prior Code, § 13.25) 
Sec. 13-127. - Water lateral installation charge. 
(a)  Subdivision developers shall be responsible, where the main extension has been approved by the water utility, for the water service lateral installation costs from the main through the curb stop and box. 
(b)  When the cost of a utility main extension is to be collected through assessment by the municipality, the actual average water lateral installation costs from the main through the curb stop and box shall be included in the assessment of the appropriate properties. 
(c)  The initial water lateral, not installed as part of a subdivision development or an assessable utility extension, will be installed from the main through the curb stop and box by the utility, for which there will be made a charge as follows: 
3/4-inch or 1-inch copper water service $300.00 Larger sized services Actual Cost  
(Prior Code, § 13.26) 
Sec. 13-128. - Replacement with larger size. 
    Where the property owner requests that a larger water service be installed to replace an existing smaller service, an allowance of $15.00 shall be made as a deduction in cost, provided the new water service is installed in the same ditch as the existing service. 
(Prior Code, § 13.27) 
Sec. 13-129. - Service maintenance. 
(a)  After the initial installation and construction, the water service from the water main in the street to and including the curb stop and curb box shall be maintained and kept in repair by the utility. The cost of the repairs caused by ordinary wear and tear, shall be borne by the utility, but damage by external violence shall be repaired by the utility at the expense of the property owner. 
(b)  Maintenance and repair of the water service from and including the connection at the curb stop to the customer's point of use shall be the responsibility of the owner, who also can be billed for any water which has not passed through the water meter, and has been wasted by leakage or defective pipes and fixtures, as estimated by authorized utility personnel. 
(c)  If the owner or consumer fails to repair a leaking or broken water service from the curb stop to the point of metering within such time as may appear reasonable to the superintendent, after notification has been served on the owner or consumer by the superintendent, the water shall be shut off and shall not be turned on again until the repairs have been completed. 
(Prior Code, § 13.28) 
Sec. 13-130. - Curb box and curb stop maintenance. 
(a)  The top of each curb box shall have a cover to prevent dirt and other debris from getting into the box. Such cover shall be level with the top of the sidewalk or ground. 
(b)  The property owner shall protect the curb box and curb stop and shall keep them free from dirt and other obstructions. He shall immediately report to the utility any damage to same. Curb boxes and stops damaged by external violence shall be repaired by the utility at the expense of the property owner. 
(c)  The utility shall not be held liable for its failure to locate or use a curb stop and box and shut off the water in case of a leak or other failure on the owner's property. 
(Prior Code, § 13.29) 
Sec. 13-131. - Winter installation of water service. 
    If an applicant decides that a water service must be installed during conditions other than normal, such as freezing weather and while the ground is frozen, the applicant shall assume all additional costs that may arise during the installation and construction under such conditions. The city water utility shall fix the dates when conditions other than normal are encountered. 
(Prior Code, § 13.30) 
Sec. 13-132. - Thawing frozen service. 
(a)  Frozen water services between the curb stop and the water main in the street shall be thawed out by and at the expense of the water utility except where the freezing was caused by contributory fault or negligence on the part of the consumer such as reduction of the grade, failure to comply with utility specifications and requirements as to depth of water service, lack of sufficient backfill, etc. 
(b)  Following the freezing of a service, the water utility shall take such steps and issue such instructions as may be necessary to prevent the refreezing of the same service. No charge shall be made for re-thawings, if the instructions are followed. If it is necessary for the water to flow to prevent refreezing, the owner or consumer shall make provision for proper disposal of the wastewater. 
(c)  Where the customer was not at fault, the utility shall adjust the billing for the quarter in which the freezing occurred to an amount determined by the average water use by the consumer for the prior two non-summer quarters. If freezing occurs in the two quarters in succession or with only one non-summer intervening, the billing will be determined by the last two non-summer quarters where water was not permitted to flow to prevent freezing of water services. Provided, however, the consumer shall not be entitled to this special billing consideration unless the consumer notifies the utility that water is being permitted to flow to prevent freezing. Notification is required whether or not the utility has published a general request to the public to flow water to prevent freezing. 
(d)  Frozen services between the curb stop and the customer's point of use shall be sole responsibility of the customer or owner of the property. 
(Prior Code, § 13.31) 
Sec. 13-133. - Accuracy of meters. 
(a)  Initial testing before installation. Before initial installation every new meter shall be tested by the water utility for accuracy of registration, and no meter whose accuracy of registration does not fall within the following limits of allowable error shall be placed in service: 
Meter Size (Diameter of Connection, in Inches) Allowable Error 2% Plus or Minus on Rates of Flow (Gals. per Min.) Allowable Error 10% (Under-Registration on Flow of Gals. per Min.) From To 5/81 20 1/4 3/4 2 35 1/2 1 3 60 3/4 11/2 5 100 11/2 2 8 160 2 3 16 320 4 4 28 560 7 6 48 960 12  
(b)  Maintenance of accuracy. The accuracy of registration of all meters in service shall be maintained, and ensured by periodic retests of the frequency by the water utility as the conditions of service in any case may warrant. Retests should include a test on a small and definite rate of flow within the range for which the allowable error is two percent. 
(c)  Records. A permanent record shall be kept of the tests on each meter, and such records shall show the name, number and size of the meter, date and place of the original and of each subsequent installation and the complete results of each test and retest. The records shall also show the cause of removal from service and what, if any, repairs were made between time of removal and the retest of the meter. The original test record shall show the identification of the meter and all data taken in form that permits convenient checking of the methods employed and the calculations. Any meter that has been in service for two years, for which no satisfactory record is available, shall be tested, and a permanent record made within one year unless extended by written order of the PSC. 
(Prior Code, § 13.41) 
Sec. 13-134. - Outside meter pit installation. 
    If an outside meter pit installation is chosen by the property owner, this pit shall be located near the street line of the property. The meter pit shall conform to standard utility plans and specifications and shall include a suitable and convenient-to-use ladder. The original cost and maintenance of the meter pit, including the ladder, shall be borne by the property owner or customer. 
(Prior Code, § 13.42) 
Secs. 13-135-13-151. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE FIRE LINE SERVICE 

Sec. 13-152. - Components of private fire line service. 
    Private fire line service shall consist of separate connections for automatic sprinkler system standpipes (where same are connected permanently or continuously to the water mains), water storage tanks and private hydrant systems. Private fire protection service shall be supplied separately from general service, except that the water line used for fire protection service may also be used for general service where the property owner first provides the city water utility with an easement to enter the property to turn off the water, where necessary, and where a general service water valve is installed inside the building adjacent to the fire line. 
(Prior Code, § 13.35) 
Sec. 13-153. - Application. 
    Application shall be made in writing at the water utility office. 
(Prior Code, § 13.36) 
Sec. 13-154. - Installation. 
(a)  The installation of fire service lines from the water main to the building shall be made to conform with the specifications and installation of general water service and, in addition, the pipe gallery and all the piping installed for private fire protection service upon the premises of the users shall be open and not concealed or the premises shall be equipped entirely with dry systems where proper adequate seals are maintained. Service shall be supplied on an unmetered basis billed at the established rate. 
(b)  All connections shall include a fire underwriter's approved audio or visual flow alarm system. 
(Prior Code, § 13.37) 
Sec. 13-155. - Cost to customers. 
    Service shall consist of unmetered connections to the main for the purpose of supplying water to private fire protection systems such as automatic sprinkler systems, standpipes, (where same are connected permanently or continuously to the mains) and private hydrants. Cost, to be billed in the same manner as for general service, shall consist of quarterly demand charges as follows: 
Size of Connection Quarterly Charge 11/2 inches $10.80 2 inches $24.00 21/2 inches $39.00 3 inches $45.00 4 inches $75.00 6 inches $150.00 8 inches $240.00 10 inches $363.00 12 inches $480.00  
(Prior Code, § 13.38) 
Sec. 13-156. - Meters. 
(a)  Service and location. 
(1)  The size and location of a water meter shall be agreed upon by the customer and the city water utility but, in case of a difference, the superintendent shall be the final judge. 
(2)  The meter shall be located so it will be safe from both heat and cold and preserved from obstructions or any fixture which might retard easy access thereto for reading, removal, or observation. 
(3)  The meter shall be located as near as possible to the point of entrance of the service pipe, between one and four feet from the floor, with the dial pointing up, and the top of the meter dial not more than 54 inches above the surrounding floor area, unless a variation from these requirements is granted by the superintendent. 
(4)  If the owner desires a change in the meter location, he shall consult with the city water utility to determine its acceptability to the water utility. The owner shall pay for all costs required to make the change. 
(b)  Piping to. 
(1)  The owner shall, at his expense, provide suitable piping to and from the meter connections and the piping shall be arranged to provide sufficient flexibility to permit easy removal and resetting of the meter, using slip joint or dresser type connections when or as designated and approved by the superintendent. All piping to and from the meter must be supported so its weight is not borne by the meter connections. When designated by the superintendent, bases shall be provided by the owner for the support of larger and heavier meters. 
(2)  Where it is possible to set the meter in the basement, or other suitable place within the building, a short nipple shall be inserted after the service valve, then a union and then another nipple and coupling of the proper length. The nipple attached to the union and coupling shall be cut to a standard length provided by plans of the utility (a horizontal run of 18 inches may be required in such pipe line) which may later be removed for the insertion of the meter into the supply line. 
(c)  Service valves for. 
(1)  In the service pipe just ahead of each meter there shall be a utility approved shut off service valve of good quality, good hydraulic characteristics, and of the same nominal size as the service pipe. 
(2)  In meter locations where water on the floor or area under the meter, due to meter servicing or changing, is objectionable, there should be an additional service valve, located immediately after the meter as well as the one ahead of the meter. 
(d)  Bypass valves for. All meters of a nominal size and capacity greater than one inch shall have a piped bypass around the meter which may be one nominal pipe size smaller than the meter. In such piped bypass there shall be a utility approved bypass valve capable of being sealed in the closed position. 
(e)  Utility to furnish. All water meters or other water measuring apparatus for the purpose of measuring water furnished to a consumer shall be the property of and installed by the water utility. 
(f)  Repairs to. 
(1)  Water meters or other measuring apparatus furnished by the water utility, shall be repaired by the water utility and the cost of the repairs caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the water utility. 
(2)  Any damage to a meter resulting from the carelessness of the owner of the premises, his agent, or tenant, or from the negligence of any one of them to properly secure and protect same, including any damage that may result from allowing a water meter to become frozen or to be injured from the presence of hot water or steam, shall be paid for by the consumer or the owner of the premises. 
(g)  Additional meter rental charge. 
(1)  Upon request, the utility shall furnish and install additional meters to: 
a.  Water service customers for the purpose of measuring the volume of water used that is not discharged into the sanitary sewer system; and 
b.  Sewerage service customers who are not customers of the water utility for the purpose of determining the volume of sewage that is discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
(2)  The utility shall charge a meter installation charge of $40.00 and a quarterly/monthly rental fee for the use of this additional meter. 
(3)  Additional meter rental charges: 
Monthly Quarterly 5/8 -inch meter $4.10 $12.30 3/4-inch meter $4.10 $12.30 1-inch meter $6.75 $20.25 11/4-inch meter $9.00 $27.00 11/2-inch meter $12.50 $37.50 2-inch meter $20.75 $62.25  
(4)  This schedule applies only if the additional meter is installed on the same service lateral as the primary meter and either: 
a.  The additional meter is three-quarter-inch or smaller if the metering configuration is the addition method; or 
b.  The additional meter is two-inch or smaller for all other metering c configurations. 
(5)  If the additional meter is larger than two-inch or larger than three-quarter-inch and installed in the addition method, each meter shall be treated as a separate account and schedule Mg-1 rates shall apply. 
(Prior Code, § 13.40) 
Secs. 13-157-13-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BILLING AND COLLECTIONS GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-181. - Billing frequency; minimum bill. 
(a)  Bills are rendered quarterly for residential and small commercial, industrial and public authority customers. Large commercial and industrial customers are billed monthly. The minimum billing is as follows: 
Quarterly Monthly Residential Fixed Charge $25.50 $8.50 Nonresidential, Based on Meter Size    5/8 inch $25.50 $8.50   3/4 inch $25.50 $8.50   1 inch $41.73 $13.91   11/4 inch $55.62 $18.54   11/2 inch $77.25 $25.75   2 inches $128.25 $42.75   3 inches $194.67 $64.89   4 inches $349.17 $116.39   6 inches $658.17 $219.39   8 inches $889.92 $296.64   10 inches $1,059.87 $353.29   12 inches $1,433.76 $477.92  
(b)  Plus volume charges: 
First 5,100 cf used quarterly: $2.34 per 100 cf Next 270,000 cf used quarterly: $2.16 per 100 cf Next 300,000 cf used quarterly: $1.85 per 100 cf Over 575,100 cf used quarterly: $1.65 per 100 cf  
First 1,700 cf used monthly: $2.34 per 100 cf Next 90,000 cf used monthly: $2.16 per 100 cf Next 100,000 cf used monthly: $1.85 per 100 cf Over 191,7000 cf used monthly: $1.65 per 100 cf  
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1); Amd. No. 33 , 5-16-2018) 
Sec. 13-182. - Surburban service. 
    The rates for suburban water service shall be the same as for metered general service plus a 25 percent surcharge. Billing, payment of bills, penalties and all other applicable rules and regulations in this division shall apply to suburban water service areas designated by city ordinance. 
(Prior Code, §§ 13.61, 13.62) 
Sec. 13-183. - Intermittent uses; governmental and school uses. 
    Water service supplied to municipal buildings, schools, sewer treatment plants, etc., shall be metered and the regular metered service rates applied. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(a)) 
Sec. 13-184. - Payment of bills. 
    Except as may otherwise be provided in this division, bills for water service are rendered quarterly or monthly and become due and payable upon issuance following the period for which service is rendered. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(b)) 
Sec. 13-185. - Multiple buildings. 
    When a consumer's premises has several buildings, each supplied with service and metered separately, the full service charge will be billed for each meter separately and the readings will not be cumulated. If these buildings are all used in the same business and are connected by the consumer, they can be metered in one place. If the water utility, for its own convenience, installs more than one meter, the readings will be cumulated for billing. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(c)) 
Sec. 13-186. - Reading periods. 
    Water meters shall be read as regularly as possible for established billing periods. If access to the meter cannot be gained, a meter reading form (self-addressed post card) shall be left. If it is not returned in time for the billing operation, an estimated bill shall be rendered. Only in unusual cases or when approval is obtained from the customer shall more than two consecutive estimated bills be rendered. The customer shall be notified by letter, if all reasonable attempts to contact him fail, that he must procure a reading by a specified date and that service shall be discontinued until such arrangements are made. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(d)) 
Sec. 13-187. - Failure to read meters. 
(a)  Where the water utility is unable to read a meter after two successive attempts, the fact shall be plainly indicated upon the bill, and either an estimated bill will be computed, or the minimum charge applied. The difference shall be adjusted when the meter is again read, that is, the bill for the succeeding billing period will be computed with the gallons or cubic feet in each block of the rate schedule doubled and credit will be given on that bill for the amount of the bill paid the preceding period. Only in unusual cases or when approval is obtained from the customer, shall more than three consecutive estimated bills be rendered where bills are rendered monthly and there shall be not more than two consecutive estimated bills where the billing period is two months or more. 
(b)  If the meter is damaged or fails to operate for any reason, the water utility shall render a bill for the current period, based on an average of the water consumption for a comparable preceding period for which readings were obtained. In case these periods cannot be properly used, the bill shall be estimated by some equitable method. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(e)) 
Sec. 13-188. - Mailing of bills. 
    All bills and notices shall be mailed to the owner or, upon his written request, to his designated agent or tenant. A bill, even if in duplicate, for one period for one meter shall go to one address only. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(f)) 
Sec. 13-189. - No penalty waiver. 
    Every reasonable care will be exercised in the proper mailing of water service bills to the owner or occupant. However, failure to receive a bill shall not relieve any person for the payment of the bill within the prescribed period, nor exempt any person from any penalty imposed for the delinquency in the payment thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(g)) 
Sec. 13-190. - Vacant premises; minimum charge. 
    When a premises remains vacant following a special or regular meter reading and billing, but the meter remains on the premises, the regular minimum charge shall apply. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(h)) 
Sec. 13-191. - Complaints. 
    Any claims or complaints on bills or billings should be filed within ten days after the day the bill becomes due and payable. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(i)) 
Sec. 13-192. - Penalty for delinquent payment. 
(a)  A late payment charge of three percent, but not less than $0.30 will be added to bills not paid within 20 days of issuance. This one-time three percent late payment charge will be applied only to any unpaid balance for the current billing period's usage. This late payment charge is applicable to all customers. The utility customer may be given a written notice that the bill is overdue no sooner than 20 days after the bill is issued and unless payment or satisfactory arrangement for payment is made within the next eight days, service may be disconnected, pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 185. 
(b)  Payment not honored by financial institution charge: The utility shall assess a $20.00 charge when a payment rendered for utility service is not honored by the customer's financial institution. This charge may not be in addition to, but may be inclusive of, other such charges when the payment was for multiple services. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(j)) 
Sec. 13-193. - Special meter reading charge. 
    The utility shall assess a $15.00 charge to the requestor whenever an existing customer or the property owner requests a special meter reading by utility personnel on a date other than the regularly scheduled meter reading. This charge may not be assessed if the customer or the property owner provides the meter reading. This charge may not be assessed to a new customer. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(j)) 
Sec. 13-194. - Charges a lien on property. 
    Should all efforts of the water utility to collect a water bill or any other bill pertaining to water service or water meter installation, these charges shall be a lien on the lot, part of lot or parcel of land to which such service was supplied. All bills for such services prior to October 1 that are not paid shall be mailed directly to the owner by October 15, designating the delinquency and if not paid by November 1, shall be increased by an additional ten percent penalty. If still not paid by November 15, same shall be placed on the tax roll for collection according to Wis. Stats. § 66.0809. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(1)(k)) 
Sec. 13-195. - Combined metering. 
(a)  Volumetric meter readings will be combined for billing if the utility for its own convenience places more than one meter on a single water service lateral. Multiple meters placed for the purpose of identifying water not discharged into the sanitary sewer are not considered for utility convenience and shall not be combined for billing. Meter readings from individually metered separate service laterals shall not be combined for billing purposes. 
(b)  Buildings used in the same business, located on the same parcel and served by a single lateral may have the customer's water supply piping installed to a central point so that volume can be metered in one place. 
(Prior Code, § 13.45(l)) 
Sec. 13-196. - Special readings. 
(a)  Special readings. 
(1)  Where it is desired to divide a water bill, because of moving, property sale or otherwise, a special reading of the meter may be requested by either the renters or landlord, or by the seller or purchaser of property involved in a sale provided at least 15 days have elapsed since the last reading. A $15.00 fee will be charged for this special service. 
(2)  The person making the request shall furnish the water utility with the name and address of the party to whom the bill is to be sent (usually the person moving out), the owner's name and address and the date the meter is to be locked so the meter will be accessible to the city water utility employee. 
(3)  When service has been discontinued (meter removed), this is considered a special reading for billing purposes, but the $15.00 fee shall not be charged. 
(b)  Computation. Bills for special readings (pro rata billings) shall be computed according to the following schedule: 
(1)  For meter readings up to and including the 5th day after the end of a previously billed period, present consumption shall be added to that for the previous period, the total bill recomputed, re-billed and credit given for previous payment, if any, on such bill. 
(2)  For meter readings from the 6th day through the 15th day after the end of a previously billed period, present consumption shall be billed on the basis of one-third month, in which case the amounts consumed under each grouping of the semiannual metered rate schedule are 1/18 th of the amount computed for the semiannual rate. 
(3)  For meter readings from the 16th day through the 25th day after the end of a previously billed period, present consumption shall be billed on the basis of two-thirds month, in which case the amounts consumed under each grouping of the semiannual metered rate schedule are one-ninth of the amount computed for the semiannual rate. 
(4)  For meter readings from the 26th day through the 35th day after the end of a previously billed period and for each monthly period thereafter, in the pro rata billing period, present consumption shall be billed on the basis of monthly billings and multiples thereof, in which case the amount consumed under each grouping of the semiannual metered rate schedule are one-sixth of the amount computed for the semiannual rate. 
(5)  In all cases cumulated pro rata billings shall equal but not exceed the amount that would be billed if consumption were cumulated and billed as of one billing period. 
(c)  Apportioning bills. When a premises changes occupants or owners, etc., unless the water utility is immediately informed of the change to permit reading the meter and issuing a special reading bill, the billing for the entire period will be submitted to the owner or occupant, and any adjustment in the way of apportioning the bill between the outgoing and incoming consumers shall be the responsibility of the owner or parties involved. 
(Prior Code, § 13.47) 
Sec. 13-197. - Temporary unmetered service billing. 
(a)  Service may be supplied temporarily on an unmetered basis where the utility cannot immediately install a water meter, including water used for construction. Unmetered service shall be billed the amount that would be charged to a metered residential customer using 1,400 cubic feet of water per quarter under Schedule Mg-1, including the service charge for a ?-inch meter. If the utility determines that actual usage exceeds 1,400 cubic feet of water per quarter, an additional charge for the estimated excess usage shall be made according to the rates under Schedule Mg-1. 
This schedule applies only to customers with a one-inch or smaller service connection. For customers with a larger service connection, the utility shall install a temporary meter and charges shall be based on the rates set forth under Schedule Mg-1. 
Billing: Same as Schedule Mg-1 
(b)  Billing rules; general. Except as otherwise provided in this division, bills for water service shall be rendered quarterly as of March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year. Statements covering water service rendered during the quarterly periods ending on March 31 and October 31 shall be based on estimates. Bills for water service shall become due and payable on the 20th day of the month following the period for which the service has been rendered. 
(Prior Code, § 13.46) 
Sec. 13-198. - Charges for fire protection service. 
(a)  For public fire protection service to the city, the annual charge shall be $509,701.00 to cover the use of mains and hydrants up to and including the terminal hydrant and connection on each main existing for the 1997 test year. For all extensions of fire protection service, there shall be an additional annual charge of $691.00 per net hydrant added to the system in excess of 357 hydrants. 
(b)  This service shall include the use of hydrants for fire protection service only and such quantities of water as may be demanded for the purposes of extinguishing fires within the municipal boundary. This service shall also include water used for testing equipment and training personnel. For all other purposes, the metered or other rates set forth, or as may be filed with the public service commission, shall apply. 
(c)  The annual public fire protection charge shall never be less than the base amount. 
(Prior Code, § 13.65) 
Sec. 13-199. - Contract term; disconnection and reconnection at customer's request before end of contract term. 
    A consumer shall be considered the same consumer provided the reconnection is requested for the same location by any member of the same family, or if a place of business, by any partner or employee of the same business. 
(Prior Code, § 13.48) 
Sec. 13-200. - Reconnection charge after disconnection for failure to pay. 
    A reconnection charge as follows, payable in advance, shall be required from consumers whose services are disconnected because of nonpayment of bills when due (not including disconnection for failure to comply with deposit or guarantee rules), and if disconnected because of seasonal use. Any outstanding bills, such as meter damage, delinquent bills, penalties, etc., shall be paid before such reconnection is made. 
During Normal Business Hrs. After Normal Business Hrs. Reinstallation of meters and Valve turned on at curb cock $40.00 $55.00  
(Prior Code, § 13.49) 
Sec. 13-201. - Discontinuance of water request. 
    To discontinue the supply of city water to a property or unit of service, notice shall be given to the city water utility office during office hours and arrangements made to have the premises accessible for the removal of the meter by water utility personnel. The water shall be shut off at the curb stop and the meter removed. If the building is too razed, the water utility shall be so notified so the meter may be removed. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the protection of the meter from damage. A bill for the water used prior to discontinuance shall be rendered in accordance with the rates and regulations governing special readings, except the special fee shall not be charged. 
(Prior Code, § 13.50) 
Sec. 13-202. - Charges for water wasted due to leaks. 
    The utility is not responsible for water lost through leaks in plumbing or otherwise. Customers are responsible for keeping their own plumbing in repair. 
(Prior Code, § 13.51) 
Sec. 13-203. - Billing for special water services. 
(a)  Metered or estimated; what constitutes bulk water sale. All bulk water supplied from the water system through hydrants or other connections shall be metered, or at the direction of the utility, estimated. Utility personnel or utility-approved party shall supervise the delivery of water. Bulk water sales are: 
(1)  Water supplied to tank truck or from hydrant for the purpose of extinguishing fires outside the utility's immediate service area; 
(2)  Water supplied by tank truck or from hydrant for purposes other than extinguishing fires such as irrigation or the filling of swimming pools; or 
(3)  Water supplied from hydrants or other temporary connections for general service type applications. 
A charge for the volume of water used will be billed to the party using the water at $2.27 per 100 cubic feet. A service charge, in addition to the volumetric charge, will be $40.00. A deposit for the meter or valve will be required. The deposit collected shall be $25.00 and will be refunded upon return of the utility's equipment. Damaged or lost equipment will be repaired or replaced at the customer's expense. 
(b)  Deposit. A deposit shall be required for the water used, hydrant, hydrant wrench and meter with fittings according to the size of the meter as follows: present new cost of the size of meter required plus 30 percent to cover the other items. The utility shall record the meter, number, size and reading. The contractor or his authorized agent shall state the location where the meter is to be used, the contractor's name and address, and make the proper deposit. He shall sign a form provided at the water utility office, which shall constitute a contract for all water used and embody these rules and regulations as part of same. 
(c)  Meter and fittings removed at end of each working day. The meter and fittings as a unit shall be removed by the contractor at the end of each working day and the hydrant shall be properly closed and left until the next morning at beginning of work. If it becomes necessary to use the hydrant for fire any time while the meter is attached thereto, the contractor shall close the hydrant and remove the meter and fittings as a unit. The meter shall be protected from damage. 
(d)  Building and construction water service-MZ-1. For single family and small commercial buildings, apply the unmetered rate in section 13-197. For large commercial, industrial or multiple apartment buildings, a temporary metered installation shall be made and general, metered rates in section 13-197 applied. 
(e)  Return of supplies at end of construction. When the contractor no longer requires the hydrant for construction purposes, he shall return the meter, fittings and hydrant wrench to the water utility. Should the meter with fittings or the hydrant be damaged, the water utility shall repair the damage and bill the contractor for the cost of same plus 20 percent. Should the contractor fail to return the hydrant wrench, meter or fittings, he shall be billed for the cost of replacement. When all charges have been paid by the contractor, the water utility shall make a refund of the deposit following approval of the payment voucher at the next regular commission meeting. 
(f)  Failure of payment. Should the contractor fail to make payment of any or all charges, the water utility shall, after 60 days, deduct the charges from the deposit and refund the remainder as specified. 
(Prior Code, § 13.52(1)-(6)) 
Sec. 13-204. - Temporary metered supply. 
(a)  Deposits. A consumer or owner of a premises may apply for a temporary water supply on a meter basis, in which case such applicant shall make and maintain a monetary deposit of not less than $25.00 for each meter installed, as security for payment for use of water and for such other charges which may arise from the use of the supply. 
(b)  Charges. The charge for setting the valve and furnishing and setting the meter shall be $40.00 during normal business hours and $55.00 after normal business hours. Water usage shall be billed at present rates. 
(c)  Refund of deposit. All moneys deposited as security for payment of charges arising from the use of this temporary metered supply, shall be refunded to the depositor on the termination of the use of water, the payment of all charges levied against the depositor and the return of the meter and equipment. 
(Prior Code, § 13.52(7)) 
Sec. 13-205. - Application for water for construction purposes. 
(a)  When water is requested for construction purposes, or for filling tanks or other such uses, an application therefor shall be made to the utility, in writing, upon application provided for that purpose in the utility's office, giving a statement of the amount of construction work to be done, or the size of the tank to be filled, etc. Payment for the water for construction may be required in advance at the scheduled rates. The service pipe must be installed inside the building from where the water must be drawn. No connection with the service pipe at the curb shall be made without special permission from the utility. In no case, will any employee of the utility turn on water for construction work unless the contractor first presents a permit. Upon completion of the construction work, the contractor must return the original permit to the utility. 
(b)  Consumers shall not allow contractors, masons or other persons to take water from their premises without first showing a permit from the department. Any consumer failing to comply with this provision will have water service discontinued. 
(Prior Code, § 13.52(8)) 
Sec. 13-206. - Seasonal, emergency or temporary service. 
    Seasonal customers shall be served at the general service rate in section 13-191, except that each customer served under this rate shall pay an annual seasonal minimum bill equal to four times the applicable semiannual service charge. Water use in any quarter shall be billed at the applicable volume schedule in section 13-191 and the charge added to the annual seasonal service charge. 
(Prior Code, § 13.52(9)) 
Sec. 13-207. - Meter tests. 
(a)  Complaint meter tests. If a consumer demands that a test be made of his meter in addition to the periodic or installation test, he may have his meter retested by the utility at any time upon his conditional deposit of $2.00 per inch of nominal size or fraction thereof. Such deposit shall be returned to him by the water utility if the retests shows the meter to be over-registering by more than two percent. Otherwise, it shall be forfeited to the water utility by the depositor. Such retests on request of a consumer shall be made in his presence, if desired by him. 
(b)  Referee tests. Any water consumer may have official test of his meter made by the PSC upon request, accompanied by a deposit of $4.00 per inch of nominal size or fraction thereof and upon payment of meter transportation expense, if any. In such case, the meter test fee deposited by the consumer shall be refunded to him by the water utility furnishing the metered service in question if the PSC finds the meter to be over-registering beyond the allowable limit of error for new meters. 
(Prior Code, § 13.54) 
Sec. 13-208. - Billing for surreptitious use of water. 
    When the water utility has reasonable evidence that a consumer is obtaining water, in whole or in part, by means of devices or methods used to stop or interfere with the proper metering of the utility service being delivered, the utility reserves the right to estimate and present immediately a bill for service unmetered as a result of the interference, and such bill shall be payable subject to a 24-hour disconnection of service. When the utility shall have disconnected the consumer for any such reason, the utility will reconnect the consumer upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The consumer will be required to deposit with the utility, an amount sufficient to guarantee the payment of the consumer's bills for utility service to the utility. 
(2)  The consumer will be required to pay the utility for all damages to its equipment on the consumer's premises due to such stoppage or interference with its metering. 
(3)  The consumer must further agree to comply with reasonable requirements to protect the utility against further losses. 
(Prior Code, § 13.55) 
Secs. 13-209-13-237. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - NON-CONSERVANT AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION SURCHARGES 

Sec. 13-238. - Applicability. 
(a)  These surcharge rates shall be applicable to non-conservant water-cooled air conditioning or refrigeration units, as defined below, which are installed or operated for maintenance by heat removal of room or space temperatures which are not less than 60 degrees Fahrenheit, and which are operated in summer months. The surcharges shall be in addition to charges at regular applicable rates for water used by such units. 
(b)  These surcharge rates shall not apply to relatively uniform quarterly use for refrigeration or to air conditioning units that have no water connections or are conservant units as defined below. 
(Prior Code, § 13.53(1)) 
Sec. 13-239. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Conservant water-cooled unit means a unit that: 
(1)  Is equipped with a cooling tower, atmospheric condenser, spray pond, or other equipment which shall directly or indirectly cool refrigerant; and 
(2)  Can use water from the building plumbing system only for make-up water to replace water lost be evaporation or by flushing of the equipment; and 
(3)  Uses an average of less than 12 gallons of water an hour from the building plumbing system for each ton of cooling capacity when the unit is operating; and 
(4)  Has no piping connection to allow operation of the unit by direct use of water from the building plumbing system either in conjunction with, or in place of the cooling tower, atmospheric condenser, spray pond, or other recirculating and heat exchanging equipment. 
    Non-conservant water-cooled unit means a unit that: 
(1)  Uses water from the building plumbing system directly for cooling refrigerant, with discharge to waste or to lawn sprinklers or to any other place where the water is not cooled and reused for cooling the refrigerant; 
(2)  Uses an average of more than 12 gallons of water an hour from the building plumbing system for each ton of cooling capacity when the unit is operating; 
(3)  Has accompanying conservant equipment installed, but which has the piping so connected that a valve may be opened or other means are provided so the water may be taken from the building plumbing system to allow operation of the unit when the conservant equipment is out of service; or 
(4)  Uses water for air conditioning without the use of a compressor or cooling refrigerant. 
    Rated refrigerating capacity means the capacity of a unit in tons which shall be the greatest of the following: 
(1)  The manufacturerer's rating in tons per 24 hours of equivalent ice-making capacity. 
(2)  The 24-hour BTU rating of heat removal capacity divided by 288,000. 
(3)  The horsepower rating of the motor driving the refrigerant compressor. 
(4)  Nine-tenths of the horsepower rating of a motor driving both compressor and fan. 
(5)  Where none of the above ratings is available, or where question arises as to the accuracy of any rating, the rating shall be determined by measurement of power input to the compressor motor, the rate of fuel consumption, or other suitable means. 
(Prior Code, § 13.53(5)-(7)) 
Sec. 13-240. - Notification concerning installation of non-conservant units. 
    Each customer installing a new non-conservant air conditioning unit in his premises shall promptly notify the water department of the date of installation and shall furnish information from which the capacity rating of the unit may be computed. 
(Prior Code, § 13.53(4)) 
Sec. 13-241. - Billing and payment. 
(a)  The amount of any annual surcharge shall be billed after May 1 of each year, and shall be the entire annual surcharge based upon the capacity of non-conservant equipment installed prior to July 1 of each year. 
(b)  Partial-year surcharges for new equipment installed after July 1 of any year shall be billed after the date the proper surcharge has been determined. 
(c)  No surcharge shall be billed where equipment is installed, but has been physically disconnected from the building plumbing system. If, however, such equipment is reconnected and operated at any time before September 30 of any year, the entire annual surcharge shall be billed and paid for that year. 
(d)  The payment of surcharge bills shall be enforced the same as bills for other water service. 
(Prior Code, § 13.53(2)) 
Sec. 13-242. - Rate. 
(a)  Annual. An annual surcharge of $10.00 a ton of rated refrigerating capacity, as defined below, for non-conservant water-cooled air conditioning and refrigerating units shall be charged in addition to charges under other applicable rates. 
(b)  One-fourth of the annual surcharge shall be charged for each new unit installed between September 1 and September 30; one-half of the annual surcharge shall be charged for each new unit installed between August 1 and August 31; three-fourths of the annual surcharge shall be charged for each new unit installed between July 1 and July 31 of any year. 
(c)  Where non-conservant air conditioning is converted to conservant air conditioning by the installation of necessary equipment and the revision of water connections, the annual surcharge shall be reduced by 9/10 of the conversion between June 1 and June 30; by one-half for conversion between July 1 and July 31; and by one-fourth for conversion between August 1 and August 31 of any year. 
(Prior Code, § 13.53(3)) 
Secs. 13-243-13-262. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 13-263. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the city water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
(Prior Code, § 13.83(2)) 
Sec. 13-264. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of the municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of the supply shall have been approved by the city water utility and by the state department of natural resources in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 810.15. 
(Prior Code, § 13.83(1)) 
Sec. 13-265. - Inspection. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system where cross connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections is based on potential health hazards involved and shall be as established by the city water utility and as approved by the state department of natural resources. 
(b)  That upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the city water utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property served by a connection to the public water system of the city for cross connections. If entry is refused, such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. On request the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property. 
(Prior Code, § 13.83(3)) 
Sec. 13-266. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  The city water utility is authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. ch. 68. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connections have been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  If it is determined by the city water utility that a cross connection or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the clerk of the city and delivered to the customer's premises, service may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. ch. 68 within ten days of the emergency discontinuance. 
(Prior Code, § 13.83(4)) 
Sec. 13-267. - Applicability of city plumbing regulations. 
    The city has adopted the state plumbing code by reference. This division does not supercede the state plumbing code and city ordinances pertaining to plumbing, but is supplementary to them. 
(Prior Code, § 13.83(5)) 
Secs. 13-268-13-297. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PRIVATE WELLS 

Sec. 13-298. - Purpose. 
    To protect public health, safety and welfare and to prevent contamination of groundwater by ensuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells or wells which may act as conduits for contamination of groundwater or wells which may be illegally cross-connected to the municipal water system, are properly maintained or abandoned in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 810.16. 
(Prior Code, § 13.84(1)) 
Sec. 13-299. - Applicability. 
    This division applies to all wells located on-premises served by the city municipal water system. 
(Prior Code, § 13.84(2)) 
Sec. 13-300. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Municipal water system means a community water system owned by a city, village, county, town, town sanitary district, utility district or a federal, state, county, or municipally owned institution for congregate care of correction, or a privately owned water utility serving the foregoing. 
    Noncomplying means a well or pump installation which does not comply with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812, Standards of Existing Installation, and which has not been granted a variance pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812. 
    Pump installation means the pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water from a well including the discharge piping, the underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or caps. 
    Unsafe means a well or pump installation which produces water which is bacteriologically contaminated or exceeds the drinking water standards of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812 or for which a health advisory has been issued by the department of natural resources. 
    Unused means a well or pump installation which is not used or does not have a functional pumping system. 
    Well means an excavation or opening into the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving, or other methods for the purpose of obtaining groundwater for consumption or other use. 
    Well abandonment means the filling and sealing of a well according to the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812. 
(Prior Code, § 13.84(3)) 
Sec. 13-301. - Abandonment required. 
    All wells on-premises served by the municipal water system shall be abandoned in accordance with the terms of this division and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812 unless a well operation permit has been obtained by the well owner from the city. 
(Prior Code, § 13.84(4)) 
Sec. 13-302. - Well operation permit. 
    The city water utility shall grant a permit to a well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed five-years providing the conditions of this section are met. An owner may renew a well operation permit by submitting information verifying that the conditions of this section are met. The city water utility, or its agent, may conduct inspections or have water quality tests conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain or verify information necessary for consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the clerk. The following conditions must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit: 
(1)  The well and pump installation shall meet or shall be upgraded to meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812 and have a functional pumping system. 
(2)  The well construction and pump installation shall have a history of producing bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by at least two samples taken a minimum of two weeks apart. No exception to this condition may be made for unsafe wells, unless the state department of natural resources approves, in writing, the continued use of the well. 
(3)  There shall be no cross-connections between the well's pump installation and the municipal water system. 
(4)  The proposed use of the well and pump installation can be justified as reasonable in addition to water provided by the municipal water system. 
(Prior Code, § 13.84(5)) 
Sec. 13-303. - Abandonment procedures. 
(a)  All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this division or rule shall be abandoned according to the procedures and methods of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812. All debris, pumps, piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations shall be removed prior to abandonment. 
(b)  The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall notify the clerk at least 48 hours prior to commencement of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of the well shall be observed by a certified well driller or pump installer. 
(c)  An abandonment report form, supplied by the department of natural resources, shall be submitted by the well owner to the clerk and the department of natural resources within 30 days of the completion of the well abandonment. 
(Prior Code, § 13.84(6)) 
Sec. 13-304. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any well owner violating any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 and the cost of prosecution. Each day of violation is a separate offense. If a person fails to comply with this division for more than 30 days after receiving written notice of the violation, the municipality may impose a penalty and cause the well abandonment to be performed and the expense to be assessed as a special tax against the property. 
(b)  Any person who fails to obtain a permit required hereunder or who violates any of the rules or regulations established hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 25-11. 
(Prior Code, §§ 13.84(7), 13.85) 
Secs. 13-305-13-326. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 13-327. - Purpose, authority and application. 
(a)  Residents in the city depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of this division is to institute land use regulations and restrictions to protect the city's municipal water supply and well fields, and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(b)  Statutory authority of the city to enact these regulations was established by the state legislature in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(a) and (c). Under these statutes, the city has the authority to enact this division, effective in the incorporated areas of the city, to encourage the protection of groundwater resources. 
(c)  The regulations specified in this division shall apply within the city's corporate limits. 
(Prior Code, § 13.86(2)) 
Sec. 13-328. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aquifer means a saturated, permeable, geologic formation that contains, and will yield, significant quantities of water. 
    Existing facilities means current facilities, practices and activities which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution within that portion of the city's wellhead protection area that lies within the corporate limits of the city. Existing facilities include, but are not limited to, the type listed in the department of natural resources' public water supply potential contaminant use inventory form 3300-215, which is incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
    Groundwater protection overlay district means that portion of the recharge area for the city wells that is designated as a "wellhead protection area" in the city's wellhead protection plan on file in the office of the city clerk and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
    Recharge area means the land area which contributes water to a well by infiltration of water into the subsurface and movement with groundwater toward the well. This area extends beyond the corporate limits of the city. 
    Well field means a piece of land used primarily for the purpose of supplying a location for construction of wells to supply a municipal water system. 
(Prior Code, § 13.86(3); Ord. No. 946 , § 2, 4-18-2018) 
Sec. 13-329. - Groundwater protection overlay district. 
(a)  Separation distances. The following minimum separation distances as specified in s. NR 811.12(5) Wis. Admin. Code shall be maintained within the groundwater protection overlay district. 
(1)  Ten feet between a well and an emergency or standby power system that is operated by the same facility which operates the well and that has a double wall above ground storage tank with continuous electronic interstitial leakage monitoring. These facilities shall meet the installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written approval from the department of safety and professional services or its designated Local Program Operator under s. ATCP 93.110. 
(2)  Fifty feet between a well and storm sewer main or a sanitary sewer main where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main class materials and joints. Gravity sanitary sewers shall be successfully air pressure tested in place. The air pressure test shall meet or exceed the requirements of the four psi low pressure air test for plastic gravity sewer lines found in the latest edition of Standard Specifications for Sewer & Water Construction in Wisconsin. Force mains shall be successfully pressure tested with water to meet the AWWA C600 pressure and leakage testing requirements for one hour at 125 percent of the pump shut-off head. 
(3)  Two hundred feet between a well and any sanitary sewer main not constructed of water main class materials, sanitary sewer manhole, lift station or single family residential fuel oil tank or private onsite wastewater treatment system (POWTS) treatment tank or holding tank component and associated piping. 
(4)  Three hundred feet between a well field and any farm underground storage tank system or other underground storage tank system with double wall and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the tank and any piping connected to it. These installations shall meet the most restrictive installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written approval from the department of safety and professional services or its designated local program operator under s. ATCP 93.110, Wis. Admin. Code. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances. 
(5)  Three hundred feet between a well field and any farm above ground storage tank with double wall, or single wall tank with other secondary containment and under a canopy; other above ground storage tank system with double wall, or single wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy and with electronic interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring for a single wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations shall meet the most restrictive installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260, Wis. Admin. Code, and receive written approval from the department of commerce or its designated local program operator under s. ATCP 93.110, Wis. Admin. Code. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances. 
(6)  Four hundred feet between a well and a POWTS dispersal component with a design capacity of less than 12,000 gallons per day, a cemetery, or a stormwater retention or detention pond. 
(7)  Six hundred feet between a well field and any farm underground storage tank system or other underground storage tank system with double wall and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the tank and any piping connected to it; any farm above ground storage tank with double wall, or single wall tank with other secondary containment and under a canopy or other above ground storage tank system with double wall, or single wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy; and with electronic interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring for a single wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations shall meet the standard double wall tank or single wall tank secondary containment installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written approval from the department of safety and professional services or its designated local program operator under s. ATCP 93.110. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances. 
(8)  One thousand feet between a well and land application of municipal, commercial or industrial waste; boundaries of a land spreading facility for spreading of petroleum-contaminated soil regulated under Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 718 while that facility is in operation; industrial, commercial or municipal waste water lagoons or storage structures; manure stacks or storage structures; or POWTS dispersal component with a design capacity of 12,000 galons per day or more. 
(9)  One thousand two hundred feet between a well and any solid waste storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, one time disposal or small demolition facility; sanitary landfill; any property with residual groundwater contamination that exceeds Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 140 enforcement standards that is shown on the department of natural resources' geographic information system registry of closed remediation sites; coal storage area; salt or deicing material storage area; gasoline or fuel oil storage tanks that have not received written approval from the state department of safety and professional services or its designated local program operator under Wis. Admin. Code s. ATCP 93.110; for a single wall tank installation. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances; and bulk fuel storage facilities; and pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the groundwater protection overlay district subject to the separations distances in Section E: 
(1)  Parks, provided there is no on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated with this use. 
(2)  Playgrounds. 
(3)  Wildlife areas. 
(4)  Non-motorized trails, such as bike, skiing, nature and fitness trails. 
(5)  Residential, commercial and industrial property, which is municipally sewered, and free of flammable and combustible liquid storage or underground storage tanks (USTs). 
(6)  Routine tillage, planting, and field management operations in support of agricultural crop production, where nutrients from legume, manure, and commercial sources are accounted for and credited toward crop nutrient need. The combination of all nutrient sources applied or available on individual fields may not exceed University of Wisconsin soil test recommendations for that field. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be conditionally permitted in the groundwater protection overlay district subject to the separations distances in section (a) and governed by the conditional use provisions in section 13-330 of this chapter. 
(1)  Hydrocarbon, petroleum or hazardous chemical storage tanks. 
(2)  Motor vehicle services, including filling and service stations, repair, renovation and body work. 
(3)  Residential, commercial and industrial property, which is municipally sewered, but may contain flammable and combustible liquid storage or underground storage tanks (USTs). 
(4)  Storm water retention or detention basins. 
(5)  Geothermal wells, also known as ground source heat pump along with any associated piping and/or ground loop component installations. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the groundwater protection overlay district. 
(1)  Chemical manufacturers (Standard Industrial Classification Major Group 28). 
(2)  Coal storage. 
(3)  Dry cleaners. 
(4)  Electroplating facilities. 
(5)  Foundries and forge plants. 
(6)  Industrial liquid waste storage lagoons and pits. 
(7)  Landfills and any other solid waste facility, except post-consumer recycling. 
(8)  Manure and animal waste storage. 
(9)  Mining of any kind, including metallic, sand and aggregate pits. 
(10)  Pesticide and fertilizer dealer, manufacturing, transfer or storage facilities. 
(11)  Private on-site wastewater treatment systems or holding tanks receiving 12,000 gallons per day or more. 
(12)  Railroad yards and maintenance stations. 
(13)  Rendering plants and slaughterhouses. 
(14)  Salt or deicing material bulk storage. 
(15)  Salvage or junk yards. 
(16)  Septage or sludge spreading, storage or treatment. 
(17)  Septage, wastewater, or sewage lagoons. 
(18)  Stockyards and feedlots. 
(19)  Wood preserving operations. 
(20)  Any other use determined by the city council to be similar in nature to the above listed uses. 
(Prior Code, § 13.86(4); Ord. No. 946 , § 2, 4-18-2018) 
Sec. 13-330. - Review of permit application. 
(a)  The city public works board shall review all requests for approval of permits for land uses in the groundwater protection overlay district. All determinations shall be made by the city public works board within 60 days of any request for approval, provided however, that this 60-day period of limitation may be extended by the city public works board for good cause, as determined in the sole and absolute discretion of the city public works board. 
(b)  Upon reviewing all requests for approval, the city public works board shall consider all of the following factors: 
(1)  The city's responsibility, as a public water supplier, to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
(2)  The degree to which the proposed land use practice, activity or facility may seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality in the city or the city's recharge area. 
(3)  The economic hardship which may be faced by the landowner if the application is denied. 
(4)  The availability of alternative options to the applicant, and the cost, effect and extent of availability of the alternative options. 
(5)  The proximity of the applicant's property to other potential sources of contamination. 
(6)  The then existing condition of the city's groundwater public water wells and well fields, and the vulnerability to further contamination. 
(7)  The direction of flow of groundwater and other factors in the area of the applicant's property which may affect the speed of the groundwater flow, including topography, depth of soil, extent of aquifer, depth to water table and location of private wells. 
(8)  Any other hydrogeological data or information which is available from any public or private agency or organization. 
(9)  The potential benefit, both economic and social, from the approval of the applicant's request for a permit. 
(c)  Any exemptions granted will be made conditional and may include environmental or safety monitoring which indicates whether the facility may be emitting any releases or harmful contaminants to the surrounding environment. The facility will be held financially responsible for all environmental cleanup costs. The city public works board may require that a bond be posted for future monitoring and cleanup costs if deemed necessary at the time of granting an exemption. 
(d)  The applicant shall be solely and exclusively responsible for all costs associated with the application, including all of the following: 
(1)  The cost of an environmental impact study if so required by the city or its designee. 
(2)  The cost of groundwater monitoring or groundwater wells if required by the city or its designee. 
(3)  The costs of an appraisal for the property or other property evaluation expense if required by the city or its designee. 
(4)  The costs of city's employee's time associated in any way with the application based on the hourly rate paid to the employee multiplied by a factor, determined by the city, representing the city's costs for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation and other similar benefits. 
(5)  The cost of city equipment employed. 
(6)  The cost of mileage reimbursed to the city employees. 
(Prior Code, § 13.86(5)) 
Sec. 13-331. - Requirements for existing facilities and land uses. 
(a)  Existing facilities shall provide copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approvals or certificates and ongoing environmental monitoring results to the city. 
(b)  Existing facilities shall provide additional environmental or safety monitoring as deemed necessary by the city public works board, specifically including the production of all environmental statements detailing the extent of chemical use and storage on the property. 
(c)  Existing facilities shall replace equipment or expand in a manner that improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already in existence. 
(d)  Existing facilities shall have the responsibility of devising or filing with the city, a contingency plan satisfactory to the public works board for the immediate notification of the appropriate city officers in the event of an emergency. 
(e)  Property owners with an existing agricultural use shall be exempt from requirements of this division as they relate to restrictions on agricultural uses, provided however, that such exemption shall only apply to the property owners in existence at the time of passage of the ordinance and this exemption shall not constitute a covenant running with the land. 
(Prior Code, § 13.86(6)) 
Sec. 13-332. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  In the event an individual or facility causes the release of any contaminants which endanger of the groundwater protection overlay district, the individual or facility causing the release shall immediately cease and desist, and provide clean-up satisfactory to the city. 
(b)  The individual/facility shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup and the city consultant fees at the invoice amount plus administrative costs for oversight, review and documentation, including the following: 
(1)  The cost of city employees' time associated in any way with the clean-up based on the hourly rate paid to the employee multiplied by a factor determined by the city, representing the city's cost for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation, and similar benefits. 
(2)  The cost of city equipment employed. 
(3)  The cost of mileage reimbursed to the city employees attributed to the clean-up. 
(c)  Following any such discharge, the city may require additional test monitoring or other requirements as outlined in section 13-331 and this section. 
(d)  Violations. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land or water in violation of this division. Any person who is specifically damaged by such violations may institute appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this division. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00 plus the costs of the prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days, or in the alternative, shall have such costs added to their real estate property tax bill as a lien against the property. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 13.86(7)) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall govern the design, construction, alteration, erection, installation, additions, demolition, moving and repair of all buildings and structures, including building components and systems. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01) 
Sec. 14-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building accessory means any detached building or structure, not used as a dwelling unit, but whose use is incidental to that of the main building and which is located on the same property. 
    Building, attached means any building or structure attached directly to the principal building, or attached by means of an enclosed or open breezeway, porch, terrace or vestibule; or so constructed as to form an integral part of the principal building. 
    Building component means any subsystem, subassembly or other system designed for use in or as part of a structure which may include structural, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems and other systems affecting health and safety. 
    Building, detached means any building or structure which is not physically connected to the principal building in any manner. 
    Building system means plans, specifications and documentation for a system of manufactured buildings or for a type or a system of building components, which may include structural, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and variations which are submitted as part of the building system. 
    Dwelling means a building which is designed or used, or which in intended to be used, as a residence or place of abode. 
    Equipment means as specifically regulated in this chapter, includes heating, cooling, air conditioning and ventilating systems; plumbing and sanitary systems; electric light and power systems; telephone, electronic, radio signaling and annunciation systems; dry cleaning, dyeing and washing machines; elevators and dumb waiters; gas pipe systems; sprinklers, standpipes, fire extinguishers and fire protection apparatus; pumps, oil burners, stokers and conveyors; refrigeration systems; devices, machinery and apparatus of every description; furnaces, boilers, high or low pressure steam systems; gasoline pumps; all movable or portable containers of every description; all air pressure or other tanks; and all other self-contained systems used in conjunction with buildings or structures. 
    Garage, private means a building, or portion of a building, in which only motor vehicles used by the premises are stored or kept. 
    Occupancy means the purpose for which a building, structure, equipment, materials or premises, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used as regulated by this chapter. 
    Structure means anything which is constructed, erected and framed of component parts and which is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation, or on the ground for any occupancy or use whatsoever, excluding fencing. 
    Use. See Occupancy. 
(Prior Code, § 14.10) 
Sec. 14-3. - Zoning. 
    No provision of this chapter shall be construed to repeal, modify or constitute an alternative to any lawful zoning regulation. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01(1)) 
Sec. 14-4. - Alteration permitted. 
    When not in conflict with any other regulation, alteration to any building or structure, or building component or system accommodating a legal occupancy or use but of nonconforming type of construction, which involves either the structural members of floors, roofs, beams, girders, columns, bearing or other walls, room arrangement, heating or air conditioning systems, electrical systems, plumbing systems, light and ventilation systems, changes in location of exit stairways or exits, or any or all of the above, then such existing construction shall be made to conform to this chapter, applicable to such occupancy and use and given type of construction. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01(2)) 
Sec. 14-5. - Alterations and repairs required. 
    When any building or structure or building component thereof, whether existing or being constructed, has deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to less than is designed for safe performance level, the owner of the building or structure shall commence within 48 hours to cause such building or structure, or building component thereof, to be restored to its designed or safe building or structure, or building component thereof, to be considered a menace to public safety and welfare and shall be ordered vacated and disconnected from utilities and thereafter no further occupancy or use shall be permitted. If the orders of the department of building inspection are not complied with after due notice and within 30 days, the department shall proceed as required by this chapter to have such building or structure demolished. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01(3)) 
Sec. 14-6. - Repairs. 
    Repairs for the purposes of maintenance or replacements in an existing building or structure, or building component, which do not involve the structural integrity, light and ventilation, room arrangement, access or efficiency of exit stairways or exits, fire protection or electrical system and which do not increase a given occupancy and use, shall be deemed minor repairs. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01(4)) 
Sec. 14-7. - Use of unsanitary building. 
    No person shall occupy or use, or permit to be occupied or used, any building or structure that is unsanitary, dilapidated, deteriorated or out of repair, thereby being unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use until the regulations of this chapter are complied with. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01(5)) 
Sec. 14-8. - Extent of deterioration. 
    The amount and extent of deterioration of any building, structure or building component shall be determined by the department of building inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01(6)) 
Sec. 14-9. - Construction. 
    These regulations shall be construed to secure their expressed intent and to ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they are dependent upon building construction. 
(Prior Code, § 14.01(7)) 
Sec. 14-10. - Building inspection department. 
    There is created the department of building inspection, henceforth to be referred to as the department. The building inspector shall act as head of this department, under the direction of the public safety committee. 
(1)  Members. The department shall consist of the building inspector, electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, code enforcement officer and their deputies. 
(2)  Duties. Members of the department are vested with the authority and responsibility to enforce this chapter and all laws, rules and orders controlling safe building construction. They shall make inspection at the site of buildings damaged by any cause whatsoever to determine the safety of buildings affected thereby. 
(3)  Rights. Members of the department shall have the power and authority at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to enter upon any public or private premises and make inspection thereof, and to require the production of any required permit or license therefor. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to the above describe representatives of this city while in the performance of their duties. 
(4)  Records. There shall be kept in the department a record of all applications for permits and each permit shall be regularly numbered in the order of its issue. Also, a record showing the number, description and size of all buildings erected indicating the kind of materials used and the cost of each building shall be kept. There shall be kept a record of all inspections made, all removal and condemnation of buildings and all fees collected. The building inspector shall make an annual report to the committee relative to these matters. 
(Prior Code, § 14.02) 
Sec. 14-11. - Building inspector may issue citations. 
    The building inspector may issue citations with respect to ordinances that are directly related to his official responsibilities. 
Sec. 14-12. - Contractor registration. 
(a)  All contractors (with the exception of electrical contractors) whose work requires them to apply for building permits are required to obtain city contractor registration. Registration is for the calendar year, with a non-prorated registration fee of $20.00. To be eligible for registration, the contractor must show proof of the required state contractor licensing as required by the department of safety and professional services. 
(b)  Failure to obtain the above registration will result in denial of building permits until the contractor has properly registered. 
(Prior Code, § 14.025) 
Sec. 14-13. - Owners constitutional privilege. 
    Unless specifically directed by a section, nothing in this chapter shall prevent a property owner from personally doing electrical, mechanical, plumbing or structural work in his own single family residence owned and occupied by him as a permanent residence, provided that the work shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 14.06) 
Sec. 14-14. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any order or ruling of the department, except an order or ruling by the building inspector, may appeal from such order or ruling to the public safety committee within ten days after written notice of the order or ruling is delivered to him. Such appeal shall be in writing, setting forth the order appealed from and the respects in which such person claims such order or ruling is erroneous or illegal. Such notice of appeal shall be filed with the clerk who shall thereupon notify the department. The appeal shall be heard at the next public safety committee meeting, after consideration thereof, shall affirm, reverse or modify such order or ruling as is just in the premises. No such modification or reversal shall conflict with any state law, code or lawful order. The order or ruling of the department shall remain in effect until acted upon by the committee. 
(Prior Code, § 14.07) 
Sec. 14-15. - Violation. 
    No person shall erect, use, occupy, install or maintain any building, structure or building component in violation of any provision of this chapter, or cause, permit or suffer such violations to be committed. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions and penalties as set forth in section 25-11. If in any action a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any member of the department constitute a defense. 
(Prior Code, § 14.08) 
Secs. 14-16-14-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS, CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 14-32. - Permit required. 
    A permit shall be obtained by the owner or his agent from the department for any of the following: 
(1)  Building. For new construction, additions or alterations to existing buildings or structures. All demolition or moving of any building, or portion thereof, into, within, or out of the city. 
(2)  Electrical. All additions, alterations or new installations of electrical wiring, equipment or devices, except that no permit shall be required for the repair or replacement of defective fittings, fixtures, receptacles, sockets or switches or for the installation of less than six outlets. 
(3)  Mechanical. All new installations of any boiler furnace, incinerator, wood burner, including a fireplace, or any other heat producing apparatus; any air cooled, water cooled or mechanically cooled air conditioning or refrigeration system; also any chimney, distributions system, fuel supply system, storage tank, ventilation system or any other equipment pertaining to the use of flammable gases, liquids or solids. Also, all additions, alterations or modifications to any of the above which involve more than 50 percent of the mechanical system, as determined by the building inspector. 
(4)  Plumbing. All new installations and all additions to an existing system; all new turf sprinkler system installations; all alterations or modifications involving more than 50 percent of an existing system, as determined by the plumbing inspector; all connections to public sewer or water mains. 
(5)  Signs and canopies. For the erection of any billboard; for the erection of any sign or canopy. Such permit shall include any electrical work necessary. 
(6)  Manufactured home permit requirements. The plumbing contractor and electrical contractor that make hookups shall apply for a permit and call for an inspection prior to skirting installation. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03(1)) 
Sec. 14-33. - Application for permit. 
    Application for any permit shall be on forms prescribed by the department. With such application, there shall be submitted two complete sets of plans, specifications and surveys. The department may waive such filing of plans, specifications or surveys if, in the opinion of the inspector, the character of the work is sufficiently described in the application. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03(2)) 
Sec. 14-34. - Department to issue permits. 
(a)  If the department finds that the proposed work will comply in every respect with this article, other city ordinances, laws of the state, and lawful orders issued pursuant thereto, a permit shall be issued. After receiving a permit, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect which involves any of the above-mentioned ordinances, laws, orders or safety of the project, except with the written consent of the department filed with the application. 
(b)  In appropriate cases the department may issue a permit for part of a project prior to receiving plans for the entire project prior to receiving plans for the entire project. No person shall commence work on any building or structure, or part thereof, before the proper permits are issued. The issuance of a permit upon the plans thereafter requiring the correction of any errors in such plans and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of any ordinance, law or lawful order. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03(3)) 
Sec. 14-35. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The department may revoke any permit, certificate of occupancy or approval issued under the regulations of this article any may stop construction or use of approved new materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Whenever there is a violation of this article or of any other ordinance, law, lawful order or state statute relating to the same subject matter. 
(2)  Whenever the continuance of construction becomes dangerous to life or property. 
(3)  Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provision of the application for permit, or of the permit. 
(4)  Whenever there is inadequate supervision provided on the work site. 
(5)  Whenever any false statement or misrepresentations has been made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data specifications or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  The notice revoking the permit, approval or certificate of occupancy shall be in writing and may be served upon the owner or his agent, the person having charge of construction or may be posted on the building, structure, equipment or premises in question. After the notice is served, no person shall proceed with any construction operation on the premises and the revoked permit shall be null and void. Before any construction or operation is resumed, a new permit, as required by this article, shall be procured and the proper fee paid therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03(4)) 
Sec. 14-36. - Fee. 
    Before receiving any permit, the owner or his agent shall pay to the city treasurer the applicable fees as specified in Table No. 1. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03(5)) 
Sec. 14-37. - Lapse of permit. 
    All permits shall lapse unless operations are commenced within six months of issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended at any time after work has commenced for a period of 60 days, unless extended by the department. In any case, all work shall be completed within 24 months from the date of issuance of the permit. Before any work is commenced or recommenced after lapse of a permit, a new permit shall be issued and the required fees paid therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03(6)) 
Sec. 14-38. - Failure to obtain permit. 
    No person shall commence any work requiring a permit without first obtaining the required permits therefor. In addition to other penalties provided for in this article, double fees shall be charged for any permits which are issued after work has been commenced by any contractor. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03(7)) 
Sec. 14-39. - Card. 
    A card signed by a member of the department indicating the permits issued shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the work site during construction operations. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03(8)) 
Sec. 14-40. - Streets established to grade. 
    A building permit shall not be issued until the streets abutting the building site are established to grade. 
(Prior Code, § 14.03(9)) 
Sec. 14-41. - Inspection. 
(a)  Notification. The permit holder shall notify the department when ready for the following inspections: 
(1)  Inspection of footings and foundation walls for conformance with plans and specifications. Underground plumbing may be inspected at this time, if ready. 
(2)  Inspection of rough-ins, including framing, energy, electrical, mechanical and plumbing, as they are ready and prior to being concealed. 
(3)  Inspection prior to pouring concrete floors for sub-grade, drain tile, forms and under-floor building components. 
(4)  Inspection upon completion of project and prior to occupancy or use. 
(b)  Coordinated inspection. All provisions of the laws and regulations of this city, and of legally adopted rules of local health and fire officials in respect to the operation, equipment, housekeeping, fire protection, handling and storage of flammable materials, liquids and gases, and the maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions of use or occupancy in all buildings shall be strictly enforced by the administrative officials to whom such authority is delegated. Whenever an inspection by any authorized enforcement officer discloses a violation of this article, or of any other rules, regulation or law, he shall immediately notify the administrative officer having jurisdiction of the violation. 
(Prior Code, § 14.04) 
Sec. 14-42. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Inspection. A final inspection of all new buildings, additions and alterations shall be made by the department. If no violations of this article or any other law or ordinance is found, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued, stating the purpose for which the building is to be used. No building or portion thereof shall be occupied until such certificate is issued, nor shall any building be occupied in any manner which conflicts with the conditions set forth in the certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Use discontinued. 
(1)  Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this article, the department shall order such use or occupancy discontinued and the building or portion thereof vacated by notice served on any person using or causing such use or occupancy to be continued and such person shall vacate such building or portion thereof within ten days after receipt of the notice or shall proceed diligently to make the building or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Any building, structure or premises, or any portion thereof, hereafter vacated or damaged by any cause whatsoever so as to jeopardize public safety or health, shall not be used or occupied under any existing certificate of occupancy or without the same, until an application has been filed and a new certificate of occupancy issued. 
(c)  Change. No person shall change the use of any building, structure, premises, or any part thereof, without first obtaining from the department an approval of the change and a certificate of occupancy therefor. 
(d)  Hardship. The building inspector may permit the occupancy of any building or structure prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy in cases of hardship, as in his judgment warrant occupancy and the premises are determined to be safe and sanitary. The building inspector shall determine the time within which such building can be completed, but not greater than 60 days. 
(Prior Code, § 14.05) 
Secs. 14-43-14-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STRUCTURAL AND MECHANICAL 

Sec. 14-73. - Adoption of state regulations. 
(a)  Uniform dwelling code. The village adopts by reference as though fully set forth in this article, the state uniform dwelling code and all amendments thereto, a copy of which is on file in the office of the village administrator-clerk, applicable to all new and existing one- and two-family dwelling including alterations and additions thereto. The adopted code is comprised of the following state administrative rules: 
(1)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 320, Administration and Enforcement. 
(2)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 321, Construction Standards. 
(3)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 322, Energy Conservation. 
(4)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 323, Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning. 
(5)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 324, Electrical Standards. 
(6)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 325, Plumbing. 
(7)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 327, Camping Units. 
(b)  Commercial building code. The village adopts by reference as though fully set forth in this article, the state commercial building code and all amendments thereto, a copy of which is on file in the office of the village administrator-clerk, applicable to those classes of building to which such code applies. The adopted code is comprised of the following state administrative rules: 
(1)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 361, Administration and Enforcement. 
(2)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 362, Buildings and Structures. 
(3)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 363, Energy Conservation. 
(4)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 364, Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning. 
(5)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 365, Fuel Gas Appliances. 
(6)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 366, Existing Buildings. 
(Prior Code, § 14.15) 
Sec. 14-74. - Street repair. 
    Any owner or contractor performing construction work within the city shall restore any city street or alley damaged by their work or equipment to original condition or better, except where damage is restricted to normal wear and tear. The owner or contractor shall consider the time of year and soil and road conditions when scheduling and performing such work. It is the owner's or contractor's responsibility to document substandard areas of pavement or boulevards before construction commences to prove that such damage was not caused by their work. A warning of this standard shall be included on building permits issued by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 14.15(c)) 
Sec. 14-75. - Enforcement. 
    Primary enforcement of the structural-mechanical portion of this article shall be by the building inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 14.16) 
Sec. 14-76. - Regulations for moving buildings. 
(a)  General. No person shall move any building or structure upon any of the public rights-of-way of this city without first obtaining a permit from the department and payment of the proper fee. Every such permit issued by the department shall designate the route to be taken, the conditions to be complied with and shall limit the time during which such moving operations shall be continued. The police department shall be notified prior to the commencement of any moving operation. 
(b)  Moving damaged buildings. No building shall be repaired, altered or moved into or within the city that has deteriorated or been damaged by any cause more than 50 percent of its equalized value, and no permit shall be granted to repair, alter or move such building within or into the city. 
(c)  Continuous movement. The movement of buildings shall be a continuous operation until such movement is fully completed. All such operations shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street crossing or intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lighted lanterns shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night. 
(d)  Street repair. Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall, within one day after such building reaches its destination, report that fact to the building inspector who shall, in the company of the city engineer, inspect the streets and highways over which such building has been moved and ascertain their condition. If the removal of the building has caused any damage to any street or highway, they shall forthwith be placed in as good repair as they were before the permit was granted. The person holding such permit and the sureties in his bond shall be responsible for the payment of all such damages. 
(e)  Conformance with Code. Prior to issuing a permit to move a building into or within the city, the building inspector shall inspect the building and determine if it is in a sound and stable condition, and of the construction that it will meet the requirements of this article in all respects. Plans shall be submitted to indicate that the building will be in conformance with this article in all respects prior to its occupancy within the borders of this city. 
(f)  Bond. Before a permit is issued to move a building over any public way, the party applying therefor shall give a bond to the city in the amount of $10,000.00. Such bond to be executed by a corporate surety or by a cash deposit with the city to indemnify the city for any costs or expenses incurred by it in connection with any claims for damages to any person or property, and for the payment of any judgment together with any costs or expenses in connection therewith, arising out of the removal of the building for which the permit was issued. The bond shall be further conditioned upon the permittee erecting adequate barriers within 48 hours filling in such excavation for the protection of children and travelers. Police escort fees shall be paid in advance. 
(g)  Insurance. The building inspector shall also require public liability insurance covering injury to persons in the sum of not less than $100,000.00 together with property damage insurance of not less than $50,000.00. 
(Prior Code, § 14.17) 
Sec. 14-77. - Razing of buildings. 
(a)  The building inspector is authorized to act for the city under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0413 relating to the razing of buildings. The treasurer is authorized to place the assessment and collect the special tax as herein provided. 
(b)  Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or his agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within the building, such as electric, gas, water, sewer and any other connections. A permit to demolish or remove a building shall not be issued until it is ascertained that service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. Excavations shall be filled with solid fill to match lot grade within 48 hours of removal of the structure. Any excavation shall be protected with appropriate fences, barriers or lights. 
(c)  The demolition and removal of all resultant debris shall be completed within 30 days of the commencement of work under the razing permit and the property or parcel shall be brought into compliance with all applicable ordinances, including, but not limited to, the public nuisance ordinance and laws. 
(Prior Code, § 14.18) 
Sec. 14-78. - Accessory buildings and structure. 
(a)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building or structure , as used in this section, means a building or structures entirely separated from the principal building and is not subject to the state building code. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  Frame. Building and structures of wood frame construction shall be located not less than ten feet from any principal building; except that such distance may be reduced to not less than five feet when the adjacent wall is protected by at least one-hour fire rated construction. 
(2)  Masonry. Buildings and structures of masonry wall construction shall not be located less than five feet from any principal building. 
(c)  Footings and foundation. 
(1)  Accessory buildings and structures shall be provided with the same type footings and foundations as are herein required for the principal building, except that: 
a.  Buildings and structures with a width up to and including 26 feet may be built with a continuous floating slab of wire mesh reinforced concrete not less than four inches thick, in which case the slab shall be provided with a thickened edge all around being eight inches wide by eight inches below the surface of the slab. 
b.  Buildings and structures with a width exceeding 26 feet, but less than 36 feet, may be built with a continuous floating slab of wire mesh reinforced concrete not less than four inches thick, in which case the slab shall be provided with a thickened edge all around being 12 inches wide by 12 inches below the surface of the slab. 
(2)  Exterior wall curbs of masonry shall be provided not less than four inches above finished ground grade, unless the wall construction within four inches of grade is approved insect and termite resistant. Bolts three-eighths inch in diameter, with nuts and washers attached, by six inches long, shall be embedded three inches in the concrete curb eight feet on centers. 
(3)  For purposes of this subsection, the term "width" means the distance between the exterior of one main load bearing wall and the opposite load bearing wall. 
(d)  Wall construction. 
(1)  All walls shall be designed to support all superimposed vertical dead loads and live loads from floors and roofs without exceeding the allowable stresses of the material. 
(2)  All walls shall be designed to withstand a horizontal wind pressure of at least 20 pounds per square foot applied to the vertical projection of the portion above grade. No reduction shall be permitted for the shielding effect of other buildings or structures. 
(e)  Roofs and ceilings. 
(1)  Roof and roof/ceiling assemblies shall support all dead loads plus the minimum live loads as herein specified. 
(2)  Roofs shall be designed and constructed to support a snow load of 30 pounds per square foot assumed to act vertically over the roof area. 
(3)  Roofs shall withstand a pressure of at least 20 pounds per square foot acting upward normal to the roof surface. Roofs shall be properly anchored to resist uplift. 
(4)  All roofs shall be designed and constructed to ensure the proper drainage of water. 
(f)  Heating. Heating units and equipment in accessory buildings shall conform to the requirements of heating systems in the principal building. 
(Prior Code, § 14.19) 
Sec. 14-79. - Designation of fire districts and restriction. 
(a)  Designation. There are established two fire districts which shall be known as the first and second fire districts. 
(b)  Building restriction. 
(1)  Within the first fire district, any building erected after September 15, 1989, or any addition to an existing building, shall be in compliance with the state commercial building code adopted in subsection (a) of this section, except one- and two-family dwellings located within the first fire district shall conform to the state uniform dwelling code adopted in subsection (a) of this section, provided that such dwellings are located on not less than the minimum size lot (6,000 square feet). Buildings or existing buildings containing both commercial and residential occupancy are not included within the exception. 
(2)  Any building hereafter erected, or any addition to an existing building, which contains both commercial and residential occupancies shall have all residential portions of the building separated from all other parts of the building by a minimum of one hour fire resistive construction; whether such construction lies in the first or second fire district. 
(3)  Within the foregoing fire districts, no building shall be hereafter increased in height unless it is of a type of construction permitted for new buildings within such fire district or is altered to comply with the requirements for new buildings. 
(4)  Within the foregoing fire districts, no building, other than a one- or two-family dwelling or an accessory building thereto, shall be hereafter extended on any side; unless such extension is of a type of construction permitted for new buildings within such fire district. Nothing in this section shall prohibit other alterations within the fire districts, provided there is no change of occupancy otherwise prohibited. 
(5)  No building shall hereafter be moved from one fire district to another, or to another lot in the same district, or from without to within a fire district, unless this type of construction is permitted in the district into or within which it is to be moved. 
(6)  Any building located partly in more than one fire district shall be of a type of construction required for the most highly restricted district. 
(7)  The preceding provisions of this section shall not apply to temporary buildings under such conditions as may be prescribed by the building inspector; nor to builders shanties for use only in connection with an authorized building operation; nor to storm enclosures not more than 12 feet high nor more than two feet wider than the doors they serve, located entirely within the lot lines; nor to woods piazzas or porches not exceeding two stories in height nor projecting more than then feet from the building wall, but such piazza or porch shall not be built less than five feet from a side lot line unless separated from adjoining structures by a masonry wall; nor to greenhouses less than 15 feet high erected on the same lot as a business or residence; nor to fences not exceeding eight feet in height. 
(Prior Code, § 14.20) 
Sec. 14-80. - Surface water drainage. 
    No building shall be erected or added to if such proposed construction shall unreasonably obstruct the flow of water from adjoining properties or obstruct the flow of water of any ditch, drain, ravine or stormwater sewer draining onto neighboring property; unless suitable provision is made for such flow by means of an adequate ditch or pipe. Building plans shall indicate in sufficient detail the proposed provision for surface water drainage. 
(Prior Code, § 14.21) 
Sec. 14-81. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Public pools. Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 390, Design and Construction of Public Swimming Pools and Water Attractions inclusive and all amendments thereto are made a part of this article by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Private pools. 
(1)  Installation. All private pools shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers' instructions. 
(2)  Maintenance. All private pools shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturers' instructions. All pools shall meet water quality standards as may be established for pools by the state department of health and social services and the city board of health. 
(3)  Restricted access. All pools, whether installed above or below grade, shall be enclosed by a wall or fence at least 48 inches high and of the construction as to make access difficult. Entrances through this enclosure shall be through self-closing gates, designed to be difficult to open by an unattended child. Pool walls may serve as the required wall if the pool enclosure is a minimum of 48 inches above grade and access is difficult for an unattended child. 
(4)  Permit required. Construction or installation of any pool shall require a structural permit and the required fee paid therefor prior to commencement of any such work. 
(Prior Code, § 14.22) 
Sec. 14-82. - Mechanical systems. 
    All mechanical systems installed, maintained, modified or repaired in any building or structure shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations of the Wisconsin Administrative Code relating to that building or structure. 
(Prior Code, § 14.23) 
Sec. 14-83. - Incinerators. 
(a)  General. Incinerators shall meet the requirements of the state department of natural resources as contained in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR. 154. The department of natural resources shall have approving authority for the equipment involved. Installation shall conform to the following requirements, unless superseded by the manufacturers' requirements. 
(b)  Gas burner connection. Where a gas burner is used, a lever handle shut off cock shall be provided before the union at an accessible location in the gas line at the rear of the burner. Incinerators furnished with means of automatic ignition of the gas at the main burner shall be equipped with a device which will automatically shut off the main gas supply in the event the means of ignitions becomes inoperative, or the means of keeping the valve of the device open becomes inoperative, or both. 
(c)  Mounting. 
(1)  Incinerators, except as provided, shall be mounted on floors of fire resistive construction with noncombustible flooring or surface finish and with no combustible material against the underside thereof. Such construction shall extend a minimum of 12 inches beyond the incinerator base on all sides, except that at the front or side where ashes are removed, it shall extend a minimum 18 inches beyond the incinerator. 
(2)  Incinerators that are specifically approved for installation on a combustible floor may be mounted in accordance with the conditions of the approval. 
(d)  Masonry chimneys for incinerators. Masonry chimneys for incinerators shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements for masonry chimneys. All flues shall terminate in a substantially constructed spark arrester with openings a maximum of one-half inch or be provided with other suitable means for stopping discharge of fly particles. Such screen shall be kept in repair at all times. Incinerators shall be connected to a chimney suitable for solid fuel burning appliances. 
(e)  Clearance. 
(1)  Incinerators, except as provided herewith, shall be installed to provide clearances between the unit and woodwork or other combustible material, of not less than 36 inches at the sides and top and not less than 48 inches at the front, and in no case shall the clearance above the charging door be less than 48 inches. 
(2)  Incinerators that are specifically approved for installation with clearances less than specified above may be installed in accordance with the conditions of the approval, provided that, in any case, the clearances shall be sufficient to afford ready accessibility for firing, clean out and any necessary servicing, and with a minimum clearance of three inches between the sides and any combustible materials. 
(3)  Incinerators may be installed in rooms, but not in confined spaces, such as alcoves, with reduced clearances to woodwork or other combustible material, provided that the combustible material is protected with an approved protective material, but in no case shall this clearance be less than three inches. 
(f)  Flue pipes for incinerators. 
(1)  Incinerator flue pipes, except as herein provided, shall be installed to provide clearances of not less than 18 inches to woodwork or other combustible material. 
(2)  Incinerator flue pipes may be installed in rooms, but not in confined spaces, such as alcoves, with reduced clearances to woodwork or other combustible material provided the combustible material is protected with an approved protective material. 
(3)  Incinerator flue pipes shall not pass through any combustible wall or partition unless protected at the point of passage by an approved thimble. 
(g)  Refuse chute. Refuse chutes shall not feed directly into incinerators. 
(Prior Code, § 14.24) 
Secs. 14-84-14-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL 

Sec. 14-108. - Adoption of national code. 
    The National Electrical Code, and all amendments thereto, are made a part of this article by reference and shall apply to all alterations, extensions, installations and repairs to any electrical component, system or subsystem. Primary enforcement of the electrical portion of this article shall be by the electrical inspector. 
(Prior Code, §§ 14.30, 14.31) 
Sec. 14-109. - Electrical installation. 
    In addition to the requirements of the state electrical code, the following shall apply to all alterations, extensions, installations or repairs to applicable electric components or systems. With the exception of multi-family units, all new and replacement electrical wiring in commercial and manufacturing uses shall be installed in a raceway. All new and replacement wiring within the first fire district regardless of use shall be installed in a raceway. For the purpose of this section, metal clad cable, type MC, will be permitted. 
(1)  No service less than 100 amp rating shall be installed in any building having a commercial, industrial or residential occupancy. Accessory buildings may have a smaller service with the prior approval of the electrical inspector. 
(2)  All basement wiring of any occupancy shall be on separate circuits as the load may require. 
(3)  No person shall install or replace electrical services unless licensed by the state safety and professional services as an electrical contractor or master electrician. 
(Prior Code, § 14.34) 
Sec. 14-110. - Standards for electrical equipment. 
    Only that equipment which has been expressly made for electrical purposes shall be installed for electrical purposes. All electrical equipment shall be installed or used in the exact manner and for the exact purpose indicated by the manufacturers' instructions, markings or labels. No equipment or devices shall be sold or utilized which is not approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. Old or secondhand electrical equipment shall not be installed unless such equipment is in a safe condition as determined by the electrical inspector. The original manufacturer's ratings, markings or labels thereon shall not be changed or altered in any manner; except that normal repairs and replacements may be made to such equipment if the replacements and repairs do not change the original characteristics and design. 
(Prior Code, § 14.36) 
Sec. 14-111. - Public utilities regulated. 
    Public utilities furnishing electric lights or power shall give service either light or power only to installations conforming with this article. 
(Prior Code, § 14.38) 
Secs. 14-112-14-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING 

Sec. 14-136. - Adoption of state regulations. 
    The state plumbing code, Wis. Admin. Code chs. SPS 381-387, both inclusive and all amendments thereto, are made a part of this article by reference and shall apply to all alteration, extension, installations and repairs to any plumbing component or plumbing system or subsystem of any building or structure. Primary enforcement of the plumbing section of this article shall be by the plumbing inspector. 
(Prior Code, §§ 14.10, 14.41) 
Sec. 14-137. - Plumbers license required. 
    No person shall engage in any plumbing, except leakage and stoppage repairs may be made, without the proper plumbing license as required by Wis. Stats. ch. 145. 
(Prior Code, § 14.42) 
Sec. 14-138. - Private sewage disposal systems. 
    Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of this article, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system. When a public sewer becomes available to such a property, as determined by the plumbing inspector, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article. The private sewage disposal system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Prior Code, § 14.43) 
Sec. 14-139. - Restrictions to existing sewers. 
    Whenever it is necessary to disturb any building drain or sewer in actual use, the same shall not be obstructed or discontinued without specific permission from the plumbing inspector. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when, on examination by the plumbing inspector, they meet all the requirements of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 14.44) 
Sec. 14-140. - Obstructions in drain course. 
    Whenever the course of any drain or sewer is obstructed by electrical, gas, steam, water or other pipe or conduits; the plumbing inspector shall determine whether the obstruction shall be raised or lowered to permit the construction, installation and venting of the drain or sewer. 
(Prior Code, § 14.45) 
Sec. 14-141. - Stormwater and surface water drain. 
    No stormwater or surface water drains shall be connected with the building sewer or building drain, whether installed above or below the surface of the ground. No building shall be erected, nor shall existing provisions for the conveyance of water from the roof of the building be altered or replaced unless provision is made to convey water from the roof of the building in such a manner that such water will not, directly or indirectly, pass into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Prior Code, § 14.46) 
Sec. 14-142. - Fees. 
    The following permit fees shall apply to permits issues pursuant to this chapter. 
(1)  Structural: 
TABLE NO. 1 
SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES 
A. Residence; one- or two-family, attached garages, finished areas. $0.28/square foot B. Residence; apartments, three-family and over, row housing, multiple-family dwellings, institutional. $0.22/square foot C. Residences; additions. $0.28/square foot D. Local business, office buildings or additions thereto. $0.20/square foot E. Manufacturing or industrial (office areas to be included under D.). $0.18/square foot F. Accessory buildings, detached garages, agricultural buildings 150 square feet and larger. $0.10/square foot G. All other buildings, structures, alterations and repairs where square footage cannot be calculated. $8.00/$1,000.00 valuation H. Minimum fee for all permits except roofing, fence, and mobile home hook-up. $30.00  
Fees will be doubled for work started prior to a permit being issued by the inspection department. 
(2)  The following permit fees shall be based upon the physical value of the work to be done, on the basis of current costs, as determined by the department. 
Electrical, mechanical or plumbing: 
Cost Fee Up to $1,000.00 $30.00 $1,001.00 to $2,500.00 $45.00 $2,501.00 to $4,000.00 $50.00 $4,001.00 to $6,000.00 $55.00 $6,001.00 to $8,000.00 $60.00 $8,001.00 to $10,000.00 $65.00 Over $10,000.00 $65.00 plus $3.00 per thousand in excess of $10,000.00  
(3)  Miscellaneous fees: 
A. Plan examinations. i) Commercial/industrial including additions. $100.00 ii) Commercial/industrial HVAC: (if submitted separately). $50.00 iii) Alterations to commercial buildings. $50.00 iv) Revision to previously submitted plan. $100.00 v) Permission to start construction. $100.00 B. Wisconsin uniform building permit seal. $35.00 C. Special inspections. $30.00 D. Re-inspections. $30.00 E. Sign/canopy. $30.00 F. Mobile home hook-up (plumbing and electric). $20.00 G. Raze permit (building inspector may waive fee if building is condemned). $30.00 H. Building moving permit. $50.00 I. Re-roofing or re-shingling permits only. $20.00 J. Mobile home hook-up (plumbing and electric). $20.00 K. Fence permit. $20.00 L. Foundation only permit. $125.00 M. Occupancy permit. $30.00  
Note: Gross square footage calculations are based on the dimensions of the building from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, of each finished floor level and the garage. Unfinished basements, in one- and two-family dwelling or portions thereof are not included in this calculation. 
(Prior Code, § 14.46) 
Chapter 15 - SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) means one of the oxidation states of nitrogen, in which nitrogen is combined with hydrogen in molecular form as NH3 or in ionized form as NH4+. Quantitative determinations of ammonia nitrogen shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    Approving authority means the board of public works of the common council of the city, or its duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed as milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipe inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning approximately five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or lateral. Except as provided in this article, building sewers shall not be subject to the jurisdiction of the city and the city shall not be responsible for the construction or maintenance of the sewers. The term "building sewer" is also called "house connection," "lateral" or "private sewer." 
    Chlorine requirement means the amount of chlorine, in milligrams per liter, which must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    Combined sewer means any sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm sewer. 
    Commercial user means any user whose premises are used primarily for the conduct of a profit-oriented enterprise in the fields of construction, wholesale or retail trade, finance, insurance, real estate or services, and who discharges primarily normal domestic sewage. 
    Composite sample (24 hours) shall be the combination of individual samples taken at intervals of not more than one hour. 
    Compatible pollutant means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, nitrogen, pH, or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the WPDES permit for the publicly owned treatment works receiving the pollutants if such works was designed to treat such additional pollutants, and in part does remove pollutants to a substantial degree. 
    Dwelling unit means a structure, or that part of a structure, which is used or intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one person or by two or more persons maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others. 
    Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Fixed charge means the portion of the sewerage service charge based upon the number of dwelling units, the number of customer meters/connections to the wastewater works and the size of the customer's water meters. Fixed charges shall recover the cost of debt retirement and associated reserves and depreciation associated with the construction, erection, modification or rehabilitation of the wastewater works. Fixed charges also include operation costs for customer billing and treatment costs relating to infiltration and inflow. 
    Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Flow proportional sample means a sample taken that is proportional to the volume of flow during the sampling period. 
    Garbage means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce. 
    Ground garbage means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
    Industrial user means any user whose premises are used primarily for the conduct of a profit-oriented enterprise in the fields of manufacturing, dairy products processing, meat processing, other food and drink products, painting or finishing operations, transportation, communications or utilities, mining, agriculture, forestry or fishing. 
    Industrial waste means any trade or process waste as distinct from segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    Intercepting sewer means a sewer whose primary purpose is to convey sewage from a collection system to a wastewater treatment plant. Size of the sewer is not a factor. 
    Milligrams per liter means a weight-to-weight ratio; the milligrams per liter value (mg/l) multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface waters or groundwaters. 
    Normal domestic sewage means sanitary sewage resulting from the range of normal domestic activities, in which BOD 5, SS, total kjeldahl nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations do not exceed normal concentration of: 
(1)  A five day, 20 degree Celsius, BOD of not more than 270 mg/l. 
(2)  A suspended solids content of not more than 252 mg/l. 
(3)  A total kjeldahl nitrogen content of not more than 25 mg/l. 
(4)  A phosphorus content of not more than 3.67 mg/1. 
    Operation, maintenance and replacement (O,M&R) costs means and includes all costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the wastewater works as well as the costs associated with periodic equipment replacement necessary for maintaining the design capacity and performance of the wastewater treatment facilities. 
    Organic nitrogen means that portion of nitrogen present in organic compounds which includes various forms of proteins and their degradation products of amino acids and polypeptides. Oxidation or organic nitrogen frees the available nitrogen to ammonia nitrogen. Quantitative determination of organic nitrogen shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen concentration of 10 -7 . 
    Phosphorus (P) means total phosphorus in wastewater, which may be present in any of three principle forms: orthophosphates, polyphosphates, and organic phosphates. Quantitative determination of total phosphorus should be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    Pretreatment means an arrangement of devices and structures, for the preliminary treatment or processing of wastewater required to render such wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers. 
    Private sewer means any sewer outside of a public right-of-way or public easement. Except as provided in this chapter, a private sewer shall not be subject to the jurisdiction of the city and the city shall not be responsible for the construction or maintenance of the sewer. 
    Public authority means any user whose premises are used for the conduct of the legislative, judicial, administrative, or regulatory activities of federal, state, local or international units of government; government-owned educational facilities; government-owned health facilities; or government-owned recreational facilities. This does not include government-owned or operated business establishments. It is assumed that public authority users have normal domestic strength wastewater unless sampling data or other information demonstrates that greater than normal domestic strength wastewater is discharged. 
    Public sewer means any sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary sewer system, even though sewers may not have been constructed with city funds. The term "public sewer" shall not include private sewers or building sewers. 
    Replacement fund means a separate account in which an annual budgeted amount shall be accumulated for purposes of defraying replacement costs as they arise. The replacement fund shall be used exclusively to defray replacement costs as defined above, during the useful life of the wastewater treatment facilities. At the end of the useful life, or at the time of any significant expansion or upgrade of the wastewater facilities, the fund may be used for any proper purpose related to providing wastewater treatment service pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0821. 
    Residential user means any user whose premises are used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons and discharges only domestic wastes. 
    Sanitary sewage means a combination of water carried from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial plants (other than industrial wastes from such plants), together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries sanitary and industrial water-carried wastes from residents, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Segregated domestic wastes means wastes from nonresidential sources resulting from normal domestic activities. These activities are distinguished from industrial, trade, or process discharge wastes. 
    Service life means the expected life of individual pieces of equipment. In many instances, the service life of a piece of equipment will be shorter than the useful life of the overall treatment plant. 
    Sewage means the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
    Sewage system means the composite network of underground conduits carrying wastewater and appurtenances incidental thereto (i.e. manholes, lift stations, service lateral). 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
    Sewer service charge means a charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for capital-related expenses as well as operation and maintenance and replacement costs of the facilities. 
    Significant contributors means those users of the wastewater works whose discharges exceed, in one or more parameters (flow, BOD, TSS, TKN, P), five percent of the design value for that particular parameter, on such average or peak basis as the approving authority deems appropriate. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the system or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
    Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Federation of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Associations. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of the rainfall that is drained into the sewers. 
    Surcharge means any user of the wastewater works whose discharge exceeds in one or more parameters (BOD, TSS, TKN, P) the concentration of normal domestic wastewater for that parameter shall be subject to a surcharge. The amount of the surcharges shall reflect the costs incurred by the city in removing the high strength BOD, suspended solids, TKN, or P from the wastewater. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods and are referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Total kjeldahl nitrogen (tkn) means the sum total of ammonia nitrogen and organic nitrogen. Quantitative determination of total kjeldahl nitrogen shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    Toxic discharges means discharge containing a substance or mixture of substances which, through sufficient exposure, or ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation by an organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through the food chain, will, on the basis of information available, cause death, disease, behavioral or immunological abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, or developmental or physiological malfunctions, including malfunctions in reproduction or physical deformations, in such organisms or their offspring. 
    Unmetered user means a user who does not have a meter, installed and maintained by the city, on his public or private water supply. 
    Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    Useful life means the expected life of the treatment plant if individual pieces of equipment are replaced as necessary. 
    User classes mean categories of users having similar flows and water characteristics; that is, levels of biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, phosphorus, ammonia nitrogen, etc. For the purposes of this chapter, there shall be four user classes: residential, commercial, industrial, and public authority. 
    User charge system means the methodology for collecting operation, maintenance, replacement and capital costs equitable from each user of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities. 
    Variable charge means the portion of the sewerage service charge based on the volume strength of wastewater discharged to the wastewater works. The variable charge shall include the charge for normal strength wastewater and a surcharge if any of the parameters in the discharge exceed those of normal strength wastewater. Variable charges shall recover OM&R costs except customer billing and treatment costs relating to infiltration and inflow, which are recovered in the fixed charge. 
    Volume charge means a sewer use charge based upon normal strength wastewater quantities. 
    WPDES permit means a permit issued under the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 210. 
    Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities means the treatment works defined below exclusive of interceptor sewers, and wastewater collection systems. 
    Wastewater treatment facilities means the wastewater treatment works defined in this section, excluding wastewater collection and transportation systems which deliver wastewater to the treatment plant. 
    Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of wastewater, liquid industrial wastes, and sludge. These systems include interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, wastewater collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances; any works that are an integral part of the treatment process or are used for ultimate disposal of residues from such treatment; or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of municipal or industrial wastes. 
    Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Prior Code, § 15.01, 15.21) 
Sec. 15-2. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)  Sanitary sewers. No persons shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sanitary sewer except stormwater runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  User connection. The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city are required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities, therein, and connect such facilities directly to the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within three months after the date of official notice from the approving authority to do so. 
(c)  Storm sewers. Stormwater other than that exempted under subsection (a) of this section and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the approving authority, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(d)  Prohibitions and limitation. Except as provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of the size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metals, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  The following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The approving authority may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in its opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability, the approving authority will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of wastes or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the approving authority are as follows: 
a.  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
b.  Wastewater containing more than 250 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils, fats, grease or product of mineral oil origin. This limitation will be specifically reviewed during evaluation of wastewater treatment processes and may be further limited by the approving authority. 
c.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
d.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, mercury, lead, and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials. 
e.  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the approving authority. 
f.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of the half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the approving authority in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
g.  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a slug or which exceeds agreed capacity limitations provided for by contract between a user and the city. 
h.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amendable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements or other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
i.  Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
j.  Materials which exert or cause: 
1.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment plant. 
2.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. 
3.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate). 
4.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable wastes or tanning solutions). 
No wastewater, regardless of character, shall be discharged to the sewage system in such a manner as to interfere with the designed operation of the collection systems or treatment facilities, or to cause the treatment works to exceed the limits presented by the WPDES permit. 
(e)  Special arrangements. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the city and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the sewage disposal works, either before or after pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the sewage disposal works by reason of the admission of the wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the city without recompense by the person provided that all rates set forth in this article are recognized and adhered to. 
(f)  New connection. New connections to the sewage system shall not be permitted if there is insufficient capacity in the treatment works to adequately transport or treat, as required by the WPDES permit the additional wastewater anticipated to be received from such connections. 
(Prior Code, § 15.02) 
Sec. 15-3. - Control of high strength or toxic wastes direct to public sewers. 
(a)  Submission of basic data. Within three months after passage of this article, establishments discharging industrial wastes to a public sewer shall prepare and file with the approving authority a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the wastes discharged to the wastewater works. Such information shall be provided as per Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 101. Similarly, each establishment desiring to make a new connection to public sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall prepare and file with the approving authority a report that shall include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste to be discharged. 
(b)  Extension of time. When it can be demonstrated that circumstances exist which would create an unreasonable burden on the establishment to comply with the time schedule imposed by subsection (a) of this section, a request for extension of time may be presented for consideration of the approving authority. 
(c)  High strength or toxic discharge. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers, which contain substances or possess characteristics in excess of normal domestic sewage as defined in section 15-1, or which in the judgment of the approving authority: 
(1)  May be acutely or chronically toxic to aquatic life and wild and domestic animals; 
(2)  May adversely affect humans and cause increased risk of cancer in humans; 
(3)  May impart undesirable tastes or odors to surface waters or aquatic organisms ingested by humans; 
(4)  May prevent present or prospective future use of surface waters for public and private water supplies; 
(5)  May prevent propagation of fish and aquatic life and wild and domestic animal life; 
(6)  May create severe limitations for current and future methods of sludge recycling/disposal; 
(7)  May have deleterious effects upon the sewage works, processes or equipment; 
(8)  May cause additional requirements or limitations to become part of the city's discharge permit; 
(9)  Or may otherwise create a hazard to life, health or constitute a public nuisance. 
The approving authority may: 
a.  Reject the wastes; 
b.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable limit for discharge to the public sewers; 
c.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or 
d.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. 
(d)  Control manhole. Each user discharging high strength or toxic wastes into a public sewer may be required by the approving authority to construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access points to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of his wastes, including domestic sewage. Within three months after written notification from the approving authority, the selected users shall complete construction of the control manholes or access points. 
(1)  Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a manner acceptable to the approving authority. If measuring devices are to be permanently installed they shall be of a type acceptable to the approving authority. 
(2)  Control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment shall be installed by the establishment discharging the waste, at its expense, and shall be maintained by it so as to be in safe condition, accessible, and in proper operating condition at all times. Plans for installation of the control manholes or access facilities and related equipment shall be approved by the approving authority prior to the beginning of construction. 
(3)  Alternatively, the approving authority may choose to install the control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment at the establishment discharging the waste. Expenses incurred for this service, however, are the responsibility of the establishment discharging the waste. 
(e)  Metering and sampling of high strength or toxic waste. 
(1)  General. Users designated by the approving authority with high levels of flow or with high strength discharge may be required to have monitoring facilities. The approving authority shall make a determination as to when metering of high levels of flow are needed as well as what frequency of sampling of high strength wastewater is needed. Metering and sampling devices shall be installed, owned and maintained by the discharger subject to the approval of the approving authority. Access to the sampling and metering location shall be granted to the approving authority or its duly authorized representative at all times. Within three months after written notification from the approving authority, the selected users shall complete the installation of metering and sampling devices. 
Alternatively, the approving authority may choose to install or maintain the metering and sampling devices at the establishment discharging the waste. Expenses incurred for this service, however, are the responsibility of the establishment discharging the waste. 
(2)  Metering. Devices for measuring the volume of wastewater discharged may be required by the approving authority if the volume cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. 
(3)  Sampling. Industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be subject to periodic inspections and a determination of character and concentration of the wastes. Sampling shall be conducted in such a manner as to be representative of the composition of the waste. Every care shall be exercised in collection of samples to ensure their preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the sample was taken. The sampling may be accomplished either manually or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to the approving authority. The use of flow proportional composite sampling is preferred. 
Expenses incurred for sampling the wastes, including the laboratory analytical tests, are the responsibility of the establishment discharging the wastes. 
(4)  Maintenance. A maintenance schedule must be accepted by the approving authority. All maintenance and equipment repair shall be performed within a reasonable time as determined by the approving authority. Failure to perform maintenance within a reasonable time shall be subject to the same forfeiture and procedural provisions as applied to violations under this sewer use ordinance. Prior to completion of satisfactory repairs, and for any preceding period during which the approving authority determines there existed a malfunction, error or bias in the metering and sampling, the volume and strength of the wastewater for that period discharged by the discharger shall be based on historical data and a reasonable engineering estimate of flow and strength, taking account of material known production variations, all as determined by the approving authority in consultation with the discharger. If prolonged periods of breakdown are anticipated, approved interim measuring and sampling needs shall be provided, and used to determine the volume and strength of wastewater. 
Following approval and installation of permanent or temporary metering or sampling equipment, such equipment shall not be removed without the consent of the approving authority. 
(f)  Analysis. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of wastes and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the approving authority. 
Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial wastes shall be made by the establishment discharging them, or its agent, as designated and required by the approving authority. The approving authority may also make its own analyses on the wastes and these determinations shall be binding as a basis for charges. 
(g)  Pretreatment. Where required, if in the opinion of the approving authority, to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structures, processes or operation of the wastewater treatment works, the person shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be determined required to render his wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers. 
(h)  Submission of information. Plans, specifications, any other pertinent information relating to proposed flow equalizations, pretreatment or processing facilities shall be submitted for review of the approving authority prior to the start of their construction if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers. 
(i)  Grease and/or sand interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in section 15-2(d)(5), or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the owners shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the approving authority. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Prior Code, § 15.03) 
Sec. 15-4. - Right of entry, safety, and identification. 
(a)  Right of entry. The city engineer, plant superintendent, or other duly authorized employee of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, testing, all in accordance with the provisions of this article and state laws. The city engineer, plant superintendent, or other duly authorized employee of the city shall have no authority to inquire into any process beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for wastewater treatment. 
(b)  Safety. While performing the necessary work on private premises referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the duly authorized city employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner or occupant and the city shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by the city employees and against the liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner and growing out of gauging and sampling operations of the city employees; except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions as required in section 15-3(d). City shall report to the owner or occupant any unsafe conditions. 
(c)  Identification, right to enter easements. The city engineer, plant superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurements, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement, all subject to the terms, if any, of the agreement. 
(Prior Code, § 15.04) 
Sec. 15-5. - Sewer construction (building sewers). 
(a)  Work authorized. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the approving authority. 
(b)  License and bond required. No contractor, plumber, pipe fitter or other person shall be permitted to do work on any public sewer or building sewer without first receiving a license from the state and posting a $1,500.00 bond with the approving authority, except in cases where state law permits building owners to do their own work without being licensed. The bond shall be released upon satisfactory inspection of the work in accordance with subsection (i) of this section. Prior to commencement of the work, the permittee shall notify the city at least 48 hours before beginning excavations. 
(c)  Cost of sewer connection. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Upon completion of the building sewer, the owner shall be responsible for all maintenance costs. 
(d)  Use of old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the approving authority to meet all requirements for this article. 
(e)  Materials and methods of construction. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, the state department of natural resources, the building and plumbing code, and other rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or an amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(f)  Building sewer grade. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(g)  Stormwater and groundwater drain. No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. All existing downspouts or groundwater drains, etc. connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer must be disconnected no later than 60 days from the date of an official written notice by the approving authority. Exceptions to the above shall be made only by the approving authority in writing. 
(h)  Conformance to plumbing code. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the approving authority before installation. All connections to existing sewer mains shall be made with a saddle "T" or "Y" fitting set upon a carefully cut opening centered in the upper quadrant of the main sewer pipe and securely strapped on with corrosion-resistant straps or rods, or with solvent-welded joints in the case of plastic pipe. 
(i)  Inspection of connection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the approving authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the approving authority. 
(j)  Barricades; restoration. All excavations for the building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Prior Code, § 15.05) 
Sec. 15-6. - Septic tank and holding tank disposal. 
(a)  Charges for disposal shall be established in accordance with the city user charge system. Bills shall be mailed on a monthly basis and if payments are not received in 30 days thereof, disposal privileges shall be suspended. 
(b)  All materials discharged to the treatment works shall be of domestic origin only and septic tank wastes shall be segregated from holding tank wastes. The discharger shall also certify that he will comply with the provisions of any and all applicable provisions of the city and will not deposit or drain any gasoline, oil, acid, alkali, grease, rags, waste, volatile or inflammable liquids, or other deleterious substances into any manhole nor allow any earth, sand, or other solid material to pass into any part of the treatment works. 
(c)  The persons or party disposing waste shall furnish a bond to the city in the amount of $1,000.00 to guarantee performance. The performance bond shall be delivered to the city prior to the issuance of the permit hereunder. 
(d)  Violation of any of these provisions shall render the discharger subject to immediate suspension or revocation of his disposal privileges and may make him liable to the penalty provision of this article as outlined in section 15-8. The city also retains the right to suspend or revoke any disposal privileges upon 30 days' notice if, in the opinion of the approving authority, the acceptance of the wastewater would cause the treatment works to violate the provisions of its WPDES permit due to the volume or character of the wastes. Upon such suspension or revocation, the approving authority shall refund a proportionate share of the permit fee. 
(Prior Code, § 15.06) 
Sec. 15-7. - Damage or tampering with sewage facilities. 
(a)  Willful, negligent or malicious damage. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage facilities. Any persons violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly conduct. 
(b)  Liability to discharger for losses. Any person who intentionally, negligently or accidentally violates any provisions of this article shall become liable to the city or any downstream user, for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of the violation which the city or any downstream user may suffer as a result thereof. This section shall be applicable whether or not a written notice of the violation was given as provided in section 15-8(a) and without consideration for any penalties which may be imposed for a violation of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 15.07) 
Sec. 15-8. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Written notice of violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for accidentally allowing a prohibited discharge or a discharge in excess of the limitations and restrictions as defined in section 15-2(d) to the sewer system which causes damage to the treatment facility or receiving body of water shall, in addition to a fine, pay the amount to cover damage, both values to be established by the approving authority. Any accidental wastewater discharges which violate section 15-2(d) shall be reported immediately upon discharge. The city shall address any potential fines within 15 days after the end of the month in which the violation is reported or detected, whichever is later. 
(c)  Accidental discharge penalty. The city may levy a minimum fine of $500.00 for an accidental discharge that is reported immediately or a minimum of $1500.00 fine for an unreported accidental discharge. 
(d)  Continued violation. Except as provided for in subsection (c) of this section, any person, partnership or corporation, or any officer, agent or employee thereof, who shall continue any violation beyond the aforethe notice time limit provided shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $1,000.00 or more than $2,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of the forfeiture and costs, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day in which any violation is continued beyond the notice time limit shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(e)  Liability to the city for losses. Any person violating any provision of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by reason of the violation which the city may suffer as a result thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 15.08) 
Sec. 15-9. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any user, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by any decision, action, or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the approving authority interpreting or implementing the provisions of this article or in any permit issued herein, may file with the approving authority a written request for reconsideration within ten days setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration. 
(b)  The approving authority shall render a decision on the request for reconsideration to the user, permit applicant or permit holder in writing within 15 days of receipt of request. If the ruling on the request for reconsideration made by the approving authority is unsatisfactory, the person requesting reconsideration may, within ten days after notification of the approving authority's action, file a written appeal with the city clerk. 
(c)  A fee of $10.000.00 shall accompany any appeal for a ruling by the common council of the city. This fee may be refunded if the appeal is sustained in favor of the appellant. 
(d)  The written appeal shall be heard by the city council within 45 days from the date of filing. The city council shall make a final ruling on the appeal within 60 days from the date of filing. 
(Prior Code, § 15.09) 
Sec. 15-10. - Sanitation superintendent. 
(a)  The sanitation superintendent shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Be responsible for the function of all phases of the department of sanitation for efficient and economical purposes. 
(2)  Keep a complete record showing the costs of materials and labor used for each phase of the department 
(3)  Make all necessary chemical analyses at the sewage plant and fill out and complete all monthly reports to the state. 
(4)  Order necessary materials and repair parts used in the department, subject to the approval of the sanitation committee on any sum exceeding $5,000.00. 
(5)  Keep informed on the latest methods and practices being used in the department, and put the most economical methods thereof into practical use. 
(6)  Assist, whenever possible, in assistant's jobs when such assistants are absent or unable to work. 
(b)  The sanitation superintendent shall keep a daily record of all transactions of his office and file a monthly and yearly report covering the same with the city council. The yearly report shall be filed on or before February 1 and shall contain such recommendations relating to the operation of the department and the ordinances pertaining thereto as he shall deem advisable. 
(Prior Code, § 15.10) 
Sec. 15-11. - Disposition of revenue. 
    The amounts received from collection of the charges shall be credited to a sanitation sewage account which shows all receipts and expenditures of the sewage system. When appropriated by the council, the credits to the account shall be available for payment for operations, maintenance, repairs and depreciation of the sewage system. Any surplus in the account shall be available for payment of principal and interest of bonds or notes issued and outstanding or which may be issued to provide funds for the sewage system or parts thereof, and all or part of the expenses for additions, improvements and other necessary disbursements or indebtedness. The council may, by resolution, pledge such surplus or any part thereof for any such purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 15.11) 
Secs. 15-12-15-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE CHARGE SYSTEM 

Sec. 15-41. - Basis for variable charges. 
(a)  Sewer users served by water utility water meters. For each lot, parcel of land, building or premises having a connection with the wastewater system and being served with water solely by the water utility, the quantity of wastewater for billing purposes shall be measured by the water utility water meter used upon the premises. In which case a user feels that a significant amount of water metered does not reach the sanitary sewer that user can, at their own expense, through the approving authority, install a second water meter or service that would monitor the flow of water used for lawn and garden watering, non-contract cooling water or other similar purposes. Charges for sewer use would be made based on the difference between the two meter readings if only a second meter is installed, and on actual water metered for sewer use if a second meter and service are installed. 
Requests for usage adjustments, or a second meter or service, must be made in writing to the approving authority. Charges for this service shall be made in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Sewer users served by private wells. Sewer users served by private wells shall be required to do the following: 
Any person discharging sewage into the public sanitary sewer system who procures any part, or all of this water sources from other than the water utility, all or part of which is discharged into the public sanitary sewer system, the person shall be required to have water meters installed for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from each of these other sources. Where sewage meters are already installed, the water meters will not be required. The water meters shall be furnished by the water department and installed under its supervision, all costs being at the expense of the person requiring the meter. The water department shall charge for each meter a rental charge set by the utility to compensate for the cost of furnishing and servicing the meter. The rental charge shall be billed at the time the sewer charge is billed. The rental charge for water meters follows: 
Meter Size Rental Charge All meters $2.50/quarter plus an installation charge  
(c)  Measurement of flow from high strength or toxic waste discharge. The volume of flow used for computing the variable charge shall be the metered water consumption of the user as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the water utility, except as noted in subsection (d) of this section. 
Provisions for deductions. In the event that an establishment discharging industrial waste into the public sewers produces evidence satisfactory to the approving authority that more than 20 percent of the total annual volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the public sewer, then the determination of the water consumption to be used in computing the waste volume discharged into the public sewer may be made a matter of agreement between the approving authority and the person. Satisfactory evidence shall be evidence obtained by approved metering. 
(d)  Metering and sampling of high strength waste. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the approving authority if this volume cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. Users designated by the approving authority with high levels of flow or with high strength discharges may be required to have monitoring facilities. The approving authority shall make a determination as to when metering of high levels of flow are needed as well as what frequency of sampling of high strength wastewaters is needed. 
(e)  Free service. No user shall receive free service or pay a sewerage service charge less than the user's proportional share of all costs as defined in section 15-43. 
(f)  Outside service. All users within the sewer service area shall be treated equally as to operation, maintenance and replacement sewer use charges regardless of their location with respect to the corporate limits. All users located outside of the corporate limits will be charged 150 percent of the sewerage service charges. Total service charges may be adjusted to reflect variations in capital costs for outside users. 
(Prior Code, § 15.22) 
Sec. 15-42. - Billing practice. 
(a)  Billing period. All sewerage service charges for customers whose water meter is read on a quarterly basis shall be billed on a quarterly basis. All sewerage service charges for significant contributors and for those customers whose water meter is read on a monthly basis shall be billed on a monthly basis. 
(b)  Payment. Sewerage service charges shall be payable 20 days after the billing date, to the city treasurer. 
(c)  Penalty. Charges levied in accordance with this article shall be a debt due to the city. If the debt is not paid within 20 days after it is due and payable, it shall be deemed delinquent. A penalty of ten percent shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed for payment. 
(d)  Lien. Charges and penalties shall constitute a lien under the property services, and be recorded on the tax roll of the city. Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties. 
(Prior Code, § 15.23) 
Sec. 15-43. - Amount of user charges. 
(a)  Sewerage service charge. There is levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building, premises or unit having a connection with the wastewater treatment works, a sewerage service charge, based upon the quantity of wastewater discharged, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0821. Such sewerage service charges shall be billed to the person, firm, corporation or other entity owning, using or occupying the property served. The sewerage service charges shall consist of a fixed charge, a wastewater treatment plant debt service charge, and a variable charge as set forth in the following sections. 
(b)  Fixed charge. 
(1)  The fixed charge shall be a minimum charge for all users based upon the number of dwelling units, the number of customer meters/connections to the wastewater treatment works, and the size of the customer's water meters. This charge includes billing and administration costs, inflow/infiltration treatment costs, collection system depreciation, insurance costs and collection system debt costs. 
(2)  Schedule of fixed charges. 
Meter Size Monthly Charge Quarterly Charge Dwelling unit $7.00 $21.00 5/8 inch $7.00 $21.00 3/4 inch (residential) $7.00 $21.00 3/4 inch (nonresidential) $9.80 $29.40 1 inch $15.44 $46.33 11/2 inches $29.47 $88.41 2 inches $46.30 $138.89 3 inches $85.61 $256.82 4 inches $141.74 $425.23 6 inches $283.70 $851.10 8 inches $495.58 $1,486.74 10 inches $743.37 $2,230.10  
(c)  Normal domestic sewage. 
    Volume charge (metered user)-$4.10/1,000 gallons or $3.07/100 cubic feet. 
(d)  Variable charge. 
(1)  Users will be billed on the volume and strength of wastewater discharged to the wastewater treatment works. Normal domestic wastewater, defined as wastewater with concentrations of BOD of 270 milligrams or less per liter, suspended solids of 252 milligrams or less per liter total kjeldahl nitrogen of 25 milligrams or less per liter and total phosphorus of 3.7 milligrams or less per liter will be billed upon a volume charge based upon the quantity of flow determined pursuant to section 15-41. Users discharging wastewater into the wastewater treatment works shall be subject to surcharges, in addition to the volume charge, if their wastewater has a concentration greater than the domestic concentration specified in the preceding sentence. The amount of the surcharges shall reflect the costs incurred by the city in removing the high strength BOD, suspended solids, total kjeldahl nitrogen or phosphorus from the wastewater. 
(2)  Normal domestic sewage. 
    Volume charge (metered user)-$4.10/1,000 gallons or $3.07/100 cubic feet. 
(3)  Sewage of greater than normal strength. 
    Charges to users discharging wastewater of greater than normal strength of wastewater which is 270 mg/l BOD 5, 252 mg/l TSS, 25 mg/l TKN and 3.7 mg/1 P. The following rates will be used in calculating the surcharges. 
Parameter Cost BOD $0.419/lb. TSS $0.450/lb. TKN $3.442/lb. Phosphorous $5.313/lb.  
    Charges to users discharging wastewater of greater than normal strength shall be computed in accordance with the formula presented below: 
    C = $4.10 x V + ($0.419 x .00834 x V x B) + (0.450 x .00834 x V x S) + (3.442 x .00834 x V x N) + (5.313 x .00834 x V x P). 
    Where: 
    C = Charge to sewer user for operation, maintenance and replacement costs for treatment works. 
    V = Wastewater volume in 1,000 gallons. 
    B = Concentration of BOD from a user above the normal strength of 270 mg/l. 
    S = Concentration of suspended solids from a user above the normal strength of 252 mg/l. 
    N = Concentration of total kjeldahl nitrogen from a user above the normal strength of 25 mg/l. 
    P = Concentration of total phosphorus from a user above the normal strength of 3.7 mg/1. 
    $4.10 = Charge for that portion of the waste equal to normal strength wastewater. Includes cost for treating 270 mg/l BOD 5, 252 mg/l TSS, 25 mg/l TKN and 3.74 mg/1 P.00834 = Conversion Factor (mg/l to lbs.). 
    .7480 = Conversion Factor (1,000 gallons to 100 cubic feet). 
(e)  Holding tank waste disposal charge. Charges to licensed dischargers shall be computed and assessed on the following basis: 
Flow - $1.33/1,000 gallons BOD - $0.419 x 845 mg/l x .00834 = $2.953 SS - $0.450 x 715 mg/l x .00834 = $2.653 TKN - $3.442 x 90 mg/l x .00834 = $2.584 P - $5.313 x 13 x .00834 = $0.576 Dumping Charge per 1000 gallons = $6.15 TOTAL $16.24/1,000 gallons  
(f)  Septic tank waste disposal charge. Charges to licensed dischargers shall be computed and assessed on the following basis: 
Flow - $1.33/1,000 = $1.33 BOD - $0.419 x 8500 mg/l x .00834 = $29.703 SS - $0.450 x 13,600 mg/l x .00834 = $31.400 TKN - $3.442 x 500 mg/l x .00834 = $ 14.353 P - $5.313 x 73 x .00834 = $3.234 Dumping Charge per 1,000 gallons = $ 6.15 TOTAL $86.67/1,000 gallons  
(g)  Special assessments. Not included in the foregoing sewerage service charges are the costs associated with providing local collecting facilities to users, which the city may assess, by special assessment, in whole or in part, to the property benefited thereby. 
(Prior Code, § 15.24) 
Sec. 15-44. - Audit. 
    The city shall conduct an annual audit, the purpose of which will be to maintain accurate accounting records for the revenues and expenditures of the wastewater treatment facility and to demonstrate the continued proportionality and sufficiency of the user charges relative to changes in system operation, maintenance and replacement costs. Change must be based on engineering code, rather than public policy. 
(Prior Code, § 15.25) 
Sec. 15-45. - Significant contributors. 
    Significant contributors shall be those users of the wastewater works whose discharges exceed, in one or more parameters (flow, BOD, TSS, TKN, P), five percent of the design value for that particular parameter, on such average or peak basis as the approving authority determines is appropriate. 
(1)  Significant contributors will be requested to advise the city of their best estimate of the level of usage of the wastewater treatment facilities that they expect to utilize through the remaining useful life of the wastewater treatment facility. The city may allocate a portion of capacity in the wastewater treatment facilities to specific significant contributors, particularly in the case of new construction, expansion or renovation of the facilities. Significant contributors will then pay capital costs associated with such allocated capacity. 
(2)  Significant contributors will be encouraged to contract with the city as to the amount of the allocated capacity and as to the payment of associated capital costs. In exchange for a contractual commitment to pay such capital costs, the city may protect the contracting significant contributors from capital cost increases that might otherwise result from changes in the number of dischargers over whom capital costs might be spread. 
(3)  Significant contributors who have provided projected usage levels to the city prior to a project of construction, expansion or renovation, shall, in the absence of contract provisions to the contrary, have their fixed charge computed on the basis of actual or projected usage levels. The city shall in any such allocation process treat all significant contributors in a manner that is not unreasonable or unjustly discriminatory. The city may change the amount of allocated capacity from the projections provided by the significant contributors, provided any opportunity for such change is made available to all significant contributors. 
(4)  Phosphorus (P) monitoring is required by the approving authority in anticipation of future phosphorus limitations. Frequency of monitoring to be determined by the approving authority on a case-by-case basis. 
(5)  Significant contributors who connect to the system after any specific construction, expansion or renovation project may only be allocated capacity in that project to the extent the approving authority deems such capacity is available. In no event may capacity allocated to a significant contributor under a wastewater service contract with the city be changed in any way without compliance with the terms of the contract. Significant contributors who do not have a contractual commitment to pay specific treatment plant debt service charges may have their allocated capacities and associated fixed charges reduced on a prospective basis if, in the judgment of the approving authority, the re-allocated portion of the capacity should be made available to another user 
(Prior Code, § 15.26) 
Chapter 16 - SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use or structure means a use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a building or to the principal use of land and which is located on the same parcel and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building or land use. Accessory uses or structures to residential principal uses may include: Garages, carports, other parking spaces, swimming pools, tennis courts, play houses, wood shops and tool sheds. Accessory uses in residential districts shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry, except as defined as a home occupation and shall not include the commercial boarding of animals or the keeping of fowl or farm animals. 
    Administrator means the zoning administrator who is designated as the enforcement officer of this chapter. 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a predominant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals, or video cassettes, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined herein). 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, car, theater, restaurant or similar establishment which frequently features live performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas or which regularly feature films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. An adult cabaret does not include theaters, performing art centers, civic centers and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion of, employees engaging in nude erotic dancing. 
    Agricultural services means establishments engaged in providing services to agricultural establishments and landowners including soil preparation, crop services, veterinary services, farm management, and landscape and horticultural services. 
    Agriculture means the use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities. 
    Airport means the Sparta-Fort McCoy Airport. 
    Airport affected area means the area located within three miles of the boundaries of the airport. 
    Airport hazard means any structure, object, or natural growth, or use of land that obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing and taking off. 
    Alley means a thoroughfare less than 80 feet in width and for the purpose of providing access to the rear of buildings in a platted city block. 
    Amusement and recreation service means establishments not defined elsewhere, engaged in providing indoor and outdoor amusement, entertainment, and recreation to the general public. The term "amusement and recreation service" includes both indoor and outdoor activities. 
    Automobile repair and services means general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers; collision services including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop and vehicle steam cleaning. Automotive services include car washes, except for single stall car washes incidental to the sale of gasoline. 
    Automobile service station or gas station means a place where gasoline, kerosene, or any other motor fuel, lubricating oil, or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale and delivered directly into motor vehicles, including greasing, oiling, and single stall car washes incidental to the sale of gasoline. 
    Automotive, implement, and recreational vehicle sales means an open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles, implements or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done. 
    Basement means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling having at least one-half of its height below grade. A basement shall be counted as a story. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment means any place of lodging that provides four or fewer rooms for rent, for more than ten nights in a 12-month period, is the owner's personal residence, is occupied by the owner at the time of the rental, and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast. 
    Block means the property abutting a street between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets. A railroad right-of-way, the boundary line of unsubdivided acreage, or a body of water shall be regarded the same as an intersecting or intercepting street for the purpose of defining a block. 
    Boarding home means a dwelling or part thereof occupied by a single housekeeping unit where meals and lodging are provided for three or more persons not related to the owner for compensation by previous arrangement, excluding transients. 
    Boathouse means as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.01(1d), means a permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any combination of structural parts. 
    Buildable lot area means the part of the lot not included within the open space areas required by this chapter. 
    Building, height, means the vertical distance from the grade level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. 
    Building supply stores means retail establishments engaged primarily in the selling of lumber and other building materials. 
    Buildings. See Structures. 
    Campgrounds means establishments primarily engaged in providing overnight or short-term sites for recreation vehicles, trailers, campers and tents. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a permit for restoration or change of a landmark, landmark site, or historic preservation district site that shall accompany a building or demolition permit and is issued upon direction of the city historic preservation commission. 
    Chair means the chair of the plan commission or the chair of the board of appeals as the context requires. 
    Channel means the channel is a natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow is that water which is flowing within the limits of the defined channel. 
    Civic uses means a community center, public library, public museum, public art gallery, public recreation, post office, fire station, public botanical garden, and similar public uses, each without outdoor storage and municipal garages with screened outdoor storage. 
    Class II public notice means publication of a public hearing notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985 in a newspaper of circulation in the affected area. Publication is required on two consecutive weeks, the last at least seven days prior to the hearing. 
    Clubs and associations means a nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues, and are organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
    Community based residential facility (CBRF) means a place where three or more unrelated adults reside in which care, treatment, or services above the level of room and board, but not including nursing care, are provided to persons residing in the facility as a primary function of the facility. The term "community based residential facility (CBRF)" has the same as the definition of community-based residential facility (CBRF) defined in Wis. Admin. Code § DHS 89.13(4). 
    Community recreation facilities means publicly or privately owned recreation facilities that provide sites for large public gatherings such as fairgrounds, zoos, race tracks, and golf courses. 
    Comprehensive plan means the long-range master plan for the desirable use and development of land in the city as officially adopted and as amended from time to time by the plan commission and certified to the common council. 
    Conditional use permit means a document signed by the zoning administrator specifying the requirements for which a conditional use may be permitted within a parcel. A conditional use is a use permitted within a district other than a permitted use. 
    Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common with other purchases in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with separate interest in space. A condominium may include, in addition, separate interest in other portions of the property. 
    Construction means the erection or alteration of any structure or objects either of a permanent or temporary character. 
    Contractors; building construction means general and special trade contractors who undertake activities related to building construction including general construction, electrical work, painting, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, roofing, and sheet metal work. 
    Contractors; heavy construction means general contractors engaged in heavy construction other than buildings, such as highways, bridges, sewers, railroads, and airports. 
    Convalescent home. See Nursing home. 
    Convenience stores means any retail establishment serving primarily the surrounding neighborhood and offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area less than 5,000 square feet. Convenience stores do not include the sale of gasoline. 
    Court means an open, unoccupied and unobstructed space other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings. 
    Day care center means a licensed facility where a person other than a relative or guardian provides care and supervision for four or more children under seven years of age, for less than 24 hours a day and for compensation. 
    Day care center, adult, means establishments primarily engaged in the care of senior citizens, infirm, or impaired individuals, where medical care or delinquency correction is not a major element. 
    Day care center, family day care center means a center that provides care and supervision for five to eight children. 
    Day care center; group day care center means a center that provides care and supervision for nine or more children. 
    Day care center, night care center means a group day care center or family day care center which operates during any period of time between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
    Density means the number of dwelling units per net acre of land after land for streets and other public purposes is removed. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of mobile homes; ditching, filling, lagooning, dredging, grading, paving, excavation drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthier materials. 
    Drainage system means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge. 
    Drive-in restaurants means a retail outlet where food or beverages are sold to a substantial extent for consumption in parked motor vehicles. 
    Dwelling unit means one room or suite of private or interconnecting rooms, designed for independent occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes for weekly or longer basis and having cooking, toilet and bathing facilities. The structure containing the dwelling must be attached to a permanent foundation. A foundation is considered to be permanent if it is supported below the anticipated frost level, 48 inches below grade. If the location is not supported below the anticipated frost line, a recognized method of frost proofing may be utilized. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means a building containing three dwelling units or more. Any multifamily dwelling where units are available for rental periods of less than one week shall be considered a hotel, boardinghouse, or guest house. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building containing only one dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, townhouse, means a single-family dwelling jointed to other single-family dwellings by a party wall not over 25 feet in height and on a single lot. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building containing two dwelling units. 
    Environmental control facility means any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonable expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground and overhead lines and pipes for gas, electric, telephone, communications, cable television, steam, public water supply, sanitary sewage collection, stormwater conveyance or other comparable utilities. Essential services include such above surface facilities as poles, guide wires, fire alarm boxes, water hydrants, utility posts, police call boxes, and standpipes. Essential services do not include larger utility facilities such as electric substations, wastewater treatment plants, well houses, water reservoirs, and microwave and telecommunication towers. Essential services are permitted in all zoning districts without permits. 
    Extractive industries means and includes mining, quarrying, excavation, processing, storing, separating, cleaning, or marketing of natural resources such as sand, gravel, earth, peat, coal, minerals, gas and oil. 
    Family means a person living alone, or two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, in a dwelling unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, motel, hotel, club, fraternity, or sorority house, or other group, provided that unless all members except one are related by blood, adoption, marriage, or are legally cared for, no such group shall contain over five persons. 
    Family home. See Day care; family home. 
    Fixed houseboat means as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.01(1r) means a structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary high watermark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway. 
    Flood means a temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel. 
    Floodplain means the areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered with the regional flood. 
    Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages. 
    Floodway means the channel of a stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel that are required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flows of any river or stream including, but not limited to, flood flows associated with the regional flood. 
    Floor area , for the purpose of determining the floor area ratio, means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings. The floor area of a building shall include the occupied or usable floor area in a building but not including space occupied by columns, walls, partitions, mechanical shafts or ducts. 
    Floor area ratio (far) means the ratio of the total floor area of both principal and accessory buildings to the area of the lot. 
    Forestry means establishments engaged primarily in the operation of timber tracts, tree farms, forest nurseries, and related activities. 
    Foster home means a state-licensed facility providing care and supervision in a home setting for four or fewer children under the age of 18 or older adults. 
    Frontage means all the property abutting on one side of a street between intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, end of a dead-end street, or city boundary measured along the street line at the required setback line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts. 
    Garden supply stores means establishments engaged primarily in the sale of lawn and garden supplies including plant materials, fertilizers, garden tools and garden supplies. 
    Group home means a state-licensed facility located in a residential community providing shelter or rehabilitation for five or more children under the age of 18 years or older adults who, for various reasons, cannot reside in their natural home. 
    Guest home means a dwelling or part thereof occupied by a single housekeeping unit where meals or lodging are provided for transient guests for compensation by previous arrangements. 
    Height means the overall height of the top of a structure, including any appurtenance installed thereon, or the top of any object of natural growth. (For airport zoning purposes only.) 
    Height of building means the vertical distance from the main elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of a flat roof, of the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the main height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip and gambrel roofs, not including church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, chimneys, smokestacks, flag poles, radio and television towers, masts and aerials or parapet walls. 
    Home occupation means any occupation for gain or support conducted within a single dwelling unit or in a building accessory to a dwelling unit by the person maintaining a dwelling therein provided that the specified use is incidental to the residential use. Not more than one nonresident person shall be employed in the home occupation. 
    Hotel means a building designed for occupancy as a temporary residence of individuals who are lodged with or without individual meals, in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. 
    Industrial park means a planned, coordinated development of a tract of land with two or more separate industrial buildings. Such development is planned, designed, constructed, and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with special attention given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building design, and orientation. 
    Institution means a nonprofit organization of a public character, or a building being occupied by such organization. 
    Junkyard means an open area where waste or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, used lumber and bottles. A junkyard includes automobile wrecking yards and used implement storage yards, and includes any area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk but excludes uses established entirely within enclosed buildings in nonresidential districts. It also excludes establishments for the sale or purchase of used operable automobiles, and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of those manufacturing operations which conform to this chapter. Three or more unlicensed vehicles on one parcel shall constitute prima facia evidence of the operation of a junkyard. 
    Kennel means any premises or building in which four or more dogs or cats over six months of age are kept for board, propagation or sale. 
    Land means the earth, water, and air above, below, or on the surface, and includes any improvements or structures regarded as land. 
    Landmark means any identified improvement, which has a special character or special historic interest or cultural value as part of the heritage of the city. 
    Landmark site means any parcel of historic significance having value in tracing the history of aboriginal man or upon which an historical even has occurred, and which has been designated as a landmark site pursuant to this chapter. A landmark site includes the parcel upon which a landmark has been built. 
    Lot means a piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open space as required by this chapter and having frontage on a public street. 
    Lot line, front, means the line separating the lot from the street. 
    Lot line, rear, means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side, means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior side lot line. 
    Lot or parcel of record means a lot or parcel which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county prior to the date of adoption of this article. 
    Lot width means the mean width of the lot measured at right angles to its depth. Measurements for lot street frontage may be taken at the given setback requirements for the particular zoning district. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. The point of intersection of the street lines is the corner. 
    Lot, coverage, percent of, means the maximum percent of the lot which may be covered with principal and accessory structures. 
    Lot, depth, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot, through, means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
    Major street means a highway, road, or street designated on the official master street plan of the city. 
    Manufactured home means a generic term for single-family detached structures manufactured all or in part off-site and transported to the site in one or more sections that is built to the national manufactured home construction and safety standards. 
    Manufactured home dealers means an establishment engaged in the sale and service of manufactured and mobile homes. 
    Manufacturing means establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of material or substances into new products. 
    Manufacturing, heavy, means a use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted raw materials or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials or storage of manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
    Manufacturing, light, means a use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, or finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of the products, but exclusively basic industrial processing. 
    Mini-warehouse. See Warehouse; self-storage. 
    Model home means a dwelling manufactured, prefabricated, or otherwise erected or installed upon a lot for purposes of temporarily exhibiting the same as a sample, rather than for occupancy as a residence. 
    Navigable waters means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within Wisconsin and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other water within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters which are navigable under the laws of this state. Under Wis. Stats. § 281.31, notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated hereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Wis. Stats. § 61.351 or 62.221 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117 do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if: 
(1)  Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river. 
(2)  Those parts of the drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching. 
(3)  Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
    Nonconforming lot means a lot that does not comply with the minimum lot area or width requirements of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure that does not comply with the bulk, yard, setback, or height regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use of land means any use of a lot that does not conform to the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nursing home means a facility designed and licensed to provide care for aged or infirm persons requiring or receiving personal care or custodial care complying with the standards established by the state department of health and social services. 
    Objectionable element means any use operated in the manner described under the performance standards of this chapter. 
    Offensive means giving painful or unpleasant sensations: nauseous, obnoxious. 
    Open space, common, means an area of land or water, or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a planned unit development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents. 
    Open space, public, means an area of land or water or both on the comprehensive plan or official map designated as park, beautification, or land to be kept free of development. 
    Optometric clinic means an office or facility primarily offering the services of optometry under Wis. Stats. ch. 449 and including optician's services in conjunction therewith. 
    Ordinary high watermark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristics. 
    Outside tavern premises means that portion of a lot or parcel of land which a Class "B" fermented malt beverage license or retail Class "B" liquor license has been issued or may be issued enclosed by a substantial fence with gate, attached to and contiguous with the building premises, at least six feet in height and capable of limiting access to such outdoor premises other than through the building premises. 
    Parcel means any contiguous quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, that is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit, or that has been used or developed as a unit. Parcel includes an easement supporting or related to a primary parcel, and a condominium unit. Only one such designation by the owner shall be allowed under this chapter. 
    Planner means the city planner designated to advise and assist the commission and common council on land use and development matters. 
    Planning agency means the city plan commission created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(1), a board of public land commissioners or a committee of the city's governing body which acts on matters pertaining to planning and zoning. 
    Portable buildings means buildings that are not permanently attached or adhered to the ground. The maximum size of a portable building is 144 square feet. Even though they do not require a permit, they must follow all setback requirements. 
    Professional office means the office of a member of a recognized profession including the offices of doctor's physicians, dentists, optometrists, ministers, architects, professional engineers, lawyers and other similar professional occupations. 
    Public works yards means municipal, county, state, and federal administrative buildings; warehouses; garages; storage yards; and shops that are owned and operated by a governmental unit. 
    Railroads means railroad rights-of-way including terminals, transfer and storage tracks, but not accessory structures except those incidental to minor communications and switching equipment. 
    Recreational vehicle means all types of recreational vehicles or devices normally used by adults, including, but not limited to, such items as travel homes, camper trailers, pick-up camper attachments, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, boats, flotation devices, motor bikes and including go-carts and stock cars. 
    Regional flood means a flood determined by the department of natural resources that is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on a particular stream. The regional flood generally has an average frequency in the order of the 100-year recurrence interval flood determined from an analysis of floods on a particular stream and other streams in the same general region. 
    Rehabilitation centers means a home in which persons live while receiving therapy and counseling for the following purposes: 
(1)  To assist them to recuperate from the effects of drugs or alcohol; 
(2)  To assist them to adjust to living with the handicaps of emotional or mental disorder, or mental retardation; 
(3)  To assist them to adjust to living with the handicaps of physical disability; 
(4)  To assist them to be housed under supervision while under the constraints of alternatives to imprisonment including, but not limited to, prerelease, work-release, and probationary programs, provided that the number of occupants shall not exceed 20 at any one time; and where the home is managed by an organization operating a program that is approved by the state; and which is also approved by the appropriate governmental entity having authority under law to license or authorize the operation. 
    Repair shops means establishments engaged in miscellaneous repairs of household items and smaller business equipment for the general public and business. 
    Retail trade means establishments engaged in primarily selling merchandise for personal or household consumption and rendering service incidental to the sales of goods. Retail trade includes: 
(1)  General merchandisers. 
(2)  Hardware stores. 
(3)  Paint and wallpaper stores. 
(4)  Food stores. 
(5)  Apparel stores. 
(6)  Home furnishings and equipment stores. 
(7)  Eating and drinking places. 
(8)  Miscellaneous retail. 
For purposes of enforcement of this chapter, retail trade excludes: 
(1)  Building supply stores. 
(2)  Garden and lawn supply stores. 
(3)  Manufactured home dealers. 
(4)  Automotive dealers and service stations. 
    Runway means a level portion of an airport having a surface specially developed and maintained for the landing and take-off of aircraft. 
    Schools, public, means public, parochial and other private schools offering educational courses. 
    Services, business, means establishments engaged primarily in rendering services to business establishments such as advertising agencies, mailing services, employment agencies, and computer software companies. 
    Services, personal, means establishments engaged in providing services primarily to individuals and households, such as laundry, dry cleaning, copy shops, beauty/barber shops. 
    Services, professional, means establishments engaged in providing the general public and businesses with professional services in an office setting. Professional services includes: 
(1)  Security and commodity brokers. 
(2)  Insurance agents and brokers. 
(3)  Real estate services. 
(4)  Holding and other investment offices. 
(5)  Professional health services. 
(6)  Legal services. 
(7)  Engineering, accounting, research, management, and related services. 
(8)  Educational services. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the front line of the building, excluding steps and unenclosed porches, and the street property line. 
    Shopping center means a preplanned group of retail stores with common use areas for access, pedestrian, auto and service circulation, common parking, and landscaping. 
    Shoreland means lands within the following distances from the ordinary high watermark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. 
    Shoreland-Wetland District means the zoning district created as a part of this chapter, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the wetland inventory maps which have been adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
    Sign, on-site, means a sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include street graphics erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business or the provision of outdoor displays or display space on a lease or rental basis only. 
    Sign, trailer, means a motor vehicle or trailer with a street graphic mounted thereon. It may be double-faced. 
    Signs mean any name, identification, description, display, illustration or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to any object, produce, service, activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise, but does not include any display of official court or public office notices, nor any official traffic control device, nor does it include a flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, state, county, municipality, school or religious group. A sign does not include an object located completely within an enclosed building. For the purposes of removal, a the term "sign" also includes all sign structures. 
    Slope means an incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio of horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude. (Example: 3:1 slope is three feet horizontal and one foot vertical). 
    Standard performance means a criterion established in the interest of protecting the public health and safety for the control of noise, odor, smoke, noxious gases, and other objectionable or dangerous elements generated by and inherent in or incidental to land use. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor, and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half, means a story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of the story. 
    Street means a public right-of-way more than 20 feet in width, approved and accepted by public authority, which provides a primary means of public access to abutting property. The term "street" includes avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or any other similar term. 
    Structure means anything constructed, installed or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land, or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. It includes a movable structure, fences, billboards, swimming pools, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, tracks and street graphics. 
    Structure alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, lintels or girders. 
    Tourist home means a roominghouse operated in conjunction with a bed and breakfast establishment licensed under Wis. Admin. Code ch. ATCP 73 that is located at its nearest point no more than 100 feet away from the building housing the bed and breakfast. 
    Tree means any object of natural growth, except farm crops which are cut at least once a year, and except for shrubs, bushes, or plants which do not grow to a height of more than 20 feet. 
    Unnecessary hardship means circumstances where special conditions which were not self-created affect a particular property and make strict conformity with restrictions governing area, setback, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this chapter. 
    Use means the purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged, designed, or intended for or which either land or a building or structure is, or may be, occupied or maintained. 
    Use, principal, means the main use to which a parcel is devoted and the main purpose for which the premises exists. 
    Utility facilities means utility equipment including, but not limited to, electric utility substations, water reservoirs, treatment plants, transformer stations, booster stations, transmitters, and other comparable utility facilities. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Visual screen means a permanent fence or wall that permits no view into the area to be screened; or plantings or vegetation that permit no view into the area to be screened and that admit a maximum penetration of light through no more than an evenly distributed 25 percent of their vertical surface during any season of the year. 
    Warehouse means a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
    Warehouse; self-storage means warehouses serving primarily the general public with separate access for each storage stall, one story, less than 10,000 square feet per building; total area less than 60,000 square feet. 
    Wetland alteration means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area. 
    Wholesale trade means establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, construction contractors, and professional business users; or to other wholesalers, or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. 
    Yard means an open space, other than a court, on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. 
    Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building, situated between the side of the building and the adjacent side of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. If there is no front yard, the front boundary of the side yard shall be the front line of the lot, and if there is no rear yard the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the lot. The street side yard of corner lots extend from the rear of the front yard to the rear line of the lot. 
    Zero lot line housing means owner-occupied housing located within a single structure where the common wall between dwellings is approximately perpendicular to the street right-of-way line and where the lot of record before divided and upon which the single structure is located meets minimum width, area and code requirements of the required district. 
(b)  If questions arise as to the interpretation of common usage terms, the zoning administrator should refer to the definitions contained in Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary or subsequent editions. Interpretations of land use activities should be based on the 1987 Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, or subsequent editions. Interpretations of terms related to structures should be based on the state of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code or the state department of commerce enrolled building code. 
(Prior Code, § 16.03) 
Sec. 16-2. - Statutory authorization, finding of fact, and statement of purpose. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 281.31. 
(b)  Finding of fact and purpose. Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and the pollution of the navigable waters of the city would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare and impair the tax base. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
(2)  Maintain the storm and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands. 
(3)  Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters. 
(4)  Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitats. 
(5)  Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area. 
(6)  Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth moving activities. 
(Prior Code, § 16.01) 
Sec. 16-3. - Compliance. 
    The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland area of the city shall be in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 16.02(1)) 
Sec. 16-4. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the department of transportation are exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.12(4)(a) applies. 
(Prior Code, § 16.02(2)) 
Sec. 16-5. - Abrogation and greater restriction. 
(a)  This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any city zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23 or 87.30 which relate to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another city ordinance is more restrictive, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Prior Code, § 16.02(3)) 
Sec. 16-6. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state law. Where a provision of this chapter is required by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, and where the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of, or most recent text amendment to, this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 16.02(4)) 
Sec. 16-7. - Amendments. 
    The city council may alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this chapter in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, and the following: 
(1)  A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within five days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the city planning agency. 
(2)  All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning regulations shall be referred to the city planning agency and a public hearing shall be held as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2. The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
(3)  In order to ensure that this chapter will remain consistent with the shoreland protection objectives of Wis. Stats. § 281.31, the city governing body may not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district or any portion thereof where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions: 
a.  Storm and floodwater storage capacity. 
b.  Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland. 
c.  Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters. 
d.  Shoreline protection against erosion. 
e.  Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds. 
f.  Wildlife habitat. 
g.  Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species. 
(4)  Where the district office of the department determines that a proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (3) of this section, the department shall so notify the city of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment. 
(5)  The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with: 
a.  A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the city planning agency on a proposed text or map amendment within ten days after the submission of those recommendations to the city governing body. 
b.  Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map amendment within ten days after the action is taken. 
(6)  If the department notifies the city planning agency in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (3) of this section, that proposed amendment if approved by the city governing body shall not become effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the city approval was mailed to the department as required by subsection (5) of this section. If within the 30-day period the department notifies the city that the department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the city as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.231(6) and 61.351(6) the proposed amendment shall not become effective until the ordinance adoption procedure under Wis. Stats. §§ 62.231(6) or 61.351(6) is completed or otherwise terminated. 
(Prior Code, § 16.16) 
Sec. 16-8. - Zoning maps. 
    The following maps are adopted and made part of this chapter and are on file in the office of the city clerk: 
(1)  State wetland inventory maps, stamped "FINAL" on December 13, 1985. 
(2)  Floodplain zoning maps titled Flood Boundary-Flooding Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, dated June 17, 1986. 
(3)  Sparta 7.5 minute United States Geological Survey Maps, dated 1983 or the most recent version. 
(Prior Code, § 16.04) 
Sec. 16-9. - District boundaries. 
(a)  The Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District includes all wetlands in the city, which are five acres or more and are shown on the final wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this chapter and which are: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high watermark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the city shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the department publication, Surface Water Resources of the County, or are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(2)  Within 300 feet of the ordinary high watermark of navigable rivers distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. Floodplain zoning maps adopted in this section shall be used to determine the extent of floodplain areas. 
(b)  Determinations of navigability and ordinary high watermark location shall initially be made by the zoning administrator. When questions arise, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high watermark. 
(c)  When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district boundary shown on the official zoning maps and actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped is in error. If department staff concur with the zoning administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors shown on the official shoreland-wetland zoning maps, the zoning administrator shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment with a reasonable period. 
(Prior Code, § 16.05) 
Sec. 16-10. - Permitted use. 
    The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31 and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if applicable: 
(1)  Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs: 
a.  Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and boating. 
b.  The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of the crops. 
c.  The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber. 
d.  The pasturing of livestock. 
e.  The cultivation of agricultural crops. 
f.  The construction and maintenance of duck blinds. 
(2)  Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
a.  The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected. 
b.  The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries. 
c.  The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible. 
d.  The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance. 
e.  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance. 
f.  The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District, provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in section 16-7(3). 
g.  The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction. 
(3)  Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a zoning permit and which may include wetland alterations only to the extend specifically provided below: 
a.  The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of the city street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under this section, provided that: 
1.  The road cannot as a practical matter be located outside the wetland. 
2.  The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 16-7(3). 
3.  The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use. 
4.  Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only. 
5.  Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road. 
b.  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings, provided that: 
1.  The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals. 
2.  The building cannot as a practical matter be located outside the wetland. 
3.  The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area. 
4.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building is allowed. 
c.  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game birds and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that: 
1.  Any private development allowed under this subsection shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose. 
2.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed. 
3.  The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in subsection (3) of this section. 
4.  Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values. 
5.  The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines, sewage collection lines and related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that: 
(i)  The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines cannot as a practical matter be located outside the wetland. 
(ii)  Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed. 
(iii)  Such construction or maintenance is done is a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 16-7(3). 
(Prior Code, § 16.06) 
Sec. 16-11. - Prohibited use. 
(a)  Any use not listed in section 16-10 is prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this chapter in accordance with section 16-7. 
(b)  The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high water mark of any navigable waters are prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 16.07) 
Secs. 16-12-16-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES 

Sec. 16-43. - Nonconforming structures. 
    The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the time this article or an applicable amendment to this article took effect and which is not in conformity with the provisions of the article, including the routine maintenance of a building or structure, may be continued, subject to the following: 
(1)  Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure in existence at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment of this chapter adopted under Wis. Stats. § 62.231 or of an environmental control facility in existence on May 7, 1982, related to that structure, is permitted under Wis. Stats. § 62.231(5). Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h) applies to any environmental control facility that was not in existence on May 7, 1982, but was in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to this chapter. 
(3)  Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this article adopted under Wis. Stats. § 62.231 or 61.351 may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of the article. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended. 
(4)  The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the ordinary high watermark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 30.121. 
(Prior Code, § 16.08(1)) 
Sec. 16-44. - Nonconforming uses. 
    Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses. 
(Prior Code, § 16.08(2)) 
Secs. 16-45-16-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 16-62. - Zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter and assist them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms. 
(2)  Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with this chapter. 
(3)  Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions. 
(4)  Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties. 
(5)  Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or text interpretation and map or text amendments within ten days after they are granted or denied to the appropriate district office of the department. 
(6)  Investigate and report violations of this chapter to the appropriate city planning agency and the district attorney, corporation counsel or city attorney. 
(Prior Code, § 16.09) 
Sec. 16-63. - Zoning permits. 
(a)  When required. Unless another section of this chapter specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator before any new development, as defined in section 16-7, or any change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated. 
(b)  Application. An application for a zoning permit shall be made to the zoning administrator upon forms furnished by the city and shall include for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations the following information: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property owner and contractor, where applicable. 
b.  Legal description of the property and a general description of the proposed use or development. 
c.  Whether or not a private water supply or sewage system is to be installed. 
(2)  Site development plan. The site development plan shall be submitted as a part of the permit application and shall contain the following information drawn to scale: 
a.  Dimensions and area of the lot. 
b.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and centerline of all abutting streets or highways. 
c.  Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems. 
d.  Location of the ordinary high watermark of any abutting navigable waterways. 
e.  Boundaries of all wetlands. 
f.  Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover. 
g.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from floodplain zoning maps. 
h.  Location of existing or future access roads. 
i.  Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration. 
(c)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(Prior Code, § 16.10) 
Sec. 16-64. - Certificates of compliance. 
(a)  Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required, no land shall be occupied or used and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof and the proposed use thereof conform to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a zoning or conditional use permit. 
(3)  The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after notification of the completion of the work specified in the zoning or conditional use permit, providing the building or premises and proposed use thereof conforms with all the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The zoning administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building, premises or part thereof, pursuant to rules and regulations established by the city governing body. 
(c)  Upon written request from the owner, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of ordinance adoption, certifying after inspection the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether such use conforms to the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 16.11) 
Sec. 16-65. - Fee. 
    The city governing body may by resolution adopt fees for the following: 
(1)  Zoning permits. 
(2)  Certificates of compliance. 
(3)  Public hearing. 
(4)  Legal notice publications. 
(5)  Rezoning petitions. 
(Prior Code, § 16.12) 
Sec. 16-66. - Recording. 
    Where a zoning permit or conditional use permit is approved, an appropriate record shall be made by the zoning administrator of the land use and structures permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 16.13) 
Sec. 16-67. - Revocation. 
    Where the conditions of a zoning permit or conditional use permit are violated, the permit shall be revoked by the board of appeals. 
(Prior Code, § 16.14) 
Sec. 16-68. - Board of appeals procedure. 
(a)  Authority. The board of appeals: 
(1)  Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(2)  May authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the dimensional terms of this chapter as shall not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions unique to a property, a literal enforcement of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship as defined in section 16-7. In the issuance of a variance, the purpose of this chapter shall be observed. The granting of a variance shall not have the effect of granting or extending any use of property which is prohibited in that zoning district by this chapter. 
(b)  Appeals to the board. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the community affected by any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator or other administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board by filing with the official whose decision is in question and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The zoning administrator or other official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record on the matter appealed. 
(c)  Public hearings. 
(1)  Before making a decision on an appeal or application, the board of appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing. The board shall give public notice of the hearing by publishing a Class II notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985 specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the board. At the public hearing any party may present testimony in person, by agent or attorney. 
(2)  A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the department at least ten days prior to all public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning. 
(d)  Decision. 
(1)  The final disposition of an appeal or application for a conditional use permit before the board of appeals shall be in the form of a written decision, made within a reasonable time after the public hearing and signed by the board chairperson. Such decision shall state the specific facts which are the basis of the board's determination and shall either affirm, reverse or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution or grant the application for a conditional use. 
(2)  A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the department within ten days after the decision is issued. 
(Prior Code, § 16.15) 
Sec. 16-69. - Enforcement and penalty. 
    Any development, building or structure or accessory building or structure constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use or accessory use established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in violation of the provisions of the chapter by any person, including building contractors or their agents shall be deemed a violation. The zoning administrator shall refer violations to the city planning agency and the district attorney, corporation counsel or city attorney, who shall prosecute such violations. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00 per offense, together with the taxable costs of the action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the city, state or any citizen thereof, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30(2). 
(Prior Code, § 16.17) 
Chapter 17 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Legal authority. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authorization contained in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23 and 87.30. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(2)) 
State Law reference- City planning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23; floodplain zoning, Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
Sec. 17-2. - Jurisdiction. 
    The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands and waters within the corporate limits of the city. The jurisdiction of this chapter shall also extend to those lands and waters lying within the unincorporated areas within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits in the cities of Sparta and Angelo that are approved by a majority of the members of the appropriate joint extraterritorial zoning committee pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7a) of state law, and as indicated on the official zoning map for the extraterritorial area. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(3)) 
Sec. 17-3. - Purpose. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the purpose of: 
(1)  Promoting health, safety, morals, and general welfare; 
(2)  Securing adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire and other dangers; 
(3)  Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings; and 
(4)  Preserving and enhancing aesthetic values, generally, throughout the city. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(5)) 
Sec. 17-4. - Intent. 
    This chapter is intended to establish and accomplish certain standards and objectives by: 
(1)  Dividing the entire city and its extraterritorial area into districts and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business, manufacturing, or other specified uses; 
(2)  Avoiding or lessening congestion in the public streets by adequate requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities; 
(3)  Preventing the overcrowding of land by regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected; 
(4)  Establishing, regulating, and limiting the building or setback lines on or along streets, alleys or property lines; 
(5)  Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas, and regulating and determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding such buildings; 
(6)  Permitting in each of the zoning districts only those uses, buildings, and structures that are compatible with the character of each district; 
(7)  Providing controls over additions to and alterations and remodeling of existing buildings and structures; 
(8)  Providing controls governing the continuation of those uses, buildings, and structures that are incompatible with the character of the districts in which they are located; 
(9)  Providing controls governing the size and location of signs and other forms of outdoor advertising; 
(10)  Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies for the administration and enforcement of this chapter; and 
(11)  Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any amendment thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(6)) 
Sec. 17-5. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use or structure means a use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a building or to the principal use of land and which is located on the same parcel and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building or land use. Accessory uses or structures to residential principal uses may include garages, carports, other parking spaces, swimming pools, tennis courts, play houses, wood shops and tool sheds. Accessory uses in residential districts shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry, except as defined as a home occupation and shall not include the commercial boarding of animals or the keeping of fowl or farm animals. 
    Administrator means the zoning administrator who is designated as the enforcement officer of this chapter. 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a predominant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals, or videocassettes, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specific sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein). 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, car, theater, restaurant or similar establishment which frequently features live performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas or which regularly feature films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. An adult cabaret does not include theaters, performing art centers, civic centers and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion of, employees engaging in nude erotic dancing. 
    Agricultural services means establishments engaged in providing services to agricultural establishments and landowners, including soil preparation, crop services, veterinary services, farm management, and landscape and horticultural services. 
    Agriculture means the use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities. 
    Airport means the Sparta-Fort McCoy Airport located in Section 16, Township 17 North, Range 3 West Monroe County, Wisconsin. 
    Airport affected area means the area located within three miles of the boundaries of the airport. 
    Airport hazard means any structure, object, or natural growth, or use of land that obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing and taking off. 
    Alley means a thoroughfare less than 80 feet in width and for the purpose of providing access to the rear of buildings in a platted city block. 
    Amusement and recreation services means establishments not defined elsewhere, engaged in providing indoor and outdoor amusement, entertainment, and recreation to the general public. The term "amusement and recreation services" includes both indoor and outdoor activities. 
    Automobile repair and services means general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers; collision services including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop and vehicle steam cleaning. Automotive services include car washes, except for single stall car washes incidental to the sale of gasoline. 
    Automobile service station or gas station means a place where gasoline, kerosene, or any other motor fuel, lubricating oil, or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale and delivered directly into motor vehicles, including greasing, oiling, and single stall car washes incidental to the sale of gasoline. 
    Automotive, implement, and recreational vehicle sales means an open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles, implements or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done. 
    Basement means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling having at least one-half of its height below grade. A basement shall be counted as a story. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment means any place of lodging that provides four or fewer rooms for rent, for more than ten nights in a 12-month period, is the owner's personal residence, is occupied by the owner at the time of the rental, and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast. 
    Block means the property abutting a street between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets. A railroad right-of-way, the boundary line of unsubdivided acreage, or a body of water shall be regarded the same as an intersecting or intercepting street for the purpose of defining a block. 
    Boarding home means a dwelling or part thereof occupied by a single housekeeping unit where meals and lodging are provided for three or more persons not related to the owner for compensation by previous arrangement, excluding transients. 
    Buildable lot area means the part of the lot not included within the open space areas required by this chapter. 
    Building, height, means the vertical distance from the grade level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. 
    Building supply stores means retail establishments engaged primarily in the selling of lumber and other building materials. 
    Buildings. See Structure. 
    Campgrounds means establishments primarily engaged in providing overnight or short-term sites for recreation vehicles, trailers, campers and tents. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a permit for restoration or change of a landmark, landmark site, or historic preservation district site that shall accompany a building or demolition permit and is issued upon direction of the city historic preservation commission. 
    Chair means the chair of the plan commission or the chair of the board of appeals as the context requires. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow is that water which is flowing within the limits of the defined channel. 
    Civic uses means community centers, public libraries, public museums, public art galleries, public recreations, post offices, fire stations, public botanical gardens, and similar public uses, each without outdoor storage and municipal garages with screened outdoor storage. 
    Clubs and associations means a nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues, and are organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
    Community based residential facility (CBRF) means a place where three or more unrelated adults reside in which care, treatment, or services above the level of room and board, but not including nursing care, are provided to persons residing in the facility as a primary function of the facility. Same as the definition of community-based residential facility (CBRF) defined in Wis. Admin. Code § DHS 89.13(4). 
    Community recreation facilities means publicly or privately owned recreation facilities that provide sites for large public gatherings such as fairgrounds, zoos, race tracks, and golf courses. 
    Comprehensive plan means the long-range master plan for the desirable use and development of land in the city as officially adopted and as amended from time to time by the plan commission and certified to the common council. 
    Conditional use permit means a document signed by the zoning administrator specifying the requirements for which a conditional use may be permitted within a parcel. A conditional use is a use permitted within a district other than a permitted use. 
    Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common with other purchases in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with separate interest in space. A condominium may include, in addition, separate interest in other portions of the property. 
    Construction means the erection or alteration of any structure or objects either of a permanent or temporary character. 
    Contractors, building construction, means general and special trade contractors who undertake activities related to building construction, including general construction, electrical work, painting, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, roofing, and sheet metal work. 
    Contractors, heavy construction, means general contractors engaged in heavy construction other than buildings, such as highways, bridges, sewers, railroads, and airports. 
    Convalescent home. See Nursing home. 
    Convenience store means any retail establishment serving primarily the surrounding neighborhood and offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area less than 5,000 square feet. Convenience stores do not include the sale of gasoline. 
    Court means an open, unoccupied and unobstructed space other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings. 
    Day care center means a licensed facility where a person other than a relative or guardian provides care and supervision for four or more children under seven years of age, for less than 24 hours a day and for compensation. 
    Day care center, adult, means an establishment primarily engaged in the care of senior citizens, infirm, or impaired individuals, where medical care or delinquency correction is not a major element. 
    Day care center, family, means a center that provides care and supervision for five to eight children. 
    Day care center, group, means a center that provides care and supervision for nine or more children. 
    Day care center, night, means a group day care center or family day care center which operates during any period of time between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
    Density means the number of dwelling units per net acre of land after land for streets and other public purposes is removed. 
    Drive-in restaurant means a retail outlet where food or beverages are sold to a substantial extent for consumption in parked motor vehicles. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means a building containing three dwelling units or more. Any multifamily dwelling where units are available for rental periods of less than one week shall be considered a hotel, boardinghouse, or guest house. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building containing only one dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, townhouse, means a single-family dwelling jointed to other single-family dwellings by a party wall not over 25 feet in height and on a single lot. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building containing two dwelling units. 
    Dwelling unit means one room or suite of private or interconnecting rooms, designed for independent occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes for weekly or longer basis and having cooking, toilet and bathing facilities. The structure containing the dwelling must be attached to a permanent foundation. A foundation is considered to be permanent if it is supported below the anticipated frost level-48 inches below grade. If the location is not supported below the anticipated frost line, a recognized method of frost proofing may be utilized. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground and overhead lines and pipes for gas, electric, telephone, communications, cable television, steam, public water supply, sanitary sewage collection, stormwater conveyance or other comparable utilities. Essential services include such above surface facilities as poles, guide wires, fire alarm boxes, water hydrants, utility posts, police call boxes, and standpipes. Essential services do not include larger utility facilities such as electric substations, wastewater treatment plants, well houses, water reservoirs, and microwave and telecommunication towers. Essential services are permitted in all zoning districts without permits. 
    Extractive industries includes mining, quarrying, excavation, processing, storing, separating, cleaning, or marketing of natural resources such as sand, gravel, earth, peat, coal, minerals, gas and oil. 
    Family means a person living alone, or two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, in a dwelling unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, motel, hotel, club, fraternity, or sorority house, or other group, provided that unless all members except one are related by blood, adoption, marriage, or are legally cared for, no such group shall contain over five persons. 
    Family home. See Day care center, family. 
    Flood means a temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel. 
    Floodplain means the areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered with the regional flood. 
    Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages. 
    Floodway means the channel of a stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel that are required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flows of any river or stream, including, but not limited to, flood flows associated with the regional flood. 
    Floor area, for the purpose of determining the floor area ratio, means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The floor area of a building shall include the occupied or usable floor area in a building but does not include space occupied by columns, walls, partitions, mechanical shafts or ducts. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the ratio of the total floor area of both principal and accessory buildings to the area of the lot. 
    Forestry means establishments engaged primarily in the operation of timber tracts, tree farms, forest nurseries, and related activities. 
    Foster home means a state-licensed facility providing care and supervision in a home setting for four or fewer children under the age of 18 or older adults. 
    Frontage means all the property abutting on one side of a street between intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, end of a dead-end street, or city boundary measured along the street line at the required setback line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts. 
    Garden supply stores means establishments engaged primarily in the sale of lawn and garden supplies, including plant materials, fertilizers, garden tools and garden supplies. 
    Group home means a state-licensed facility located in a residential community providing shelter or rehabilitation for five or more children under the age of 18 years or older adults who, for various reasons, cannot reside in their natural home. 
    Guest home means a dwelling or part thereof occupied by a single housekeeping unit where meals or lodging are provided for transient guests for compensation by previous arrangements. 
    Height means the overall height of the top of a structure, including any appurtenance installed thereon, or the top of any object of natural growth. (For airport zoning purposes only.) 
    Height of building means the vertical distance from the main elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of a flat roof, of the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the main height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip and gambrel roofs, not including church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, chimneys, smokestacks, flag poles, radio and television towers, masts and aerials or parapet walls. 
    Home occupation means any occupation for gain or support conducted within a single dwelling unit or in a building accessory to a dwelling unit by the person maintaining a dwelling therein provided that the specified use is incidental to the residential use. Not more than one nonresident person shall be employed in the home occupation. 
    Hotel means a building designed for occupancy as a temporary residence of individuals who are lodged with or without individual meals, in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. 
    Industrial park means a planned, coordinated development of a tract of land with two or more separate industrial buildings. Such development is planned, designed, constructed, and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with special attention given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building design, and orientation. 
    Institution means a nonprofit organization of a public character, or a building being occupied by such organization. 
    Junkyard means an open area where waste or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, used lumber and bottles. The term "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking yards and used implement storage yards, and includes any area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk but excludes uses established entirely within enclosed buildings in nonresidential districts. The term "junkyard" also excludes establishments for the sale or purchase of used operable automobiles, and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of those manufacturing operations which conform to this chapter. Three or more unlicensed vehicles on one parcel shall constitute prima facia evidence of the operation of a junkyard. 
    Kennel means any premises or building in which four or more dogs or cats over six months of age are kept for board, propagation or sale. 
    Land means the earth, water, and air above, below, or on the surface, and includes any improvements or structures regarded as land. 
    Landmark means any identified improvement, which has a special character or special historic interest or cultural value as part of the heritage of the city. 
    Landmark site means any parcel of historic significance having value in tracing the history or aboriginal man or upon which a historical even has occurred, and which has been designated as a landmark site pursuant to this chapter. A landmark site includes the parcel upon which a landmark has been built. 
    Lot means a piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of the buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open space as required by this chapter and having frontage on a public street. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. The point of intersection of the street lines is the corner. 
    Lot, coverage, percent of, means the maximum percent of the lot which may be covered with principal and accessory structures. 
    Lot, depth, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line, front, means the line separating the lot from the street. 
    Lot line, rear, means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side, means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior side lot line. 
    Lot or parcel of record means a lot or parcel which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Lot, through, means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
    Lot width means the mean width of the lot measured at right angles to its depth. Measurements for lot street frontage may be taken at the given setback requirements for the particular zoning district. 
    Major street means a highway, road, or street designated on the official master street plan of the city. 
    Manufactured home means a generic term for single-family detached structures manufactured all or in part off-site and transported to the site in one or more sections that is built to the national manufactured home construction and safety standards. 
    Manufactured home dealers means establishments engaged in the sale and service of manufactured and mobile homes. 
    Manufacturing means establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of material or substances into new products. 
    Manufacturing, heavy, means a use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted raw materials or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials or storage of manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
    Manufacturing, light, means a use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, or finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of the products, but exclusively basic industrial processing. 
    Mini-warehouse. See Warehouse, self-storage. 
    Model home means a dwelling manufactured, prefabricated, or otherwise erected or installed upon a lot for purposes of temporarily exhibiting the same as a sample, rather than for occupancy as a residence. 
    Nonconforming lot means a lot that does not comply with the minimum lot area or width requirements of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure that does not comply with the bulk, yard, setback, or height regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use of land means any use of a lot that does not conform to the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nursing home means a facility designed and licensed to provide care for aged or infirm persons requiring or receiving personal care or custodial care complying with the standards established by the state department of health and social services. 
    Objectionable element means any use operated in the manner described under the performance standards of this chapter. 
    Offensive means giving painful or unpleasant sensations: nauseous, obnoxious. 
    Open space, common, means an area of land or water, or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a planned unit development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents. 
    Open space, public, means an area of land or water or both on the comprehensive plan or official map designated as park, beautification, or land to be kept free of development. 
    Optometric clinic means an office or facility primarily offering the services of optometric under Wis. Stats. ch. 449 and including optician's services in conjunction therewith. 
    Outside tavern premises means that portion of a lot or parcel of land which a Class "B" fermented malt beverage license or retail Class "B" liquor license has been issued or may be issued enclosed by a substantial fence with gate, attached to and contiguous with the building premises, at least six feet in height and capable of limiting access to such outdoor premises other than through the building premises. 
    Parcel means any contiguous quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, that is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit, or that has been used or developed as a unit. The term "parcel" includes an easement supporting or related to a primary parcel, and a condominium unit. Only one such designation by the owner shall be allowed under this chapter. 
    Planner means the city planner designated to advise and assist the commission and common council on land use and development matters. 
    Portable buildings means buildings that are not permanently attached or adhered to the ground. Maximum size of a portable building is 144 square feet. Even though they do not require a permit, portable buildings must follow all setback requirements. 
    Professional office means the office of a member of a recognized profession, including the offices of doctor's physicians, dentists, optometrists, ministers, architects, professional engineers, lawyers and other similar professional occupations. 
    Public works yards means municipal, county, state, and federal administrative buildings; warehouses; garages; storage yards; and shops that are owned and operated by a governmental unit. 
    Railroads means railroad rights-of-way, including terminals, transfer and storage tracks, but not accessory structures except those incidental to minor communications and switching equipment. 
    Recreational vehicle means all types of recreational vehicles or devices normally used by adults, including, but not limited to, such items as travel homes, camper trailers, pick-up camper attachments, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, boats, floatation devices, motor bikes and including go-carts and stock cars. 
    Regional flood means a flood determined by the department of natural resources that is representative of large floods know to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on a particular stream. The regional flood generally has an average frequency in the order of the 100-year recurrence interval flood determined from an analysis of floods on a particular stream and other streams in the same general region. 
    Rehabilitation centers means a home in which persons live while receiving therapy and counseling for the following purposes: 
(1)  To assist them to recuperate from the effects of drugs or alcohol; 
(2)  To assist them to adjust to living with the handicaps of emotional or mental disorder, or mental retardation; 
(3)  To assist them to adjust to living with the handicaps of physical disability; 
(4)  To assist them to be housed under supervision while under the constraints of alternatives to imprisonment, including, but not limited to, prerelease, work-release, and probationary programs, provided that the number of occupants shall not exceed 20 at any one time; and where the home is managed by an organization operating a program that is approved by the state; and which is also approved by the appropriate governmental entity having authority under law to license or authorize the operation. 
    Repair shops means establishments engaged in miscellaneous repairs of household items and smaller business equipment for the general public and business. 
    Retail trade. 
(1)  The term "retail trade" means establishments engaged in primarily selling merchandise for personal or household consumption and rendering service incidental to the sales of goods. 
(2)  The term "retail trade" includes: 
a.  General merchandisers; 
b.  Hardware stores; 
c.  Paint and wallpaper stores; 
d.  Food stores; 
e.  Apparel stores; 
f.  Home furnishings and equipment stores; 
g.  Eating and drinking places; 
h.  Miscellaneous retail. 
(3)  For purposes of enforcement of this chapter, the term "retail trade" excludes: 
a.  Building supply stores; 
b.  Garden and lawn supply stores; 
c.  Manufactured home dealers; 
d.  Automotive dealers and service stations. 
    Runway means a level portion of an airport having a surface specially developed and maintained for the landing and take-off of aircraft. 
    Schools, public, means public, parochial and other private schools offering educational courses. 
    Services, business, means establishments engaged primarily in rendering services to business establishments such as advertising agencies, mailing services, employment agencies, and computer software companies. 
    Services, personal, means establishments engaged in providing services primarily to individuals and households, such as laundry, dry cleaning, copy shops, beauty/barber shops. 
    Services, professional, means establishments engaged in providing the general public and businesses with professional services in an office setting. The term "services, professional" includes: 
(1)  Security and commodity brokers; 
(2)  Insurance agents and brokers; 
(3)  Real estate services; 
(4)  Holding and other investment offices; 
(5)  Professional health services; 
(6)  Legal services; 
(7)  Engineering, accounting, research, management, and related services; 
(8)  Educational services. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the front line of the building, excluding steps and unenclosed porches, and the street property line. 
    Shopping center means a preplanned group of retail stores with common use areas for access, pedestrian, auto and service circulation, common parking, and landscaping. 
    Sign, on-site, means a sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include street graphics erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business or the provision of outdoor displays or display space on a lease or rental basis only. 
    Sign, trailer, means a motor vehicle or trailer with a street graphic mounted thereon. It may be double-faced. 
    Signs means any name, identification, description, display, illustration or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on private property and expopsed to the public and which directs attention to any object, produce, service, activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise, but does not include any display of official court or public office notices, nor any official traffic control device, nor does it include a flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, state, county, municipality, school or religious group. A sign does not include an object located completely within an enclosed building. For the purposes of removal, a sign also includes all sign structures. 
    Slope means an incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio of horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude. (Example: 3:1 slope is three feet horizontal and one foot vertical.) 
    Standard performance means a criterion established in the interest of protecting the public health and safety for the control of noise, odor, smoke, noxious gases, and other objectionable or dangerous elements generated by and inherent in or incidental to land use. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor, and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half, means a story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of the story. 
    Street means a public right-of-way more than 20 feet in width, approved and accepted by public authority, which provides a primary means of public access to abutting property. The term "street" shall include avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or any other similar term. 
    Structure means anything constructed, installed or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land, or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. The term "structure" includes a movable structure, fences, billboards, swimming pools, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, tracks and street graphics. 
    Structure alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, lintels or girders. 
    Tourist home means a roominghouse operated in conjunction with a bed and breakfast establishment licensed under Wis. Admin. Code ch. ATCP 73 that is located at its nearest point no more than 100 feet away from the building housing the bed and breakfast. 
    Tree means any object of natural growth, except farm crops which are cut at least once a year, and except for shrubs, bushes, or plants which do not grow to a height of more than 20 feet. 
    Use means the purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged, designed, or intended for or which either land or a building or structure is, or may be, occupied or maintained. 
    Use, principal, means the main use to which a parcel is devoted and the main purpose for which the premises exists. 
    Utility facilities means utility equipment, including, but not limited to, electric utility substations, water reservoirs, treatment plants, transformer stations, booster stations, transmitters, and other comparable utility facilities. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Visual screen means a permanent fence or wall that permits no view into the area to be screened; or plantings or vegetation that permit no view into the area to be screened and that admit a maximum penetration of light through no more than an evenly distributed 25 percent of their vertical surface during any season of the year. 
    Warehouse means a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
    Warehouse, self-storage, means warehouses serving primarily the general public with separate access for each storage stall, one story, less than 10,000 square feet per building; total area less than 60,000 square feet. 
    Wholesale trade means establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, construction contractors, and professional business users; or to other wholesalers, or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. 
    Yard means an open space, other than a court, on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. 
    Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building, situated between the side of the building and the adjacent side of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. If there is no front yard, the front boundary of the side yard shall be the front line of the lot, and if there is no rear yard the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the lot. The street side yard of corner lots extend from the rear of the front yard to the rear line of the lot. 
    Zero lot line housing means owner-occupied housing located within a single structure where the common wall between dwellings is approximately perpendicular to the street right-of-way line and where the lot of record before divided and upon which the single structure is located meets minimum width, area and code requirements of the required district. 
(b)  If questions arise as to the interpretation of common usage terms, the zoning administrator should refer to the definitions contained in Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary or subsequent editions. Interpretations of land use activities should be based on the 1987 Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, or subsequent editions. Interpretations of terms related to structures should be based on the State of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code or the state department of commerce enrolled building code. 
(Prior Code, § 17.03) 
Sec. 17-6. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. 
(b)  Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are either more or less restrictive than comparable standards imposed by any other provisions of this chapter or of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, the regulation that is more restrictive or that imposes higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(c)  This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. 
(d)  No building, structure, or use not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. To the extent that the unlawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the building, structure or use remains unlawful hereunder. 
(e)  With respect to the classification of land uses that are not defined or specifically listed within this chapter, the zoning administrator shall make interpretations based on the most recent edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(7)) 
Sec. 17-7. - Separability. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the common council of the city that the several provisions of this chapter are separable, in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not specifically included in the judgment. 
(2)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of the provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in such judgment. 
(Prior Code, § 17.01(8)) 
Sec. 17-8. - Smart growth comprehensive plan. 
(a)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(2) and (3), the city is authorized to prepare and adopt a comprehensive plan as defined in Wis. Stats. §§ 66.1001(1)(a) and 66.1001(2). 
(b)  Prior to beginning the process to update the city's previously adopted 2003 comprehensive plan, the city council adopted written procedures designed to foster public participation in every stage of the preparation of a comprehensive plan as required by Wis. Stats. § 66.1001(4)(a). 
(c)  The city council of the city assigned the plan commission to prepare an update to the city's comprehensive land use plan. The plan commission meets numerous times to prepare and review the draft comprehensive plan 2016-2036. 
(d)  The plan commission of the city has adopted a resolution recommending to the city council adoption of the document entitled "Sparta Comprehensive Plan 2016-2036," containing all of the elements specified in Wis. Stats. § 66.1001(2). 
(e)  The city council has held at least one public hearing on this chapter, in compliance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.1001(4)(d). 
(f)  The comprehensive plan may be used as the basis for, among other things, official mapping, local subdivision regulations, general city zoning regulations, shoreland/wetland zoning, and as a guide for approving or disapproving actions affecting growth, development, conservation, and recreation within the jurisdiction of the city and its extraterritorial plat review area. 
(g)  The city council formally adopts the document entitled, "Sparta Comprehensive Plan 2016-2036," pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.1001(4)(c). 
(h)  The comprehensive plan 2016-2036 may from time to time be amended, extended, or added to in greater detail following the procedures specified within the plan and state law. 
(Prior Code, § 17.19) 
Sec. 17-9. - Violation, penalty. 
    Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 25-11. 
(Prior Code, § 17.35) 
State Law reference- Comprehensive planning, Wis. Stats. § 66.1001. 
Secs. 17-10-17-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-35. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Establishment of office. There is established the office of zoning administrator. 
(b)  Duties of zoning administrator. The administrator shall properly administer and enforce this article. In addition to and in furtherance of the authority, the administrator shall: 
(1)  Receive, review, analyze, and develop written reports on all applications for development permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, variances, amendments, or other development matters. 
(2)  Serve as an ex officio non-voting member of the plan commission and board of appeals. 
(3)  Issue development permits and certificates of occupancy when the requirements of this article have been met, and make and maintain records thereof. 
(4)  Coordinate official development review processes among governmental offices to the extent feasible. 
(5)  Conduct inspections to determine compliance with the terms of this article and to take remedial action when required. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(1)) 
Sec. 17-36. - Development permits. 
(a)  Filing. A request to undertake development shall be filed on an official application form. 
(b)  Plans with applications. Every application for a development permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator and be accompanied by a fee, legal description, and by plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the actual shape and dimensions of the subject parcel; reference sketch of site location to two intersecting streets; the exact location, nature, dimensions, and elevations of the existing and proposed development; the proposed occupancy (if applicable), with dimensioned and numbered parking spaces; and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this article when requested by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Approved plan. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the developer when such plans have been approved, together with the conditions of the approval, the signature of the zoning administrator, and any development permit as may be granted. One copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the zoning administrator as a permanent record or until such time as the development no longer occupies the subject parcel. 
(d)  Zoning administrator to act. The zoning administrator shall act upon all applications for development permits promptly. Within 15 working days of the time the application is filed in full compliance with the applicable requirements, the zoning administrator shall either issue the permit, notify the applicant in writing of his refusal and reasons thereof, set a hearing date, if one is required, or refer the application to the plan commission as is appropriate for the type of action requested. 
(e)  Issuance of permits. The zoning administrator shall issue a development permit if he finds that the development for which the permit is sought constitutes a general development permitted by this article or a conditional use has been approved by the common council. 
(f)  Effect of permit. The issuance of a development permit authorizes the developer to commence development immediately upon giving of notice by the city, but subject to any lawful conditions attached by the common council. A development permit does not authorize occupancy. 
(g)  Expiration of a permit. If the work described in any development permit has not begun within six months from the date of issuance, or if the work lies idle for a period of six months or more, or if the work has not been substantially completed in one year of the date of permit issuance thereof, such permit shall expire; it shall be revoked by the zoning administrator and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. Such notice shall indicate further work as described on the canceled permit shall not proceed unless a new permit is issued. 
(h)  Demolition. In such an event that the work described in any development permit has begun but has not been substantially completed within one year of the date of issuance of a permit or if work has begun without proper development permit, the zoning administrator may order demolition of partially completed work. 
(i)  Permits must conform to be valid. All officials and employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall comply with the provisions of this article and shall issue no permit or license for any use, building or purpose in conflict with the provisions of this article. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this article shall be null and void and of no effect whatsoever. 
(j)  General development permits subject to conditions. The zoning administrator may attach to a general development permit conditions relating to: 
(1)  Compliance with the plans and specifications submitted by the developer to the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Time within which the developer must be commenced or completed. 
(3)  Protective measures that a developer must undertake for the benefit of neighboring property, such as the construction of fencing or establishment of buffer areas. 
(k)  Conditional use and PUD permit conditions. The common council may attach to a conditional use and planned unit development permit conditions that may concern any matter subject to regulation under this article including means for: 
(1)  Minimizing any adverse impact of the development upon other land, including the hours of use and operation and the type and intensity of activities that may be conducted. 
(2)  The sequence of development, including when it must be commenced and completed. 
(3)  Controlling the duration of use of development and the time within which any structures must be removed. 
(4)  Ensuring that development is maintained properly in the future. 
(5)  Designating the exact location and nature of development. 
(6)  Establishing more detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats, or specifications. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(2)) 
Sec. 17-37. - Certificate of zoning compliance. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the occupancy of any building or parcel or both, or part thereof until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by the zoning administrator stating the proposed use conforms to the requirements of this article. The certificate shall state that the development complies with all city building, housing and health laws, and this article. Any lawful conditions of occupancy shall be attached to or referred to on the certificate. 
(b)  Application and records. A certificate of zoning compliance shall be applied for coincident with an application for a development permit from the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall issue the certificate within ten days after finding that the development is in full compliance with this article and after the inspector determines that the development is in compliance with city building, health and housing codes. The zoning administrator shall maintain records of all certificates of zoning compliance and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person upon payment of a reasonable fee. 
(c)  Temporary certificate. A temporary certificate may be issued for a period not to exceed six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building, or pending its completion. Such temporary certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties, or obligations of the developer or the city, and shall not be issued except under such restrictions as shall adequately ensure the safety of the occupants. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(3)) 
Sec. 17-38. - Methods of enforcement. 
(a)  Notification. Upon finding that any of the provisions of this article are being violated or upon finding a condition which may lead to a violation, the zoning administrator shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation or condition, ordering the action necessary to correct such condition or violation. The zoning administrator may order discontinuance of illegal uses of structures and land and order removal of illegal structures or additions, or may order discontinuance of illegal work being done. Further, the zoning administrator may take any other action authorized by this article to ensure compliance with or to prevent violations of this article, including, but not limited to, calling upon the city attorney to institute legal proceedings and calling upon the police chief for assistance. 
(b)  Resumption of work. When any work shall have been stopped for any reason whatsoever, it shall not again be resumed until the reason for the work stoppage has been completely removed and written approval to proceed has been received from the zoning administrator. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(4)) 
Sec. 17-39. - Fees and other costs. 
(a)  Application and permit fees. Fees for zoning amendments, conditional uses, development permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals and other types of administrative permits and procedures required by this article may be set by the common council. Such fees shall cover the costs of administering this article. 
(b)  Review costs. The zoning administrator or plan commission may request the city engineer, city attorney, city planner, or other consultant or expert to review applications for development permits or other types of permits required by this article. The cost of all such reviews shall be borne by the applicant. The city reserves the right to require an escrow account be established for the purpose of providing funds for anticipated review costs. 
(c)  Fee schedule: 
Conditional use permit $75.00 Zoning variance $250.00 Request for zoning change $75.00 Development review (business) $75.00 Subdivision plat review $150.00 PUD review $150.00 Lot division CSM approval $50.00 Grading/fillling/stormwater $50.00 ET zoning permit residential $50.00 ET zoning permit accessory $25.00 ET zoning permit business, industrial, manufacturing $75.00  
(Prior Code, § 17.02(5)) 
Secs. 17-40-17-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 17-67. - Creation and membership. 
(a)  A board of appeals is established. The board of appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation of the common council for terms of three years, except that of those first appointed, one shall serve for one year, two for two years, and two for three years. 
(b)  The members of the board shall receive compensation as set by the common council, if called at the request of an appellant, and shall be removable by the mayor for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(c)  The mayor shall designate one of the members as chairperson. 
(d)  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of members whose terms become vacant. 
(e)  The mayor may appoint, for staggered terms of three years, two alternate members of the board, in addition to the five members above provided for. Annually, the mayor shall designate one of the alternate members as first alternate and the other as second alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full power, only when a member of the board refuses to vote because of interest or when a member is absent. The second alternate shall so act only when the first alternate so refuses or is absent or when more than one member of the board refuses or is absent. The above provisions, with regard to removal and the filling of vacancies, shall apply to such alternates. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(a)) 
Sec. 17-68. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the board shall be held at least once a month, unless there is nothing to come before it. There shall be a fixed place of meeting, and all meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings, showing the action of the board and vote of each member upon each question considered. The presence of four members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. Special meeting shall be called by the chairperson. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(b)) 
Sec. 17-69. - Powers. 
    The board of appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this division upon which the board is required to pass. 
(3)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of the chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the chapter will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial judge done. The board may not permit as a variance any use that is not permitted under the chapter for property in the zone where the affected person's land is located. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(c)) 
Sec. 17-70. - Zoning administrator's report required. 
    The zoning administrator shall review the evidence of an appeal or request for variance and make a report of facts to the board within seven days of the request. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(d)) 
Sec. 17-71. - Board actions limited. 
    The board shall make no decisions except in a specific case and after a public hearing conducted by the board. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the board the powers or authority to alter or change the zoning code or the zoning map or to permit the establishment of a nonconforming use. No member of the board shall hear or vote upon an appeal or variance in which he is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial way. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(e)) 
Sec. 17-72. - Hearings. 
(a)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for a public hearing by publication in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing, as well as written notice to the chairperson of the plan commission and appellant. In the matter of hearings for variance, the city clerk shall send by regular mail, at least ten days before the date of the hearing, written notice of the hearing to the owners of record listed in the best available records, of all lands for which the variance is requested and all lands wholly or partly within 100 feet of the other perimeter of the subject property. 
(b)  At the hearing, any party may appear in person or through an agent or attorney. The board shall decide the application for variance or appeal within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(f)) 
Sec. 17-73. - Vote required. 
    The concurring vote of the four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this division or to affect any variation in this division. The grounds of every determination shall be stated. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(g)) 
Sec. 17-74. - Time limit for actions. 
    The board shall decide all appeals and requests for variance within 30 days after the date of the required hearing thereon. A certified copy of the board's decision shall be transmitted to the applicant and to the zoning administrator. Such decisions shall be binding upon the zoning administrator and observed by him, and he shall incorporate the terms and conditions of the same in the permit to the applicant or appellant, whenever a permit is authorized by the board. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(h)) 
Sec. 17-75. - Validity of permits approved. 
    Permits for the occupancy of land or construction, reconstruction, or occupancy of buildings approved by the board of appeals shall be void after one year from the date of the approval unless, in cases of new construction, work shall be done above the foundation walls, and in cases of occupancy of land or reconstruction or occupancy of buildings, the operations called for by such permit shall be well under way at the end of the one-year period. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(i)) 
Sec. 17-76. - Initiation of appeals. 
    Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(j)) 
Sec. 17-77. - Effect of appeals. 
    An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application of notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(k)) 
Sec. 17-78. - Decision on appeal. 
    In exercising the above-mentioned powers, such board may, in conformity with the provisions of this section, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issue of a permit. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(6)(l)) 
Sec. 17-79. - Variances. 
(a)  Initiation. A request for variance shall be made to the city clerk on an official application form furnished by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Findings required. No variance from the terms of this chapter shall be authorized unless all of the following facts and conditions exist: 
(1)  Exceptional circumstances. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property in question or to the intended use of the property that do not apply generally to other properties or classes of uses in the same zoning district. 
(2)  Natural causes. That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not resulted from the actions of the applicant. 
(3)  Preservation of property rights. That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other properties in the same zoning district and in the same vicinity including, but not limited to, the use of solar energy systems. 
(4)  Absence of detriment. That the authorizing of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, and will not materially impair the purposes of this division or the public interest. 
(5)  General nature. No variance shall be authorized unless the board specifically finds that the condition, situation, or intended use of the subject property is not so general or recurrent in a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to cover such cases. 
(6)  Minimum variance required. The board shall find that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. The board shall be satisfied by the evidence heard before it that the granting of the variance will alleviate a hardship approaching confiscation as distinguished from a special privilege sought by the owner. 
(c)  Subject to conditions. In granting any variance under the provisions of this section, the board of appeals shall designate such conditions that will secure substantially the objectives of the regulations or provisions in the application of which the variance is granted as to light, access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems, air, character of the neighborhood, conformity to the master plan, and generally, the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
(d)  Variances void after one year. If an applicant fails to act on a variance granted within six months of the date the variance was approved, the variance shall be null and void. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(7)) 
Sec. 17-80. - District boundary changes and text amendments. 
(a)  Authority of council. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice require, the common council may by ordinance, after recommendation thereon by the plan commission, amend the regulations or change the zoning map. The plan commission shall submit to the common council its recommendations regarding all applications for amendments or changes within 60 days after referral to the plan commission. 
(b)  Initiation of amendment. An amendment or change may be initiated by motion of the common council, by motion of the plan commission, or, in the case of district boundary changes or uses, by filling an application therefor by owners of 50 percent or more of the area of the properties proposed to be changed. 
(c)  Application for amendment. Application for any change of district boundaries or uses shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, with a copy to the clerk, upon such forms and accompanied by such data and information as is needed to ensure the fullest practicable presentation of facts, as required by the plan commission. 
(d)  Notification of public hearing on amendment. 
(1)  Before submitting its recommendations on any amendment to the regulations or change in the zoning map to the common council, the plan commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon pursuant to a Class II notice. 
(2)  When an amendment involves changes in district boundaries or classification, the zoning administrator shall send by regular mail at least ten days before the date of the hearing, written notice of the hearing to the owners of record as listed in the best available records, of all lands proposed to be changed and all lands situated wholly or partly within 100 feet of the other perimeter of the subject property. 
(e)  Plan commission recommendation. The plan commission shall review the proposed amendment to the regulations or change in district boundaries or uses and render a decision thereon analyzing the advantages and disadvantages of the proposal, based on the facts and circumstances, the comprehensive guide plan, and other information. The plan commission shall transmit a written recommendation to the common council. 
(f)  Final action by council. After reviewing the recommendation of the plan commission thereon, the common council shall consider such recommendations and, if it decides to proceed, shall instruct the city attorney to prepare an ordinance for subsequent adoption by the common council of the proposed amendment. If the common council so desires, it may order a second public hearing before the common council pursuant to a Class I notice. 
(g)  Waiting period between petitions. A denial of rezoning shall be a final determination for a period of one year that the development will not be permitted unless the common council's order includes leave to amend. After the expiration of the one-year period, a developer may make a new application for the same amendment. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(8)) 
Sec. 17-81. - Violations. 
(a)  Remedies. 
(1)  In the case of any violation of this division or any amendment or supplement thereto, any person aggrieved by such action may request the common council or zoning administrator to act in his behalf to prevent unlawful development; to restrain, correct, or abate such violations; to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises. Such procedure shall not limit taking action in a court of law. 
(2)  Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this division, and any use of any land or building which is conducted, operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this division shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and the city attorney, shall, immediately upon any such violation having been called to his attention by the zoning administrator, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use. Such action may also be instituted by any property owner who may be especially damaged by a violation of this division. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall, upon judgment or conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $500.00 and not less than $50.00 and the costs of prosecution to the city. In default of payment of the forfeiture and such costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeitures and such costs are paid but for not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In any such action, the fact that a permit shall have been issued by any city official or department shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any oversight on the part of any public official, board, or department constitute a defense. 
(Prior Code, § 17.02(9)) 
Secs. 17-82-17-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-106. - Zoning districts. 
    The city is divided into 21 zoning districts and two zoning overlay districts as follows and as shown in the table schedule of use regulations and on the zoning map: 
R-1 Single-Family Residential with Sewer R-2 Two-Family R-3 Multiple-Family R-4 Single-Family without Sewer R-5 Mobile/Manufactured Home R-6 Existing Residential with Sewer R-7 Zero Lot Line Two-Family B-1 Downtown Business District B-2 Highway Business District B-3 Interchange District B-4 Rural Business District M-1 Manufacturing District without Outside Storage M-2 Manufacturing District with Outside Storage M-3 Manufacturing Business Park District M-4 Manufacturing District without Sewer CU Civic Uses RR Railroad Operations District GA General Agricultural District EA Exclusive Agricultural District C Public Park and Conservancy District AP Airport Special Purpose Overlay District  
(Prior Code, § 17.06(1)) 
Sec. 17-107. - District boundaries. 
(a)  Changes to district boundaries. If, in accordance with the provisions of this article, changes are made in district boundaries on the zoning map, such changes shall be made on the zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council. The administrator shall make such changes and a description of the changes shall be attached to the city zoning regulations. 
(b)  Interpretation of district boundaries. When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Lot lines. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed as such boundaries. 
(2)  Street centerlines. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be boundaries. 
(3)  Water bodies and railroad rights-of-way. Where the boundary of a district follows a water body or railroad line, the boundary shall be deemed to be located midway between the shores of the water body or the main tracks of the railroad line. 
(4)  Lot divisions. Where a district boundary divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of enactment of this article, the use authorized thereon and the other district requirement applying to the most restricted portion of the lot under this article shall be construed as extending to the entire lot except when the administrator defines the boundary by dimension in writing upon request by the owner. This provision shall not pertain to floodplain overlay districts. 
(5)  Vacations. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action, the zoning district adjoining such public way shall be extended automatically to include all land attached by reversion to the centerline thereof, and it shall be subject to all regulations of the extended district. 
(6)  Administrative interpretations. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the zoning map, or where due to scale, lack of detail or illegibility there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any district boundaries or in other circumstances not covered above, the administrator shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(Prior Code, § 17.06(2), (3)) 
Sec. 17-108. - Zoning for newly annexed land. 
    All land annexed to the city shall automatically become "A" Agriculture District, unless otherwise recommended by the commission and the city council as a part of the annexation proceedings, until definite boundaries and regulations for such territory are recommended by the plan commission and adopted by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 17.06(4)) 
Sec. 17-109. - Conformance requirements. 
(a)  Types of development. All development within the city and extraterritorial area, except as specified, shall be undertaken in accordance with the terms of this article and only after a development permit is issued, if required. There shall be three types of development: 
(1)  General development. Development for which a permit will be granted as a right on compliance with the terms of this article, hereinafter called general development. 
(2)  Conditional development. Development for which a development permit will be granted only after exercise of discretion in accordance with the criteria of this article. 
(3)  Exempt development. Development which is exempt from the regulations of this article, as defined. 
(b)  Development defined. Except where the context otherwise requires, and in absence of a more limiting provision in this article, the term "development" means the performance of any building or the making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land. The following activities or uses shall be taken to involve development unless expressly excluded by this article: 
(1)  A change in type of use of a structure or land, or a change from one use group to another group so designated in this article. 
(2)  A reconstruction, or alteration of the size, or material change in the external appearance, or a structure or land. 
(3)  A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or dwelling units in a structure or on land. 
(4)  Commencement of excavation on a parcel of land. 
(5)  Demolition or moving of a structure or removal of trees required by this article or by the subdivision regulations of the city. 
(6)  Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, junk, or fill on a parcel of land. 
(7)  In connection with the use of land, the making of any material change in noise levels, thermal conditions, emissions of waste material, or other objectionable element. 
(8)  Commencement or change in the location of street graphics or use of land, and the commencement or change in location of advertising on the external part of a structure. 
(9)  Alteration of a shore, bank, or floodplain of a river, creek, lake, pond, or artificial body of water. 
(10)  Reestablishment of a nonconforming or conditional use which has not been utilized for one year. 
(11)  Departure from the normal use for which development permission has been granted, or failure to comply with the conditions of this article granting the development permission under which the development was commenced or is continued. 
(12)  Earth fill or other filling activities for the purpose of raising the elevation of a lot or site for the purpose of future development. 
(c)  Exempt activities. The following operations or uses do not constitute development for the purposes of this article. 
(1)  The maintenance or improvement of a public road or railroad track not involving substantial engineering redesign if the work is carried out on land within the boundaries of the right-of-way. 
(2)  Work by any utility not involving substantial engineering redesign for the purpose of inspection, repair, renewal, or construction on established rights-of-way of any sewers, mains, pipes, cables, utility tunnels, powerlines, towers, poles, tracks, or the like. 
(3)  Work for the maintenance, renewal, improvement, or alteration of any structure, if the work affects only the interior or the color of the structure or decoration of the exterior of the structure (but does not otherwise materially affect the external appearance of the structure). 
(4)  The use of any structure or land devoted to dwelling uses for any purposes customarily incidental to enjoyment of the dwelling. 
(5)  The use of any lands for the purpose of growing plants, crops, trees, and other agricultural or forestry products or for other agricultural purposes except the growing or storage of livestock. 
(6)  A change in use of land or structure from a use within a use group specified in this article to another use in the same group. 
(7)  Official public information street graphics installed by or at the direction of the city, the town, the county or state. 
(Prior Code, § 17.04) 
Sec. 17-110. - Principal buildings and structure. 
    Every principal structure or building erected shall be located on a lot, as herein defined and in no case shall there by more than one principal building on one lot except: 
(1)  Planned unit developments. 
(2)  Multifamily buildings and institutional buildings developed as a group. 
(3)  Industrial and commercial buildings where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator that any principal building can be subsequently detached with a lot and yards conforming to the requirements of this article. 
(4)  Temporary buildings for a period of less than six months. 
(5)  Manufactured home parks. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(1)) 
Sec. 17-111. - Residential accessory buildings and use. 
    Accessory uses may be allowed where they comply with the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Size of accessory structures in residential districts. Accessory structures in residential districts may not occupy more than ten percent of a yard area. In no instance shall the accessory structure exceed the ground floor area of the main building used for residence. The measurement of accessory structure size shall include the total of all detached or attached accessory buildings on the lot. The total area of accessory structures on a single lot in residential districts under one-half acre in size shall not exceed 860 square feet in area. The total area of accessory structures on a single lot in residential districts over one-half acre in size may not exceed 960 square feet. A conditional use permit may be issued for accessory buildings of up to three percent of the total parcel area. 
(2)  Separation from principal structures. Detached accessory buildings shall be distanced at least ten feet from the principal structure situated on the same lot or adjacent lot for fire protective reasons. A variance may be granted for less, provided preventive measures are taken; i.e. five-eighths-inch type X fire rated sheet rock or equal fire separation. In no case may an accessory building be located less than five feet from any structure. 
(3)  Accessory structures in front yards limited. No attached or detached accessory use or accessory structure shall be permitted nearer to the front lot line than legal front yard setback in the zoning district for the principal structure or the average setback of the principal structures on lots immediately adjoining the lot on the same side of the street, whichever distance is less. In no case may an accessory structure be located closer to a front lot line than the principal structure. 
(4)  Accessory structure side and rear setbacks. All accessory structures shall be set back at least five feet from all interior lot lines. If the accessory structure is built in the side yard, it shall conform to the setback requirements for the main building. In those instances, where the rear lot line in conterminous with an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall not be closer than ten feet to such rear lot line. 
(5)  Accessory structure setbacks on corner lots. The average setback of the four, or less, nearest buildings may be used to determine the side street setback of an accessory building on a corner lot, but no case shall the reduced setback be less than 20 feet nor more than 50 feet. In no case may an accessory structure be located in the vision triangle as defined in section 17-119. 
(6)  Accessory structure height. No accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height. 
(7)  Accessory structures attached to principal buildings. When an accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this article applicable to main buildings. 
(8)  Conversion of accessory structures to dwellings limited. The conversion of any accessory structure into a dwelling or the conversion of any dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under this article, and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new construction in such district, with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit, percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open spaces, and off-street parking. 
(9)  Accessory structures without principal structure. No accessory structure shall be erected or constructed prior to the erection or construction of the principal structure. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(2)) 
Sec. 17-112. - Temporary use. 
    Building, construction trailers, equipment, and materials used in conjunction with construction work shall be removed upon completion of the construction work and issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(3)) 
Sec. 17-113. - Lot size and yard dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot size. Every building and use of land shall have a lot area and width of not less than that required for the district; provided, however, that such lot requirements shall not apply to a lot smaller than of this Code. 
(b)  Lot size and minimum yard dimensions. No lot, yard, court, parking area, or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make the area or dimension less than the minimum required by this article. 
(c)  Division of lots. No lot improved with a building or buildings shall hereafter be divided into two or more lots and no portion of any lot that is improved with a building or buildings shall be sold, unless all lots resulting from each division or sale and improved with a building or buildings shall conform with all of the area and bulk regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
(d)  Street frontage required. Except as permitted by other provisions of this article, no lot shall contain any building used in whole, or in part, for residential purposes unless such lot abuts for at least 50 feet on a public street. 
(e)  Frontage modifications. In the case of curvilinear streets and cul-de-sacs, the zoning administrator may authorize a reduction of the otherwise specified lot frontage in residential districts, provided that the lot width measured in the building line shall equal the frontage required in the district where located. 
(f)  Double frontage lots. Buildings on lots having frontage on two nonintersecting streets need not have a rear yard if an equivalent open space is provided on the lot in lieu of the required rear yard; applicable front yards must be provided, however, on both streets. 
(g)  Average depth of front yards. In any residential district or the B-1 downtown business district where the average depth of existing front yards on the two lots nearest to the lot in question, on the same side of the street and within the same block front, is less than the least front yard depth prescribed elsewhere in this article, the required depth of the front yard on such lot may be modified to be not less than the average depth of the existing front yards; provided, however, that in a residential district the depth of the minimum front yard on any lot shall be at least 15 feet and the minimum setback for an attached or detached garage facing the street side yard, shall be 20 feet. 
(h)  Nonresidential special front setback. Whenever a nonresidential use will abut a residential use at a side yard or at a rear yard on a corner lot, the nonresidential use shall have a front yard setback equal to the existing adjoining residential setback or three-fourths of the required front yard setback for the adjoining residential district, whichever is less. 
(i)  Additional side yards by height. Required side yards shall be increased in width two feet for each five feet that a building exceeds 20 feet in height, except that side yards for nonresidential uses in residential districts or abutting a residential district shall be increased in width three feet for each five feet that a building exceeds 20 feet in height. Height exceptions listed elsewhere in this article shall be excluded from this requirement. 
(j)  Nonresidential side yards. The side yard of a nonresidential lot adjoining a residential district along its side lot line shall meet the side yard requirements of the adjoining residential district. 
(k)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall maintain a side yard on all public streets that is the same as the required front yard setback, unless otherwise required in this article. 
(l)  Rear yards adjoining residences. The rear yard requirements of a nonresidential use adjoining a residential district shall be increased over the rear yard requirements of the district in which the development occurs by one foot for each five feet in height that a building exceeds 20 feet in height. 
(m)  Projections into yards in residential districts. Cornices, eaves, bay windows, chimneys or other architectural features may project into any required yard or court a distance of not more than two feet six inches. Carports and fire escapes shall meet the setback and yard requirements of the district 
(n)  Open decks. Open decks (without a roof or enclosure) may not exceed one-half the distance of the required front, side and rear yard setbacks for the zoning classification of the property. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(10)) 
Sec. 17-114. - Height and bulk requirements. 
(a)  Height requirement exceptions for certain building appurtenances. The height limitations of this article shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, penthouses and domes, not used for human occupancy; nor to chimneys, ventilators, sky-lights, towers, water tanks, similar features, and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof level. The provisions of this article shall not apply to prevent the erection above the building height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for ornament (and without windows) extending above such height limit not more than five feet. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height and is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve and subject to the state building code. 
(b)  Height exceptions for certain public buildings and institutions. Public and semipublic hospitals, institutions, schools, or public utility and service buildings, when permitted in a residential district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, provided such specified buildings shall be set back from the front, rear and side lot lines on the ratio two feet for every one foot of building height greater than 40 feet. Such specified requirements, however, shall apply in addition to the other requirements for building line setbacks and for rear and side yards specifically set forth in this article. 
(c)  Conditional use exceptions to the height limitations. The commission may grant exceptions to the height limitations for a new structure or may set the maximum height of a structure on an individual lot as a conditional use and may set special requirements as part of the approval under the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(11)) 
Sec. 17-115. - Filling. 
    All developments and lots shall follow the city stormwater ordinance, chapter 26. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(12)) 
Sec. 17-116. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Home occupations defined. Any occupation for gain or support conducted within a single dwelling unit or in a building accessory to a dwelling unit by the person maintaining a dwelling therein, provided that the specified use is incidental to the residential use. Not more than one nonresident person shall be employed in the home occupation. 
(b)  Certain home occupations allowed in all districts without permits. Home occupations are allowed in all residences in all districts with permits issued by the zoning administrator providing the following requirements are met: 
(1)  No article is sold or offered for sale on the premises; samples and goods may be kept, but not sold on the premises. 
(2)  No exterior storage of equipment or materials is used in connection with the home occupation. 
(3)  Portions of a dwelling used for home occupations shall be no more than one-fourth of the area of the total area of the principal structure. 
(4)  No structural alterations or construction involving features not customarily found in dwellings are required. 
(5)  Home occupations shall not involve the repair of vehicles, or motors or construction of equipment and machinery. 
(6)  Signs advertising name and occupation not to exceed two square feet located on the premises will be permitted. 
(7)  There shall be no detriments to the residential character of the neighborhood due to the emission of noise, odor, smoke, dust, gas, heat, vibration, electrical interference, traffic congestion, or other nuisances resulting from the home occupation. 
(8)  Classes held on the premises shall have no more than four students at any given time. 
(9)  No employees other than residents of the premises shall be permitted. 
(10)  No home occupation shall be permitted that results in the need for more than two parking spaces at any given time in addition to spaces required by the occupant of the home. 
(c)  Home occupations as conditional uses. Home occupations exceeding the standards set forth above in subsection (b) of this section may be permitted as conditional uses, subject to the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(13)) 
Sec. 17-117. - Driveways. 
(a)  Side setbacks. Driveways shall have at least a three-foot maintenance setback from all side property lines, except where driveways are shared between two or more property owners. 
(b)  Public street intersection setbacks. Driveway curb cuts shall be setback at least 30 feet from the nearest intersection of a public street or alley. 
(c)  Surface. Driveways shall be constructed with a durable surface such as concrete, asphalt, compacted gravel, or comparable material. 
(d)  Time of construction. Driveways shall be constructed prior to occupancy. 
(e)  Curb cuts. A taper or radius is required at every location of a driveway or sidewalk cut. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(14)) 
Sec. 17-118. - Fences. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fence means a structure, which is a barrier or is used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement. 
    Fence, decorative, means a fence, including gates, which are more than 75 percent open and less than three feet in height, such as a split rail fence used for ornamental purposes. For the purpose of this article, chain link fences are not considered to be ornamental fencing. 
    Fence, solid, means a fence, including gates, which conceals from view adjoining properties, streets or alleys, activities conducted behind the fence. 
    Height means the height of a fence shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance from grade to the top of each section of fence. 
(b)  All fences constructed or placed upon lots or parcels of land in the city shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Residential fencing: 
a.  Fences having a height of six feet or less may be located on interior lot lines within the required side and rear yard areas in residential districts. 
b.  Fences located in front or street side yards may not exceed four feet in height. 
c.  In all cases, section 17-119 in regards to vision clearance shall be followed. 
d.  Decorative capping of posts or fences more than 75 percent open will be permitted to a height of 18 inches above the required fence height. 
(2)  Business/industrial fencing: 
a.  Fences may be located in all yards in commercial and industrial districts. The plan commission prior to the issuance of a building permit shall approve fences located in the front yard. 
b.  Fences installed in commercial and industrial districts shall not exceed eight feet in height, except when required to enclose outside storage areas as required by the plan commission. 
c.  Fencing may be constructed to screen areas and shall comply with article VIII of this chapter. 
d.  Barbed wire may be allowed in the top of fences exceeding eight feet in height. 
(3)  Agricultural fencing. Fencing shall be permitted in all yards in agricultural districts and in all yards in legal nonconforming agricultural districts. Fencing shall be permitted in front yards only for the enclosure of cultivated fields, pastures or animal pens. 
(c)  Construction and installation of fencing in all districts: 
(1)  No fencing may be constructed within the city without first obtaining building permit. (Except no permit shall be required for decorative fencing.) 
(2)  Prohibited fencing materials. Fences shall not be constructed with, or consist of, rope, string, wire products, including, but not limited to, chicken wire, hog wire, wire fabric, barbed wire (except as allowed in other sections of this Code), razor ribbon wire and similar welded or woven wire fabrics, chain, netting, cut or broken glass, paper, metal panels, corrugated metal panels, galvanized sheet metal, plywood, fiberglass panels or plastic panels or any other materials that are not manufactured specifically as fencing materials. 
(3)  Fencing shall be constructed with the finished or decorative side facing the adjacent or abutting property or street. 
(4)  Snow fencing will only be permitted between November 15 and April 15 of each year. (No permit shall be required.) 
(5)  All fences shall be maintained and in good repair and in a structurally sound condition. No fences shall be constructed and maintained which is detrimental to human life or safety or cause a traffic hazard. All fences shall be constructed and maintained straight, plumb and of an even height along its length, except for such deviations as required by grade. 
(6)  No advertising or signs shall be placed on any fence without prior approval of the plan commission. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(15)) 
Sec. 17-119. - Vision triangle; vision clearance. 
    On a corner lot in R, B-2, B-3, B-4, or M zone nothing shall be erected, placed, or allowed to grow which materially impedes vision between 21/2 and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of the corner lot and line joining points along such street lines 30 feet from the point of the intersection. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(16)) 
Sec. 17-120. - Zero lot line housing. 
    Zero lot line housing may be allowed upon compliance with the following conditions and requirements. 
(1)  Dwelling must have been constructed after January 1, 2003, and meet all applicable building code requirements. 
(2)  Each one-family residence minimum lot size shall be 5,000 square feet. 
(3)  Each one-family lot width shall be at least 45 feet. 
(4)  All additional applicable district zoning requirements shall be met. 
(5)  An appropriate document shall be submitted to the city building inspector and filed with the register of deeds, providing for maintenance of common areas and facilities and resolution of disputes with respect to the maintenance of the entire structure and grounds. The document to be signed, recorded and run with the land. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(17)) 
Sec. 17-121. - Adult oriented entertainment restrictions required. 
    The council finds that, due to their nature, the existence of adult bookstores and adult cabarets in the city has serious objectionable operational characteristics, such as an effect upon property values, local commerce and crime. Due to the deleterious combined effect on adjacent areas when such uses are concentrated, they should not be permitted to be located in close proximity to each other. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. Such regulations are contained in these standards. These standards are designed to protect the city's retail trade, maintain property values, prevent crime, and, in general, protect and preserve the quality of the city's neighborhoods, commercial districts and the quality of urban life. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(18)) 
Secs. 17-122-17-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNICATION AND SOLAR STRUCTURES 

Sec. 17-141. - Communication structures. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to establish regulations for communication towers and antennas and facilitate the growth of personal communication services, as defined in section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 USC § 332, minimize the adverse visual impact of towers and antennas, and provide for the safety of the adjacent property owners and general public in compliance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0404. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(4)(a)) 
Sec. 17-142. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning 
    Antenna means any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes, and omni directional antennas, such as whip antennas. 
    Height means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on a tower or other structure, including an antenna. 
    Self-supporting means a lattice or monopole tower or antenna which employs no guy wires or cables for support or anchorage; freestanding. 
    Tower means any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(4)(b)) 
Sec. 17-143. - Residential zones. 
(a)  Satellite earth-station antennas (dishes) less than ten feet in diameter which serve only dwelling units on the same parcel of land are a permitted accessory use, do not require a building permit, and are not subject to setback restrictions. 
(b)  Towers and antennas with a height not over 50 feet, which serve only dwelling units on the same parcel of land are a permitted accessory use and do not require a building permit. Towers, and antennas other than dishes, shall conform with the yard setback restrictions for principal buildings for the given zoning district. 
(c)  In a residential zone, no tower or antenna with a height more than 50 feet shall be erected. A conditional use permit may be issued for towers of up to 75 feet. 
(d)  Only one tower shall exist on a residential parcel at any one time. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(5)) 
Sec. 17-144. - Business, manufacturing, civic and agricultural zones. 
(a)  In business, manufacturing, civic use, and agricultural zones: 
(1)  Maximum tower height is 150 feet. 
(2)  Towers and antennas with a height not more than 50 feet shall be a permitted use (no building permit required). 
(3)  Towers or tower/antenna combinations with a height between 50 feet and 75 feet are a permitted use, but a city building permit shall be obtained prior to erection. 
(4)  Towers with a height in excess of 75 feet are a conditional use. If a conditional use is issued for a tower with a height in excess of 75 feet, any attached antennas may project an additional 30 feet above the tower height specified in the conditional use. 
(b)  A request for a communication tower with a height in excess of 150 feet shall be considered a variance request, and shall be referred to the board of appeals. 
(c)  Building permit requirements: 
(1)  Any tower/antenna with a height more than 50 feet shall require a city building permit. 
(2)  Any approvals required by the FAA or FCC shall be obtained prior to requesting a conditional use or variance from the city. State department of commerce approval shall be obtained prior to the issuance of a city building permit. 
(3)  Any building or shed placed or constructed on the same parcel a tower/antenna shall require a city building permit, regardless of the height of the tower/antenna or the size of the building or shed. 
(d)  Setback requirements: 
(1)  If a tower/antenna combination is located on a lot which is adjacent to a residential zone, the tower or tower/antenna shall be set back from the property line a distance equal to its height. 
(2)  If a tower or tower/antenna combination is located on a lot which is not adjacent to a residential zone, the tower or tower/antenna shall be set back from the property line a distance equal to half its height. 
(3)  A tower/antenna which is located on a lot which is adjacent to a public right-of-way may include the width of the right-of-way in the setback calculations required by this section. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(6)) 
Sec. 17-145. - All districts. 
(a)  Visual obtrusiveness. Towers shall be gray in color, or shall be some other neutral color acceptable to the plan commission which blends with the surroundings. No lights or reflectors shall be placed on a tower or antenna other than those required by the FAA, FCC, or other government agency. No signs or advertising shall be placed on any tower or antenna except "caution," "keep off" or similar signs. 
(b)  Guyed towers. The earth attachment points for guy wires shall be at least 25 feet from the nearest property line. Any tower with a height over 50 feet shall be self-supporting. 
(c)  Fencing. A tower with a height over 50 feet shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height, and secured so that it is not accessible by the general public. 
(d)  Compliance with National Electrical Code. Antenna installations shall comply with National Electrical Code ch. 810. Signal distribution systems shall comply with National Electrical Code ch. 820. 
(e)  Antennas on existing structures. The plan commission may grant a conditional use to allow placement of an antenna on any existing structure. 
(f)  Additional antennas on existing communication towers. No additional antenna shall be placed on existing communication towers without a prior site plan review conducted by the plan commission. A site plan review does not require a public hearing. Following a successful site plan review, a city building permit shall be obtained for each additional antenna installation. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(7)) 
Sec. 17-146. - Removal of abandoned towers and antennas. 
(a)  Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of the tower or antenna or owners of the property where the tower site is located shall remove the tower or antenna including all supporting equipment and buildings within 90 days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of the abandonment. If removal does not occur within the 90 days, the governing authority may remove and salvage the tower or antenna and all supporting equipment and buildings at the property owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(b)  The applicant for a permit under this division shall submit a copy of a signed agreement between the property owner and the owner of the tower, antennas and supporting equipment and buildings assigning the obligation for abandonment and subsequent removal based on the provisions of the previous subsection. The agreement shall contain the requirement that notice of this division shall be given in writing by the owners to successor owners of the property or tower, antenna, supporting equipment and buildings. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(8)) 
Sec. 17-147. - Solar rights. 
    No person in control of property shall allow a tree or shrub to be placed or grow as to cast a shadow between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. upon a solar collector energy system capable of generating more than one million British thermal units per year, and that supplies a part of the energy requirements for improvements on the property where the solar energy system is permanently located. The provisions of this section shall not require the removal of existing vegetation. 
(Prior Code, § 17.05(9)) 
Secs. 17-148-17-177. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 17-178. - Purpose. 
    The city's residential districts are established to accomplish the following purposes: 
(1)  To preserve existing living qualities of residential neighborhoods. 
(2)  To prevent additions or alterations of structures that would damage the character of desirability of existing residential areas. 
(3)  To ensure future high quality amenities including, but not limited to, provision of adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to the property of existing and new residential areas. 
(4)  To increase convenience and comfort by providing usable open space and recreational space on the same lot as the housing units they serve. 
(Prior Code, § 17.07(1)) 
Sec. 17-179. - R-1 Single-Family. 
(a)  Intent. The R-1 Single-Family District with public sewer is intended to provide for the single-family home (10,000 square foot minimum lot size). 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Accessory structures. 
(3)  Essential services. 
(4)  Public parks. 
(5)  Home occupations. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  CBRFs. 
(3)  Family/group day care centers. 
(4)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: single-family residences; 10,000 square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: dwellings; 90 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Main building Front yard 25 feet Rear yard 30 feet Flanking street side yard (corner lots) 20 feet Interior side yard 10 feet  
(g)  Maximum height: dwelling/main building; 35 feet accessory structures: 20 feet. 
(h)  Maximum percent of building lot coverage; dwelling/main building 30 percent accessory structures ten percent. 
(i)  Minimum building dimensions: Minimum dimension of any principal building that is constructed, erected, placed or located on the lot shall not be less than 26 feet. The minimum square footage shall not be less than 1000 square feet. 
(j)  Garage requirement: Two car garage (480 square feet), attached, for homes with at least 1,200 square feet living space and one car garage (240 square feet), attached, for homes with less than 1,200 square feet living space. 
(Prior Code, § 17.07(2)) 
Sec. 17-180. - R-2 Two-Family. 
(a)  Intent. The R-2 Two-Family District is intended to create, preserve and enhance areas for duplex housing only, served by public sewer. 
(b)  Permitted uses: two-family residences. 
(1)  Accessory structures. 
(2)  Home occupations. 
(3)  Essential services. 
(4)  Public parks. 
(c)  Minimum lot size: two-family residence; 11,000 square feet. 
(d)  Minimum lot width: two-family residence; 90 feet. 
(e)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Main building Front yard 25 feet Rear yard 30 feet Flanking street side yard (corner lots) 20 feet Interior side yard 10 feet  
(f)  Maximum height: 
Dwelling/main building 35 feet Accessory structures 15 feet  
(g)  Maximum percent of building lot coverage: 
Dwelling/main building 40% Accessory structures 10%  
(h)  Minimum building dimensions: Minimum dimension of any principal building that is constructed, erected, placed or located on the lot shall not be less than 30 feet. The minimum square footage shall not be less than 1200 square feet. 
(i)  Garage requirement: Two car garages (480 square feet), attached, per unit. 
(Prior Code, § 17.07(3)) 
Sec. 17-181. - R-3 Multiple-Family. 
(a)  Intent. The R-3 Multiple-Family District is intended to create, preserve, and provide areas for medium density residential development served by public sewers. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Multiple-family residences accessory structures. 
(1)  Essential services. 
(2)  Home occupation. 
(c)  Conditional uses: Accessory structures over 1100 square feet. 
(1)  CBRFs. 
(2)  Family/group day care centers. 
(3)  Medical centers. 
(4)  Nursing homes. 
(5)  Rehabilitation centers. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet for the first three units and 2,000 square feet for every additional unit. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: 90 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Main building Front yard 25 feet Rear yard 30 feet Flanking street side yard (corner lots) 25 feet Interior side yard 10 feet  
(g)  Maximum height: 
Dwelling/main building: 45 feet Accessory structures: 15 feet  
(h)  Maximum percent of building lot coverage: 
Dwelling/main building 40% Accessory structures 10%  
(i)  Minimum floor area per unit: 
Efficiency units: 500 square feet One bedroom units: 700 square feet Two bedroom units: 850 square feet  
(Prior Code, § 17.07(4)) 
Sec. 17-182. - R-4 Single-Family without public sewer. 
(a)  Intent. The R-4 Single-Family District is intended to create, preserve and enhance areas for low density single-family homes without public sewer. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Accessory structures. 
(3)  Essential services. 
(4)  Public parks. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Places of worship. 
(3)  Bed and breakfast. 
(4)  Home occupation. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: single-family residences; 1.5 acres. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: 
(1)  Single-family residence; 90 feet. 
(2)  Two-family residence; 100 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Main building Front yard 25 feet Rear yard 30 feet Flanking street side yard (corner lots) 25 feet Interior side yard 10 feet  
(g)  Maximum height: 
Dwelling/main building: 35 feet Accessory structures: 25 feet  
(h)  Minimum building dimensions: Minimum dimension of any principal building that is constructed, erected, placed or located on the lot shall not be less than 26 feet. The minimum square footage shall not be less than 1000 square feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.07(5)) 
Sec. 17-183. - R-5 Mobile/Manufactured Home Parks. 
(a)  Intent. The R-5 Mobile/Manufactured Home District is intended to create, preserve and enhance existing areas and planned areas for mobile/manufactured homes. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family mobile or manufactured residences. 
(2)  Accessory structures. 
(3)  Essential services. 
(4)  Public parks. 
(c)  Conditional uses: Accessory structures over 960 square feet. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: single-family mobile/manufactured residences: 6,000 square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: single-family mobile/manufactured residences: 50 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Main building Front yard 25 feet Rear yard 25 feet Side yard 10 feet  
(g)  Maximum height: 
Dwelling/main building: 35 feet Accessory structures: 15 feet  
(h)  Minimum park lot size ten acres: 
(i)  Other provisions: 
(1)  A minimum setback of 40 feet from all other exterior lot lines. 
(2)  The parks shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code § HSS177. 
(3)  No mobile/manufactured home site shall be rented for a period of less than 30 days. 
(4)  There shall be two off-street auto parking spaces for each mobile/manufactured home. 
(5)  All roads shall be surfaced with blacktop, seal coat or concrete. 
(6)  No mobile/manufactured home sales office or other business or commercial use shall be located on the mobile/manufactured home park site. However, laundries, washrooms, recreation rooms, maintenance equipment, storage and one office are permitted. 
(7)  Each mobile/manufactured home shall be placed upon a washed rock or hard surface pad or foundation with six tie down anchors. 
(8)  All mobile/manufactured homes shall have tie downs with provisions for distributing the load of these tie downs and provisions for the attachment to ground anchors so as to resist wind overturning and sliding. Each tie down shall be designed to resist an allowable working load equal to or exceeding 3,150 pounds and shall be capable of withstanding a 50 percent overload without failure. Unless the tie down system is designed by a registered professional engineer or architect, tie downs shall be placed not more than 24 feet on centers beginning from the front wall (first stud or first cross member). Not more than six feet open end spacing shall be permitted at the rear wall of the mobile/manufactured home. 
(9)  At least one acre plus one additional acre for each 50 or fraction thereof sites, exceeding the first 50, shall be designated as the recreation area, with play equipment furnished and maintained by the park owner. 
(Prior Code, § 17.07(6)) 
Sec. 17-184. - R-6 Existing Residential. 
(a)  Intent. The R-6 Existing District with public sewer is intended to preserve and enhance existing older residential areas of the city prior to January 1, 2003. The R-6 zoning district cannot be used to rezone any land that was vacant at the time this division was adopted. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family residences. 
(2)  Accessory structures. 
(3)  Essential services. 
(4)  Public parks. 
(5)  Home occupations. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Two-family residences. 
(2)  Private club or lodge. 
(3)  CBRFs. 
(4)  Cemeteries. 
(5)  Family/group day care centers. 
(6)  Bed and breakfast. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: single-family residences; 6,000 square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot width; 50 feet of frontage. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Main building Front yard 25 feet Rear yard 20 feet Flanking street side yard (corner lots) 20 feet Interior side yard 8 feet  
(g)  Maximum height: 
Main building 35 feet Accessory structure 20 feet  
(h)  Maximum percent of building lot coverage: 
Main building 30% Accessory structure 10%  
(i)  Minimum building dimensions: Minimum dimension of any principal building that is constructed, erected, placed or located on the lot shall not be less than 20 feet. The minimum square footage shall not be less than 720 square feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.07(7)) 
Secs. 17-185-17-206. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 17-207. - Purpose. 
    Outside storage prohibited. The business districts are established to accomplish the following purposes: 
(1)  To group compatible business uses that will tend to draw trade that is mutually interchangeable and so promote business prosperity and public convenience. 
(2)  To encourage master plan and development of business districts with adequate parking and loading, pedestrian circulation, and amenities 
No outside storage allowed in a business district unless otherwise noted. 
(Prior Code, § 17.08(1)) 
Sec. 17-208. - B-1 Downtown Business District. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the B-1 Downtown Business District is to provide a district that encourages and fosters the further development of the downtown business district core area. The district requirements recognize the unique characteristics of the downtown business district that differs from other business districts in the city. The intent of the requirements is to retain the existing Main Street characteristics of the core blocks on Water Street. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Antique store. 
(2)  Appliance store. 
(3)  Automotive service and repair. 
(4)  Bakery. 
(5)  Bank. 
(6)  Bar and tavern. 
(7)  Barber and hair stylist. 
(8)  Business services. 
(9)  Counseling services. 
(10)  City hall. 
(11)  Civic uses. 
(12)  Clubs and associations. 
(13)  Convenience stores. 
(14)  Co-op services. 
(15)  Day care centers. 
(16)  Discount store. 
(17)  Drug store. 
(18)  Employment agency. 
(19)  Fire department. 
(20)  Gift store. 
(21)  Greeting card store. 
(22)  Grocery store. 
(23)  Hearing aid sales and service. 
(24)  Home furnishings. 
(25)  Insurance office. 
(26)  Laundromat. 
(27)  Library. 
(28)  Locksmith. 
(29)  Medical clinic and hospital. 
(30)  Movie theater. 
(31)  Music store. 
(32)  Office supply store. 
(33)  Parking. 
(34)  Parks. 
(35)  Personal services. 
(36)  Picture frame shop. 
(37)  Places of worship. 
(38)  Police department. 
(39)  Post office. 
(40)  Professional offices. 
(41)  Radio station studio, not including radio tower over 50 feet. 
(42)  Real estate title insurance. 
(43)  Realty services. 
(44)  Repair shops. 
(45)  Residential use above street level. 
(46)  Restaurants. 
(47)  Retail trade. 
(48)  Secondhand store. 
(49)  Shoe store. 
(50)  Soap and lotion sales and manufacture. 
(51)  Sporting goods store. 
(52)  Studio. 
(53)  Tire store. 
(54)  Travel agency. 
(55)  Vacuum sales and service. 
(56)  Essential service structure. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Amusement and recreation services. 
(2)  Automotive sales. 
(3)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(4)  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(5)  Mini-storage. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: 20 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard: none. 
(2)  Rear yard: none. 
(3)  Side yard: none. 
(g)  Maximum height: 45 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.08(2)) 
Sec. 17-209. - B-2 Highway Business District. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the B-2 Highway Business District is to provide a district for a broad range of business uses located along the major roadways in the city. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Amusement and recreation services. 
(2)  Automobile service station. 
(3)  Business services. 
(4)  Clubs and organizations. 
(5)  Convenience stores. 
(6)  Day care centers. 
(7)  Garden supplies. 
(8)  Hobby shop. 
(9)  Hotels and motels. 
(10)  Manufacturing in enclosed building (no outside storage). 
(11)  Parking. 
(12)  Parks. 
(13)  Professional services. 
(14)  Professional offices. 
(15)  Recreational facilities (indoor). 
(16)  Restaurants. 
(17)  Retail trade. 
(18)  Veterinary hospital and clinic. 
(19)  Essential service facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Automobile body shop. 
(2)  Agricultural services. 
(3)  Day care center. 
(4)  CBRFs. 
(5)  Contractors; building construction (no outside storage). 
(6)  Green house; floral shop. 
(7)  Junkyard. 
(8)  Lumberyard. 
(9)  Medical centers. 
(10)  Nursing homes. 
(11)  Outside tavern premises. 
(12)  Rehabilitation centers. 
(13)  Tool and machine shop. 
(14)  Tourist homes (bed and breakfasts). 
(15)  Utility facilities. 
(16)  Warehousing/storage. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: 70 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Front yard 15 feet Rear yard 20 feet Flanking street side yard 15 feet Interior side yard 10 feet  
(g)  Maximum height: 45 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.08(3)) 
Sec. 17-210. - B-3 Interchange District. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the B-3 Interchange District is to provide a district that recognizes the unique characteristics of being located at an interstate highway interchange. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Amusement and recreation services. 
(2)  Automobile service station. 
(3)  Automobile sales or rental establishment. 
(4)  Boat sales or rental establishment. 
(5)  Business services. 
(6)  Car wash. 
(7)  Convenience stores. 
(8)  Garden supplies. 
(9)  Hotels and motels. 
(10)  Manufacturing in enclosed building (no outside storage). 
(11)  Outdoor amusements (such as a mini golf course). 
(12)  Parking. 
(13)  Planned commercial development group. 
(14)  Professional services. 
(15)  Professional and government offices. 
(16)  Recreational facilities (indoor). 
(17)  Restaurants. 
(18)  Retail trade. 
(19)  Essential service facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Contractors; building construction (no outside storage). 
(2)  Storage on-premises outside enclosed building. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: 21,780, square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: 70 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Front yard 15 feet Rear yard 20 feet Flanking street side yard 15 feet Interior side yard 10 feet  
(g)  Maximum height: 60 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.08(4)) 
Sec. 17-211. - B-4 Rural Business District. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the B-4 Rural Business District is to provide a district for a broad range of business uses located along the major roadways and not requiring central sewer. 
(b)  Principal uses: 
(1)  Amusement and recreation services. 
(2)  Business services. 
(3)  Automobile service station. 
(4)  Cemetery. 
(5)  Churches. 
(6)  Civic uses. 
(7)  Clubs and organizations. 
(8)  Convenience stores. 
(9)  County and town garages. 
(10)  Day care centers. 
(11)  Educational/vocational facilities. 
(12)  Garden supplies. 
(13)  Hotels and motels. 
(14)  Manufacturing in enclosed building with no outside storage. 
(15)  New and used store. 
(16)  Parking. 
(17)  Parks. 
(18)  Professional services. 
(19)  Professional and government offices. 
(20)  Indoor recreational facilities. 
(21)  Restaurants. 
(22)  Retail trade schools. 
(23)  Veterinary hospital and clinics. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Animal shelter. 
(2)  Auto body repair. 
(3)  Auto salvage. 
(4)  Bed and breakfast. 
(5)  Contractor yard. 
(6)  Farm machinery repair. 
(7)  Junkyard. 
(8)  Mini-warehouse. 
(9)  Mobile/manufactured home park. 
(10)  Well drilling yard and offices. 
(d)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  Accessory use or structure. 
(2)  Essential services. 
(3)  Home occupation. 
(4)  Parking garage. 
(5)  Parking area. 
(e)  Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet for each mobile/manufactured home in a mobile/manufactured home park. All other uses; one acre. 
(f)  Minimum yards: 
Front 25 feet (principal building and accessory building) Rear 25 feet (principal building and accessory building) Side 10 feet (principal building and accessory building)  
(g)  Maximum building height: 
Principal building 35 feet Accessory building 20 feet  
(Prior Code, § 17.08(5)) 
Secs. 17-212-17-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 17-231. - Manufacturing/industrial district purpose. 
    The manufacturing/industrial districts are established to accomplish the following purposes: 
(1)  To provide for manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing, and other industrial activities in locations accessible to rail and highways, so that the movement of raw materials, finished products, and employees can be carried on efficiently and with a minimum of danger to life and property. 
(2)  To realize proper standards of performance which will restrict obnoxious activities and encourage activities that will not affect lives of people living and working nearby. 
(3)  To promote stability of manufacturing uses. 
(4)  To provide room for industrial expansion in suitable locations so that employment opportunities will be preserved. 
(Prior Code, § 17.09(1)) 
Sec. 17-232. - M-1 Manufacturing District. 
(a)  Intent. The M-1 Manufacturing District is intended to provide a location for non-nuisance manufacturing uses which may be located reasonably close to residential areas. No outside storage permitted. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Contractors; building construction. 
(2)  Contractors; heavy construction. 
(3)  Manufacturing; light. 
(4)  Warehouses/mini-warehouses. 
(5)  Wholesale trade. 
(6)  Essential services. 
(7)  Utility facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Business services. 
(2)  Repair shops. 
(3)  Retail trade. 
(4)  Freight terminals. 
(5)  Storage on-premises outside enclosed building. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Front yard 25 feet Rear yard 25 feet (50 feet minimum rear yard adjacent to existing dwellings or residential districts) Side yard 10 feet (50 feet minimum side yard adjacent to existing dwellings or residential districts)  
(g)  Maximum height: 45 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.09(2)) 
Sec. 17-233. - M-2 Manufacturing District. 
(a)  Intent. The M-2 Manufacturing District is intended to provide a location for non-nuisance manufacturing uses which may be located reasonably close to residential areas. Storage is allowed on-premises outside the enclosed building. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Contractor; building construction. 
(2)  Contractors; heavy construction. 
(3)  Government service maintenance building. 
(4)  Manufacturing; light. 
(5)  Warehouses/mini-warehouses. 
(6)  Wholesale trade. 
(7)  Essential services. 
(8)  Public works yards. 
(9)  Utility facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Business services. 
(2)  Repair shops. 
(3)  Retail trade. 
(4)  Freight terminals. 
(5)  Manufacturing, heavy. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Front yard 25 feet Rear yard 25 feet (50 feet minimum rear yard adjacent to existing dwellings or residential districts) Side yard 10 feet (50 feet minimum side yard adjacent to existing dwellings or residential districts)  
(g)  Maximum height: 45 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.09(3)) 
Sec. 17-234. - M-3 Manufacturing-Business Park District. 
(a)  Intent. The M-3 Manufacturing-Business Park District is intended for use as industrial parks with a detailed master plan and development standards. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Automobile service station. 
(2)  Beer distributor. 
(3)  Business services. 
(4)  Child care facility. 
(5)  Contractors; building construction. 
(6)  Contractors; heavy construction. 
(7)  Dental office. 
(8)  Eating and drinking establishments. 
(9)  Essential services. 
(10)  Government service maintenance building. 
(11)  Hotel. 
(12)  Manufacturing; light. 
(13)  Medical centers/clinics. 
(14)  Public works yards. 
(15)  Professional/business school. 
(16)  Repair shops. 
(17)  Retail trade. 
(18)  Utility facilities. 
(19)  Warehouses. 
(20)  Wholesale trade. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Archery range. 
(2)  Mini-warehouses. 
(3)  Freight terminals. 
(4)  Outside storage. 
(5)  Manufacturing; heavy. 
(6)  Adult bookstores. 
(7)  Adult cabarets. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Front yard 25 feet Rear yard 25 feet (50 feet minimum rear yard adjacent to existing dwellings or residential districts) Side yard 10 feet (50 feet minimum side yard adjacent to existing dwellings or residential districts)  
(g)  Maximum height: 50 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.09(4)) 
Sec. 17-235. - M-4 Manufacturing District. 
(a)  Intent. The M-4 Manufacturing District is intended to provide a location for non-nuisance manufacturing uses which may be operated without public sewer. 
(b)  Principal uses: manufacturing, processing, repairing, or warehousing; wholesale establishment; governmental service building; planned industrial development group. 
(c)  Conditional uses: storage allowed on-premises outside enclosed building. 
(d)  Accessory uses: accessory use or structure. Essential services; office; parking garage or parking area. 
(e)  Extent of enclosure: all uses including storage shall be entirely within enclosed building. 
(f)  Minimum lot area: all uses; one acre. 
(g)  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
(h)  Minimum yards: 
Front 25 feet (principal building and accessory building) Rear 25 feet (principal building and accessory building) Side 10 feet (principal building and accessory building)  
(i)  Maximum building height: 
Principal building 45 feet Accessory building 20 feet  
(Prior Code, § 17.09(5)) 
Secs. 17-236-17-263. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 17-264. - Purpose. 
    The special districts are established to provide protection to unique resources and features in the community that are not included within the other standard zoning classifications. 
(Prior Code, § 17.10(1)) 
Sec. 17-265. - CU Civic Use District. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the CU Civic Use District is to provide a district that recognizes the unique characteristics of civic uses designed to serve the community. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Civic uses without outdoor storage including: 
a.  Community center. 
b.  Public library. 
c.  Public art gallery. 
d.  Public recreation. 
e.  Post office. 
f.  Fire station. 
g.  Public botanical garden. 
h.  Government buildings. 
i.  Places of instruction. 
j.  Places of worship. 
(2)  Civic uses with screened outdoor storage: 
a.  Community garage. 
b.  Government service maintenance building. 
c.  Public works yards. 
(c)  Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet. 
(d)  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
(e)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Front yard 5 feet Rear yard 5 feet Side yard 5 feet Flanking street side yard 5 feet  
(f)  Maximum height: 60 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.10(2)) 
Sec. 17-266. - RR Railroad Operations District. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the RR Railroad Operations District is to provide a district that recognizes the unique characteristics of a railroad and its related operations. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Railroad tracks. 
(2)  Uses used to support the operations of the railroad. 
(c)  Minimum lot size: one acre. 
(d)  Minimum lot width: 66 feet. 
(e)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Front yard 0 feet Rear yard 0 feet Side yard 0 feet  
(f)  Maximum height: 60 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.10(3)) 
Sec. 17-267. - GA General Agricultural District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this district shall be to provide an area for general agriculture uses and to provide for the orderly transition of agricultural land to other uses in areas planned for eventual urban expansion, to provide periodic review to ensure development is consistent with local land use plans. Defer development until the appropriate governmental bodies determine that public services can be provided at a reasonable cost. 
(b)  Principal uses: 
(1)  Agriculture. 
(2)  Horticulture. 
(3)  Beekeeping. 
(4)  Dairying. 
(5)  Livestock raising. 
(6)  Greenhouse. 
(7)  Stable. 
(8)  Truck farm. 
(9)  Roadside stand for the sale of products grown or produced on the premises. 
(10)  Single-family residence with additional dwellings if used by farm help. 
(11)  Poultry farm housing 10,000 birds or less. 
(c)  Accessory uses: essential services and household occupations. 
(d)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising of fish. 
(2)  Poultry farm housing more than 10,000 birds. 
(3)  Fur farm. 
(4)  Mineral extraction and processing. 
(5)  Campground. 
(6)  Golf course. 
(7)  Lawn mower repair. 
(8)  Rifle range. 
(9)  Race track and festival grounds. 
(10)  Shoe repair. 
(11)  Kennel. 
(12)  Solid waste disposal operation. 
(13)  Incinerator and salvage yard. 
(14)  Veterinarian facility. 
(15)  Construction yard. 
(16)  Farm machinery sales and recreational vehicle sales. 
(17)  Saw mill of a commercial nature permanently fixed to the ground. 
(18)  Stockyard. 
(e)  Minimum lot area: five acres. 
(f)  Minimum width: 200 feet. 
(g)  Minimum depth: 200 feet. 
(h)  Minimum yards: 
(1)  Front: 30 feet, except for farm buildings which may be built at the existing setback, but not less than 20 feet from the right-of-way, and except for irrigation facilities which may be built at the right-of-way. 
(2)  Rear: 50 feet. 
(3)  Side: 50 feet. 
(i)  Maximum building height for dwellings: three stories or 35 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.10(4)) 
Sec. 17-268. - EA Exclusive Agricultural District. 
(a)  Purpose. To identify a primary agriculture economy, preserving land for food and fiber production and preventing conflict between incompatible uses. 
(b)  Principal uses: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 91.01(2), including: beekeeping; commercial feedlots, dairying, egg production; floriculture, fish or fur farming; forest and game management; grazing; livestock raising; orchards; plant greenhouses and nurseries; poultry raising; raising of grain, grass, mint and seed crops; raising of fruits, nuts and berries; sod farming and vegetable raising. 
(2)  The only residences allowed as permitted uses are those to be occupied by a person who, or of a family at least one member of which, earns a substantial part of his livelihood from farm operations on the parcel, or is a parent or child of the operator of the farm. Preexisting residences located in areas subject to zoning under this district which do not conform to this subsection may be continued in residential use. Such preexisting residences may be altered, repaired or rebuilt if destroyed, but are subject to setback, height and other dimensional requirements. Farm dwellings and related structures which remain after farm consolidation may be separated from the farm lot. Gas and electric utility uses are not required authorization under Wis. Stats. § 196.491. Roadside solely for the sale of products grown or produced on the premises. No structure or improvement may be built on the land unless consistent with agricultural uses. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Agricultural related, religious, other utility uses which are not permitted uses, institutional or governmental uses which do not conflict with agricultural uses and are found necessary in light of alternative locations available for such uses. Single-family dwellings exceeding one per farm operation for occupancy by a person or family earning a substantial part of livelihood from the farm operation. 
(2)  Household occupations and professional home offices conducted within and accessory to permitted agricultural residence. 
(d)  Minimum lot area: 30 acres, except as provided. The minimum lot size to establish a separate parcel for an additional residence for persons earning a substantial part of their livelihood from the farm operation or parents or children of the farm operator shall be 11/2 acres. The minimum lot size for farm residences or structures existing before adoption of this division and which are separated from a larger parcel through farm consolidation shall be 11/2 acres. 
(e)  Minimum width: 200 feet. 
(f)  Minimum depth: 200 feet. 
(g)  Minimum yards: 
(1)  Front: 30 feet, except for farm buildings which may be built at the existing setback but not less than 20 feet from the right-of-way and except for irrigation facilities which may be built at the right-of-way. 
(2)  Rear: 75 feet. 
(3)  Side: 50 feet combined, no less than 15 feet. 
(h)  Maximum building height for dwellings: three stories or 35 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.10(5)) 
Sec. 17-269. - C Public Parks and Conservancy District. 
(a)  Intent. The C Public Parks and Conservancy District is intended to preserve public parks and those natural features and environments that are unique community assets so that they will be protected from adverse urban development activities. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Public parks. 
(2)  Conservancy. 
(3)  Essential service structures. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Amusement and recreational services. 
(2)  Utility facilities. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
(f)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
Front yard 30 feet Rear yard 20 feet Side yard 10 feet  
(g)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.10(6)) 
Sec. 17-270. - AP Airport Special Purpose Overlay District. 
(a)  Intent. The AP Airport Special Purpose Overlay District is intended to protect the airport and abutting areas from uses and activities that would be detrimental to airport operations or would jeopardize the municipal investment in those facilities. 
(b)  Statutory authorization. This division is designed to protect the approaches and airspaces of the Sparta/Fort McCoy Airport and is adopted pursuant to the authorization contained in Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.694, and 114.136. 
(c)  Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this division shall extend over all non-federal lands within three miles of the boundaries of the Sparta/Fort McCoy Airport 
(d)  Description of airport special purpose district. All zones established by this subsection are as shown on the map entitled "Height Limitation Zoning Map, Sparta/Fort McCoy Airport, Sparta, Wisconsin," which is adopted as part of this section. 
(e)  Height limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this division, no structure shall be constructed, altered, located, or permitted to remain after such construction, alteration, or location, and no trees shall be allowed to grow to a height in excess of the height limit indicated on the height limitations zoning map. 
(f)  Additional limitations. No use may be made of land in any zone in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft which endangers the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(g)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  These regulations shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any nonconforming use, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. 
(2)  Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, if the construction or alteration of the use was begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived and if such is diligently prosecuted. 
(3)  This section shall not interfere with the removal of nonconforming uses by purchase or the use of eminent domain. 
(h)  Administration. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator and the airport manager to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed in this section. Applications for variance shall be made to the zoning administrator upon a form furnished by him. Applications shall be forthwith transmitted by the zoning administrator to the board of appeals for hearing and decision. The airport manager is to attend such hearings to offer information pertinent to the granting of the variance. 
(i)  Structures. 
(1)  No person shall erect or cause to be erected any structure over 35 feet in height measured at the object site) with the shaded area of the map referred to in subsection (d) of this section without registering his intent before construction commences on a form provided by the zoning administrator. The administrator shall inform the applicant if his structure is in violation of this division. A structure may be built up to the height limit indicated on the map. The administrator shall send record of the structures to the proper agencies as required, to include the airport manager. 
(2)  No person, firm, or corporation shall erect or cause to be erected any structure over 100 feet in height within three miles of any portion of any runway of the airport without registering his intent before construction commences on a form provided by the zoning administrator. The administrator shall send record of the structures to the proper agencies to include the airport manager as required. A structure may be built up to the height limit shown on the map. 
(3)  A nonconforming structure may be repaired, rebuilt, altered, or extended, provided the structure will not be higher after such construction than on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. Every such project shall be registered with the zoning administrator prior to commencement. 
(j)  Hazard marking and lighting. The city may, at its own expense, install, operate, and maintain such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to the flyers the presence of an airport hazard, if such action is deemed advisable by the Sparta/Fort McCoy Airport Managers. 
(Prior Code, § 17.10(7)) 
Secs. 17-271-17-288. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 17-289. - Intent; scope; classification. 
(a)  Planned unit developments (PUDs) are intended to encourage more efficient use of land by allowing, under certain circumstances, a more flexible means of land development and redevelopment than is otherwise permissible under the lot-by-lot restrictions of standard zoning districts. The design flexibility is intended to benefit both the developer and the residents of the city. 
(b)  Planned unit development provisions are intended for application to larger or unique sites where a flexible approach to zoning regulations would facilitate more efficient use of the site and protection of natural resources achieved through clustering development and other innovative site plan and design techniques. Typically, PUDs enable development of portions of a site at either higher densities or with less restrictive lot provisions in exchange for preserving other portions of the site in open space or providing above normal site amenities. All PUDs are expected to provide attractive recreation and open spaces as integral parts of the development. 
(c)  PUDs may be residential, commercial, mixed residential and commercial, or mixed single-family, duplex, and multifamily dwellings. Industrial and manufacturing uses are not allowed in planned unit developments. 
(d)  Classification of a PUD does not allow a developer to avoid infrastructure improvement costs. The developer of a PUD shall pay the same proportionate costs for infrastructure improvements that a subdivider is required to pay in sections 18-118 and 18-119. 
(e)  Condominium projects with jointly owned common spaces or commonly owned structural walls, roofs, or other structural elements must be approved as PUDs if, as a result of a condominium division of the land, the lot requirements of the district in which the development is located cannot otherwise be met. This requirement would apply to townhouses where the resulting lot size would be less than otherwise required. 
(Prior Code, § 17.11(1)) 
Sec. 17-290. - Eligibility. 
(a)  Ownership. Property developed as a PUD must be a single taxable parcel. The owner is obligated to the terms of the development and improvement plans, and any covenants and restrictions established thereby or otherwise. The covenants and restrictions shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(b)  Minimum size. PUDs shall be at least one acre in size. 
(Prior Code, § 17.11(2)) 
Sec. 17-291. - Procedure. 
(a)  General development plan (PUD-GDP). The owner or developer shall submit a general development plan to the zoning administrator, the public works director, and the fire chief. 
(b)  Required contents of GDP. The PUD-GDP shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The size and shape of the lot; 
(2)  The present land use; 
(3)  Existing roads and utilities; 
(4)  Existing topography and storm drainage; 
(5)  Location of proposed buildings on the site, describing their use, size and setbacks from property lines, streets, and other structures, and the proposed grading and storm drainage plan; 
(6)  The landscape treatment; 
(7)  Location of recreational areas and open space; 
(8)  Layout of public and private roads and parking areas; 
(9)  Description of the planned phasing (order of construction); 
(10)  Form of ownership of the PUD; 
(11)  Structure of the property owners' association, if any; and 
(12)  Any deed restrictions or covenants. 
A certified survey map shall be submitted with the PUD-GDP. 
(Prior Code, § 17.11(3)) 
Sec. 17-292. - Review by public works board. 
(a)  A GDP certified to contain the required information by the zoning administrator, public works director and fire chief shall be reviewed by the board of public works. 
(b)  The board of public works shall: 
(1)  Determine if existing water and sewer mains have the capacity to service the development; 
(2)  If existing public roads can accommodate the increased traffic; and 
(3)  Examine the site plan and determine its adequacy. 
(Prior Code, § 17.11(4)) 
Sec. 17-293. - Review required by board of public works. 
(a)  The GDP must have the approval of the board of public works on the following: 
(1)  Public and private street design, including curb and gutter requirements. 
(2)  The location and construction of sidewalks, paths, and trails. 
(3)  The stormwater management plan for the PUD, including storm sewers. 
(4)  The sanitary sewer plan. 
(5)  The distribution plan for the city water supply. 
(6)  Which portions of utilities shall be publicly or privately owned. 
(7)  Utility easements the developer shall grant the city. 
(b)  Upon approval of the GDP by the board of public works, with or without modifications, the matter shall be referred to the plan commission. 
(Prior Code, § 17.11(5)) 
Sec. 17-294. - Review by plan commission. 
(a)  The GDP must have the approval of the city plan commission on the following: 
(1)  Types of buildings and total number of buildings. 
(2)  Uses of buildings (residential or commercial). 
(3)  The area, height, and location of each building. 
(4)  Location and extent of recreational areas and amenities. 
(5)  The total area under roof, total paved area, and the amount of open green space. 
(6)  The landscaping and screening from adjacent properties. 
(7)  Common areas to be dedicated to the city, park district and school district. 
(b)  Public hearing. The plan commission shall hold a public hearing upon notice as is required for amendments to the zoning regulations. 
(c)  Upon approval of the GDP by the plan commission, with or without modifications, the matter shall be referred to the city council. 
(d)  Common council approval. The common council shall either grant approval of the PUD-GDP application, with or without modification, or deny such application. If approved, the parcel shall be designated as a PUD-GDP by resolution, incorporating the plan and including any conditions or restrictions imposed by the common council. The PUD-GDP is an interim zoning classification which does not authorize development until the PUD-SIP (specific implementation plan) is approved. 
(Prior Code, § 17.11(6)) 
Sec. 17-295. - Appeals. 
    Any party aggrieved by the determination of the plan commission or board of public work may, within ten calendar days of the determination, appeal in writing to the common council. Upon notice as is required for amendments to the city zoning regulations, the common council shall hold a public hearing. 
(Prior Code, § 17.11(7)) 
Sec. 17-296. - Specific implementation plan (PUD-SIP). 
(a)  After the city council has approved a GDP, the developer must submit a specific implementation plan (SIP) within 12 months. Upon failure to submit a PUD-SIP within 12 months, the common council approval of the GDP is rescinded. 
(b)  Except for grading and clearing, no construction shall occur on the site of the PUD until the common council has approved the SIP. 
(c)  The board of public works and plan commission must approve the SIP before the matter goes to the common council. The public works director and the zoning administrator may request further information or explanation from the developer before referring the PUD-SIP to the board of public works and the plan commission. 
(d)  Upon approval of the SIP by the common council, the parcel shall be rezoned as a PUD-SIP and shall be subject to conditions or restrictions imposed by the common council. 
(e)  For parcels zoned PUD-SIP, general zoning regulations that are not inconsistent with the PUD-SIP plan shall continue to be in effect. 
(f)  Building permit restricted. Development and building permits for PUDs may not be issued until the PUD-SIP is approved by the city council. No building permit shall be issued for any structure within the PUD-SIP district unless the zoning administrator certifies that it conforms to the provisions of the PUD-SIP and other applicable zoning requirements. 
(g)  Changes or alterations. Any change of the PUD plans subsequent to approval of the PUD-SIP shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and the public works director. If these officials determine that the changes constitute a substantial modification, the developer will be required to amend the PUD-SIP, and if necessary, the PUD-GDP, following the procedures set forth in section 17-291. 
If, in the opinion of the zoning administrator and public works director, such changes do not constitute a substantial alteration of either the PUD-GDP or PUD-SIP, the changes may be accomplished by the approval of the zoning administrator and public works director. Such approval changes or modifications shall be documented and recorded in the city's official file on the PUD. 
(h)  Expiration. If substantial development progress has not occurred within one year of a PUD-SIP approval, the council, following a plan commission recommendation, may revoke the PUD-SIP approval and revert the site zoning to its previous zoning district classification. 
(Prior Code, § 17.11(8)) 
Secs. 17-297-17-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN USES AND ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 17-326. - Rehabilitation centers and group homes (CBRF). 
(a)  Distance separation. Each rehabilitation center and group home (CBRF) established after the date of this division must be at least 2,500 feet from any other existing rehabilitation center or group home (CBRF). 
(b)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for each district shall apply, except that the minimum lot area in square feet shall be increased 1,000 square feet for each additional two residents over 15. 
(c)  Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area shall be 2,500 square feet, plus 100 square feet for each resident. 
(Prior Code, § 17.14(1)) 
Sec. 17-327. - Day care centers. 
(a)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size requirement for each district shall apply except that the minimum lot area must be increased 1,000 square feet for each five children or adults between 15 and 30, plus 800 square feet for each person over 30. 
(b)  Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for all employees. 
(c)  Visual screening. The rear yard shall be required to be visually screened to a height of six feet. 
(d)  Owner-resident. In the R-1, R-2, and R-6 districts, the operator shall be an owner-resident of the facility. 
(e)  Drop-off area. All group day care facilities, providing care for nine or more children or adults, shall provide a safe off-street drop-off area. 
(Prior Code, § 17.14(2)) 
Sec. 17-328. - Model homes, model dwelling units, and pre-construction office. 
    Model homes, model dwelling units, and pre-construction sales offices are residential type structures used as sales offices by a builder/developer to display the builder/developer's product and are conditional uses under these ordinances. Such structures may be furnished and staffed by the builder/developer sales force and are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  District dimensional requirements to be met. The model dwelling unit shall meet all district requirements for dwelling size, lot and yard dimensions. 
(2)  Sign illumination. Signs shall not be illuminated after 9:00 p.m. 
(3)  Business activity not permitted before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. The model dwelling unit shall not be used for business purposes between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(4)  Lighting. All exterior lighting must be down lighting so that no light shall be cast onto adjoining residential properties. All off-street parking areas must be illuminated. All exterior lighting shall be extinguished at the closing time of the model home. 
(5)  Off-street parking. All model homes shall provide off-street, paved parking for the public. Such off-street, paved parking shall be located as directed by the plan commission. The number of required parking spaces shall be four per model home. The driveway of the model home may be utilized for not more than two of the required spaces. 
(6)  Issuance of an occupancy permit. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until after the abutting street has been dedicated to the city and provided with a hard surface. 
(7)  Termination of use. The use of model homes within a residential subdivision, or within any single phase of a multi-phase subdivision, shall terminate when building permits have been issued for 90 percent of the lots therein or within the conditional use time restriction limits. 
(8)  Model dwelling unit constructed in nonresidential zoning districts. Model dwelling units may be erected or displayed in districts which exclude residential uses, provided that such models shall not be used for residential purposes, but only for display as a means to sell homes in districts in which they are permitted and provided that all other requirements of the district in which the model dwelling unit is erected shall be met. 
(9)  Temporary sales structure on multiple-family developments. In those zoning districts where multifamily dwelling uses are permitted, a temporary structure may be used as a pre-construction sales office for the purpose of displaying a typical dwelling unit arrangement, subject to the following instructions: 
a.  The structure shall be limited to two stories in height. 
b.  The structure shall be appropriately landscaped. 
c.  The structure shall be subject to the same front yard requirements as the principal structure to be erected and shall otherwise be subject to all yard requirements for the district in which located. 
d.  Adequate off-street parking facilities (a minimum of four spaces) and access driveways shall be developed within those locations approved for such facilities in conjunction with the permanent multiple-family structure, and no additional parking areas or access driveways shall be permitted. 
e.  Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the regulations set forth for the use within the district and in compliance with this division. 
f.  The structure shall comply fully with all existing building codes for the city. 
g.  The structure shall be completely and totally removed within six months from the date of the issuance of a building permit or upon the completion of the permanent residential dwelling structure, whichever date is earlier. 
h.  Upon failure to remove as set forth above, and after 30 days' written notice from the city, the city may cause the structure to be removed at the sole expense of the owner thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 17.14(3)) 
Secs. 17-329-17-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 17-360. - Intent. 
    A conditional use is development which would not generally be appropriate within a district but might be allowed in certain locations within the district if specific requirements are met. The compatibility must be judged on the basis of the particular circumstances and may require the imposing of conditions before development or occupancy is permitted. The intent is to allow a reasonable degree of discretion in determining the suitability of a particular development at a specific location. 
(Prior Code, § 17.12(1)) 
Sec. 17-361. - Commission action. 
    The commission is empowered to recommend a development permit for a conditional use if the following requirements are met. Uses which require such a permit are identified on the table in the district regulations and the schedule of use regulations. 
(1)  Procedure. The requests for permit for a conditional use shall be filed with the administrator on an official application form and shall be accompanied by the required fee and detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed development. A public hearing shall be conducted by the commission. 
(2)  Notice. The commission shall fix a reasonable time for a public hearing by publication in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing. The administrator shall also send written notice of the hearing to the owners of record of all lands situated wholly or partly within 100 feet of the other perimeter of the subject property. Such notice shall be sent by regular mail at least ten days before the date of the public hearing. 
(3)  Conditions. The commission shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed conditional use and what additional requirements may be necessary to reduce such adverse effects. The commission may recommend denial of the request. 
(4)  Issuance and safeguards. The permit for a conditional use shall amend the development permit and shall be attached thereto. In recommending any conditional use, the commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. The commission may request that the city be provided with either a surety bond, cash escrow, certificate of deposit, securities, or cash deposit prior to issuance of the conditional use permit. The security shall be used to guarantee compliance with the conditions of the permit and shall be returned to the developer when an occupancy permit is issued. 
(Prior Code, § 17.12(2)) 
Sec. 17-362. - Decision criteria. 
    In making a determination on an application for a conditional use, the commission shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this article including standards for specific requirements for certain land uses and activities. The commission shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Compatibility. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development within 300 feet of the proposed use and within 500 feet along the same street and development anticipated in the foreseeable future within the neighborhood and conditions that would make the use more compatible. 
(2)  Consistency with the comprehensive plan. The relationship of the proposed use to the objectives of the city comprehensive plan. 
(3)  Importance of services to the community. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community, if any, and the requirements of the facility for certain locations, if any and without undue inconvenience to the developer, and the availability of alternate locations equally suitable. 
(4)  Neighborhood protections. The sufficiency of the terms and conditions proposed to protect and maintain the uses in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(5)  Conformance with other zoning regulations. The conformance of the proposed development with all provisions of this article. 
(6)  Other factors. Other factors pertinent to the proposed use, site conditions, or surrounding area considerations that the commission feels are necessary for review in order to make an informed and just decision. 
(7)  Conditions for issuance of conditional use permit for adult oriented entertainment: 
a.  Such use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any residential district as designated within this title with an "R" designation. 
b.  Such use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a public or private school, or place of worship. 
c.  Such use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another adult bookstore or adult cabaret. 
d.  The distances provided in this subsection shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the lot upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the zoning district boundary line or the lot from which the proposed use is to be separated. 
e.  Violation of these provisions is declared to be a public nuisance per se. 
f.  Nothing in this subsection is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any city ordinance or state law regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 17.12(3)) 
Sec. 17-363. - Appeal from decision regarding conditional use permit. 
    An appeal from the decision of the city plan commission regarding an application for a conditional use permit may be taken to the common council by any person aggrieved by the decision of the plan commission and must be filed in the office of the city clerk within ten days of the decision of the plan commission. Such appeal must specify the grounds therefor. The common council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, and give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. The decision of the plan commission shall be upheld unless the common council, by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the members of the common council, reverses or modifies the action of the plan commission. 
(Prior Code, § 17.12(4)) 
Secs. 17-364-17-384. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 17-385. - Intent. 
    Where the districts established contain structures and uses of land and structures that were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but that would now be prohibited, it is the intent to permit these nonconformities to continue, but not allow alteration or enlargement of use or structure in such a manner as to increase the degree of nonconformity. No changes in lot, use, or structure shall increase the level of nonconformity. 
(Prior Code, § 17.13(1)) 
Sec. 17-386. - Nonconforming use of land. 
    No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. No nonconforming use of land shall continue if it ceases for any reason (except where governmental action impedes access to the premises) for a period of no more than 12 consecutive months or for 12 months during any three-year period. No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Prior Code, § 17.13(2)) 
Sec. 17-387. - Nonconforming uses of structure. 
(a)  Preexisting uses. No nonconforming use of a structure may extend to any part of the structure which was not manifestly arranged or designed for such use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside the structure. Moreover, such use or structure shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except for a permitted use. 
(b)  Forfeiture by nonuse. No nonconforming use of structure shall continue if it is discontinued for 12 consecutive months. 
(c)  Repairs and maintenance. Improvements to nonconforming structures occurring within a consecutive 12-month period shall not exceed 50 percent of the current assessed value. No improvements shall increase the cubic content of the building as it existed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived 
(Prior Code, § 17.13(3)) 
Sec. 17-388. - Nonconforming structure. 
(a)  Preexisting structures. A structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Enlargement or alteration. No nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity except as permitted by the board of appeals as provided in this article. 
(c)  Damage or destruction. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost exclusive of foundations, at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with this article. If destroyed to less than 50 percent of its replacement cost, such restoration shall begin within six months or the structure shall be made conforming. 
(d)  Relocation. If a nonconforming structure is moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(e)  Building safety. Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of the official. 
(Prior Code, § 17.13(4)) 
Sec. 17-389. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a)  Preexisting uses on nonconforming lots. Any existing conforming use or conforming structure on a nonconforming lot existing on the effective date of this article may be enlarged, extended, constructed, or moved so long as such change does not increase the degree of nonconformity and other requirements of this article are met, except that a multifamily residential use may not be constructed, extended, or enlarged on a nonconforming lot. 
(b)  Division of combined nonconforming lots. Any two or more lots under the same ownership and with continuous frontage shall not be used or sold in a manner which diminishes possible compliance with this article. 
(Prior Code, § 17.13(5)) 
Sec. 17-390. - Certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming lots. 
    Certificates of occupancy for nonconforming uses, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming lots existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be issued by the building inspector, providing that such certificates state that the use is a nonconforming use and does not conform with the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 17.13(6)) 
Secs. 17-391-17-408. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 17-409. - Applicability; spaces required. 
    All parking and loading space needs generated by development shall be accommodated off-street as specified in this section. Such parking spaces shall not be less in number than the parking and loading space requirements of the table in section 17-413 and all required parking shall be maintained for the life of the use. 
(Prior Code, § 17.15(1)) 
Sec. 17-410. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loading space means a dust-free and durable, hard surfaced area of adequate size for the delivery vehicles expected to be used, logically and conveniently located for bulk pickup and delivery, readily accessible when required parking spaces are filled, which shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way. 
    Parking space means a durable, hard surfaced area adequate for parking a motor vehicle with room for opening doors on both sides, together with a clear, properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room which shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way. 
(Prior Code, § 17.15(2)) 
Sec. 17-411. - Interpretation. 
(a)  Interpretation by zoning administrator. Parking spaces for other permitted or conditional uses not listed in this section shall be determined by the administrator based on the requirements for comparable uses. 
(b)  Fractional numbers. Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number. 
(c)  Preexisting parking and loading spaces. Parking and loading spaces that were in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or were provided voluntarily after such date shall not hereafter be reduced in number except to conform to the requirements herein. 
(d)  Use exclusively for parking and loading. Parking and loading spaces shall be used solely for the intended use and not for the storage of goods, or of vehicles that are inoperable, for lease, rent or sale except for the sale of a vehicle at an owner's home. 
(e)  Temporary waivers. The administrator may temporarily suspend parking requirements for major unused portions of buildings for periods of one year, renewable for periods of one year. 
(Prior Code, § 17.15(3)) 
Sec. 17-412. - Proximity. 
    Parking and loading spaces generated by development shall be located on the same parcel as the use that they are intended to serve. 
(Prior Code, § 17.15(4)) 
Sec. 17-413. - Schedule of required off-street parking spaces. 
Use Number of Parking Spaces Required Per Unit of
Measurement Number Unit RESIDENTIAL USES Guest, boardinghouse or lodginghouse 1.0 Dwelling unit and lodging unit Bed and breakfast 1.0 Guest room plus dwelling unit Requirements Dwellings-one- and two-family 2.0 Dwelling unit under 1,200 square feet Dwellings-multifamily (except elderly) 1.5 Dwelling unit Dwellings-multifamily which are specifically designed and occupied exclusively by persons 60 years of age or older .8 Dwelling unit Motels, hotels 1.0 Sleeping unit, plus one per employee on largest shift EDUCATIONAL, CULTURAL AND INSTITUTIONAL Auditoriums, churches, temples and other places of assembly 1.0 Four seats Elementary and middle schools, nursery schools, care and rehabilitation centers 1.0 Each employee Convalescence or nursing homes 1.0 Three beds plus 1.5 for every two employees of the largest shift Hospitals 1.5 Per bed Senior high schools 1.0 Each employee, plus 1.0 for every five students Public libraries, art galleries, museums, etc. 1.0 300 square feet net floor area COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL Bowling alley 4.0 Per alley Funeral homes 1.0 Four seats Offices, banks and public administration 1.0 300 square feet net floor area Service garages 3.0 Per stall or service bay Drive-ins and roadside services 1.0 Each 4 patron seats; or 3.0 Per employee of largest work shift, whichever is greatest Automobile or machinery sales 1.0 800 square feet net floor area Medical clinics and service establishments 1.0 200 square feet net floor area Furniture and appliance stores 1.0 600 square feet net floor area Restaurants, night clubs, clubs 1.0 4 seats Retail stores 1.0 200 square feet net floor area Shopping centers over 45,000 square feet 5.0 1,000 square feet net floor area Theater 1.0 4 seats All other commercial 1.0 300 square feet net floor area industrial Warehousing, utilities 1.0 Two employees of the two largest shifts combined or 1,200 square feet of net floor area, whichever is greater  
(Prior Code, § 17.15(5)) 
Sec. 17-414. - Collective usage. 
(a)  Mixed occupancies. In the case of two or more uses in the same building, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the several uses computed separately. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use, except as approved specifically by the administrator for joint but alternative uses. 
(b)  Joint but alternative use. The administrator may authorize the joint use of parking facilities under the following conditions: 
(1)  Up to 50 percent of the parking facilities by nighttime uses may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities of daytime uses. 
(2)  Up to 50 percent of the parking facilities of daytime uses may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities of nighttime uses. 
(3)  Up to 100 percent of the parking facilities of a church or auditorium incidental to a school may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities of daytime uses. 
(4)  For the purposes of this section, daytime uses are defined as offices, banks, retail stores, personal service or repair shops, household equipment or furniture stores, manufacturing or wholesale, or similar primarily daytime uses; and nighttime uses are defined as auditoriums incidental to schools, churches, bowling alleys, dance halls, theaters, bars or restaurants, motels, or similar primarily nighttime or Sunday uses. 
(5)  Conditions required for joint use: 
a.  The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within 250 feet of the parking facilities. 
b.  The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
c.  A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties concerned for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to form and manner of execution by the city attorney, shall be filed with the administrator. Joint use parking privileges shall continue in effect only so long as such instrument, binding on all parties, remains in force. If such instrument becomes legally ineffective, then parking shall be provided as otherwise required in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 17.15(6)) 
Sec. 17-415. - Design. 
(a)  Plot plan. Any application for a building permit shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this article, excluding required parking of four spaces or less. The plot plan shall be approved by the administrator. 
(b)  Size. Parking and loading spaces shall be of adequate size and shape to accommodate the required number of vehicles. Except when modified by the administrator, parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area exclusive of access. Loading spaces to accommodate tractors and trailers shall be a minimum of 650 square feet in area, exclusive of access. 
(c)  Surfacing and drainage. Parking and loading areas shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area. The method of discharge of the water to public facilities shall be subject to approval of the city engineer. All required parking and loading spaces and access drives shall be paved with concrete or bituminous pavement with a setback of a minimum of three feet from any lot line. 
(d)  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading areas shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to create a nuisance to either residential properties or oncoming vehicles. 
(e)  Landscaping. Parking areas with 20 or more spaces shall have at least ten percent of the total parking area landscaped. Parking areas with 100 or more spaces shall have at least 25 percent of the required ten percent to be landscaped located in the interior of the lot. No island shall be less than 100 square feet. When landscaping is required, as set forth above, then an average of at least one tree shall be planted for every 15 parking spaces within the parking area. 
(f)  Setback from residential lots. No off-street parking area containing more than four parking spaces shall be located closer than 15 feet from an adjacent lot zoned for residential purposes. 
(g)  Driveways. All driveways shall be set back three feet from lot lines, except for common driveways. 
(Prior Code, § 17.15(7)) 
Sec. 17-416. - Exceptions. 
(a)  B-1 downtown business district exception. No accessory off-street parking is required in the B-1 downtown business district, except for dwelling units located above the ground floor of permitted uses which were created after the adoption of this article. 
(b)  Elderly housing developments. The plan commission may grant exceptions, through the issuance of a conditional use permit, to the off-street parking requirements for certain elderly housing developments where the developer can successfully demonstrate that automobile ownership will be sufficiently low so that the required number of stalls would be unnecessary. In no instance may the number of stalls be reduced to less than 0.5 per dwelling unit. 
(c)  Off-site parking. The plan commission may grant exceptions through the issuance of a conditional use permit, whenever required parking and loading spaces cannot be located on a parcel because of development restrictions imposed by the presence of an existing structure that is to continue in use. Required parking may then be provided off the parcel, for permitted uses only, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  If the use is residential, hotel, motel, or tourist home, the off-site spaces shall be within 200 feet of the principal entrance or the entrance for individual occupants for whom spaces are reserved. 
(2)  If the use is other than residential, hotel, motel, or tourist home, the farthest portion of the parking lot shall be with 500 feet of an entrance to the establishment. 
(3)  Distances indicated above shall be measured along routes generally available to the pedestrians involved. 
(4)  Off-site parking areas shall be held by the same owner as the use requiring the off-street parking space, or under lease, rental, or other form of agreement satisfactory to the plan commission with respect to ensuring continuing availability for required off-site parking for the use. 
(Prior Code, § 17.15(8)) 
Secs. 17-417-17-445. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SCREENING, BUFFERING AND LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 17-446. - Intent. 
    The intent of this section is to provide minimum screening and buffering between potentially incompatible uses and between specific operations which may create a nuisance for the occupants of adjoining properties. It is also the intent of this section to provide minimum landscaping and planting standards for the purpose of enhancing community appearance. 
(Prior Code, § 17.16(1)) 
Sec. 17-447. - Screening. 
    Whenever development cannot be placed in harmony with its surroundings, adequate screening and distance buffering shall be provided to make it so. Screening shall be an obscuring wall or fence or other method approved by the plan commission. The table below indicates these conditions which are considered inherently disharmonious, and adequate screening shall be provided at the side of the parcel between conflicting uses by the owner of the potential disharmonious use. 
MINIMUM SCREENING REQUIREMENTS 
Use Or Potential District Disharmonious Use Height In Feet Residential Business Districts 8 feet, 0 inches Residential Industrial Districts 8 feet, 0 inches Residential Business Parking Lots 6 feet, 0 inches Residential Loading Areas 6 feet, 0 inches  
(Prior Code, § 17.16(2)) 
Sec. 17-448. - Wall and fence materials. 
(a)  Durable materials. All walls and fences hereafter erected shall be durable, weather resistant, rust proof, and easily maintained. 
(b)  Masonry walls. Masonry walls shall be erected on foundations which are a minimum of 48 inches below grade. 
(c)  Limitation on open grid metal fences. Metallic cyclone type or other open grid fences may not be used as required screening between residential uses and nonresidential uses. Such metallic fences may not be used in front yards, except in industrial districts. 
(d)  Fence maintenance. All fences shall be kept in good condition, plumb and true, and without damage. 
(Prior Code, § 17.16(3)) 
Sec. 17-449. - Landscape berms and planting strips. 
    Landscaped berms or planting strips may be substituted for obscuring walls or fences when approved by the administrator. Landscaped berms and planting strips shall be landscaped with evergreen plants. Plant materials shall be of the size when planted as to reach the necessary screening height within three years of planting. 
(Prior Code, § 17.16(4)) 
Sec. 17-450. - Distance buffering. 
    Certain uses and activities are inherently incompatible with other uses and activities and are required to be separated as indicated in the table below so as to reduce conflict and to maintain amenity. 
MINIMUM DISTANCE BUFFERING 
Minimum Permitted Use Distance in Feet Quarrying operation or any stockpile Minimum of 200 feet to any property line except a exceeding 15 feet in height minimum of 100 feet to street line Junkyards and salvaging operations 200 feet to residential uses and districts and 100 feet to other uses Swimming pools 8 feet to property line Air conditioners mounted 10 feet to property line independent Loading docks 150 feet to an adjoining residential dwelling (where no dwelling is present, the required setback distance of the zoning district shall be used to calculate the 150 feet.)  
(Prior Code, § 17.16(5)) 
Sec. 17-451. - Buffer distance between single-family residential development and other use. 
    Where proposed multifamily or commercial development abuts existing single-family housing or zoning the following additional setbacks will be required: 
Structure Distance Two-story commercial or multifamily 25 feet to property line abutting single-family housing Three-story and higher commercial or multifamily 50 feet to property line abutting single-family housing  
(Prior Code, § 17.16(6)) 
Sec. 17-452. - Trash areas. 
    All trash or garbage collection areas for multifamily dwellings and businesses shall be enclosed on at least three sides by screening at least four feet in height. An open side shall not be visible from a street or abutting properties. 
(Prior Code, § 17.16(7)) 
Sec. 17-453. - Outdoor storage; commercial and industrial districts. 
(a)  Permitted outdoor storage and outdoor storage areas in commercial and industrial districts exposed to view from any street adjacent to the property on which the storage area is located shall be screened by an eight-foot high sight-obscuring fence, wall, or landscape berm or planting strip when approved by the administrator. 
(b)  Materials covered by buildings with roofs only, but without any sides shall be considered outdoor storage and shall be subject to the screening provisions of this section. This provision shall not apply to the display of new or used agricultural implements, motor vehicles or watercraft where such acclivities are an integral part of an automobile, agricultural implement, or watercraft dealership or storage facility. 
(Prior Code, § 17.16(8)) 
Sec. 17-454. - Required landscaping. 
(a)  Unpaved areas of the site and unpaved portions of adjacent right-of-way shall have one of the following ground covers: 
(1)  Seed or sod; 
(2)  Woodchips or other permanent mulch bordered with timbers or other permanent edging; 
(3)  Other landscaped plant material maintained in well-tended and aesthetically pleasing manner. 
(b)  Street trees shall be planted in adjacent rights-of-way in accordance with the subdivision ordinance. 
(c)  The minimum number of plantings required for every 10,000 square feet of lot area which is proposed for new development and not covered under the city subdivision ordinance shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two canopy or deciduous trees; and 
(2)  Three shrubs, not less than 24 inches in height. 
(Prior Code, § 17.16(9)) 
Sec. 17-455. - Exceptions and interpretation. 
    In the event that terrain or other natural features are such that the erection of obscuring berms or planting strips, walls or fences will not serve the intended purpose, as determined by the plan commission, then no such screening, fences, or wall shall be required. 
(Prior Code, § 17.16(10)) 
Secs. 17-456-17-478. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SIGNS 

Sec. 17-479. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned signs means a sign which no longer correctly directs any person, advertises a bonafide business, lessor, owner, product or activity conducted, or product available on the premises where the sign is displayed. 
    Area of sign or display area means the area is the perimeter which forms the outside shape, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed unless they are designed as part of the sign. If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled. The area of an irregularly-shaped sign shall be computed using the actual sign face surface. The area of the irregularly-shaped sign shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter of not more than eight straight lines. 
    Awning means a temporary hood or cover which projects from the wall of the building, which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting structure. 
    Banner means a non-illuminated, elongated, fabric sign usually used as a temporary display for the special announcement of a coming event. 
    Building facade means that portion of a building which is parallel or nearly parallel to the abutting roadway. 
    Canopy means a shelter, with or without a sign, attached to or connected with a building and extending into a setback or over the public sidewalk. 
    Construction site sign means a sign for the purpose of designating a new building development or any project in the process of development, for promotion of a subdivision. 
    Directory sign means shall mean any sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building is given. This shall include offices, school and church directories. Directory signs shall be encouraged for use with advertising of multiple occupied commercial and industrial buildings. 
    Electronic message unit sign means any sign whose message may be changed by electronic process, including such messages as copy, art, graphics, time, date, temperature, weather or information concerning civic or charitable events, or the advertising of products or services for sale on the premises. This also includes traveling or segmented message displays. 
    Flashing sign animation means the use of movement or some element thereof, to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
    Freestanding signs means a sign self-supporting by means of structural supports, pylons, posts, standards, or any other type of base with a foundation in the ground. This type of sign includes what are commonly called ground signs or monument signs. The base and supports of freestanding signs shall be concealed and comply with the standards of construction of the state commercial building code. 
    Freeway means a divided traffic way designed for high speed travel to which abutting property owners and others have limited access to and from as determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such traffic way: expressway. 
    Freeway oriented on-premises sign means any on-premises sign identifying premises where food, lodging, or places of business are located that engage in supplying goods and services essential to the normal operation of motor vehicles and where such businesses are directly dependent upon the adjacent freeway for business. 
    Identification sign means any sign which carries only the name of the firm, major enterprise, institution or principal products offered for sale on the premises or combination of these. 
    Indirectly illuminated sign means a sign that is illuminated from a source outside of the actual sign. 
    Mobile sign means any sign or billboard which lacks parts making it stationary or which is not stationary and which is located on any premises for longer than 48 hours. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the regulations in this article. 
    Off-premises signing means a sign which advertises goods, products or facilities, or services not necessarily on the premises where the sign is located or directs persons to a different location from where the sign is located. 
    Permanent message board means any sign permanently attached which has manually changeable copy. 
    Political sign means any sign displaying a candidate for an election, or a current election's subject matter. 
    Projecting sign means a sign, normally double faced, which is attached to and projects from a structure or building fascia. The area of projecting signs is calculated on one face only. 
    Real estate sign means any sign which is used to offer for sale, lease or rent the property upon which the sign is placed. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any building. 
    Sign means any name, identification, description, display, illustration or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to any object, produce, service, activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise, but does not include any display of official court or public office notices, nor any official traffic control device, nor does it include a flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, state, county, municipality, school or religious group. The term "sign" does not include an object located completely within an enclosed building. For the purposes of removal, a sign also includes all sign structures. 
    Temporary signs means any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a period not to exceed 30 days. Temporary signs shall not be permitted more than three times a year or more than 30 consecutive days. 
    Wall sign means any sign attached to, erected on or painted on the wall of a building or structure and projecting not more than 16 inches from such wall. 
    Window sign means any sign located completely within an enclosed building and visible from a public way. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(1)) 
Sec. 17-480. - Permits required; procedure. 
(a)  Application. No signs, billboards, awnings or canopies shall hereafter be located, erected, relocated, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a sign permit and without being in conformity with the provisions of this article. They shall also meet all other structural requirements of other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. Signs shall not be erected or altered until a permit has been issued by the building inspector. The term "altered" shall be defined as any modification in the size, height, dimensions, location or mounting of a sign other than routine maintenance. 
(1)  All applications, except for mobile signs, signs in the historic preservation district and the East Side Business Park, shall be referred to the plan commission which shall consider the application promptly and take into account the purpose of any advertising, the appearance, location, lighting, height and size of structure, safety of operators of vehicles upon the adjoining streets and highways; the effect of the structure with respect to the scenic beauty of the vicinity in which the structure is proposed to be located; the effect of the structure and advertising with respect to the enforcement of state laws, county and city ordinances; the effect of the structure with respect to the danger to human life because of falling, combustibility; the effect of the structure and advertising with respect to the prevention of crime and the effect of the structure and advertising on the general public welfare, morals, and conserving the taxable value of lands and buildings located within a city and in the immediate area adjacent to the proposed location of the structure. 
(2)  Upon approval by the plan commission, the building inspector shall issue a permit within 15 days of the approval. Upon denial of the application, the applicant shall be promptly notified and provided with the reasons therefor. 
(b)  Required information. Application for a sign permit shall contain the following information about the sign: dimensions, including display surface; materials; illumination; wiring; height above grade; distance from lot line; and the person designing, erecting or altering the sign. If required by the building inspector, calculations must show that the structure and design meets the requirements of this article for wind pressure load. 
(c)  Fee. The fee for each sign permit shall be $25.00. 
(d)  Insurance. Any person engaged in the business of erecting, repairing, maintaining or relocating any sign shall maintain in effect at all times a policy of liability insurance with limits of $500,000.00. Proof of insurance shall be presented to the building inspector before the sign permit is issued. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(2)(a)-(d)) 
Sec. 17-481. - Inspection. 
    Every sign will be inspected and approved by the building inspector within 30 days after it is erected or altered. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(2)(e)) 
Sec. 17-482. - Standards applicable to signs that qualify as more than one type. 
    Any sign qualifying as more than one of the listed types shall meet the requirements for each type. 
(Prior Code, § 17.7(2)(f)) 
Sec. 17-483. - Posting on exterior of buildings or windows prohibited. 
    Bills and posters shall not be posted on the exterior of buildings or windows. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(2)(g)) 
Sec. 17-484. - Landscape features. 
    Landscape features such as plant materials, beams, boulders, fencing and similar design elements unincorporated or in conjunction with the freestanding signs, are encouraged and shall not be counted as allowable sign area. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(2)(h)) 
Sec. 17-485. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Traffic interference. Signs shall not resemble, imitate or approximate the shape, size, form or color of railroad or traffic signs or devices. Signs, canopies and awnings shall not obstruct or interfere with the effectiveness of railroad or traffic signs, signals or devices or the safe flow of traffic. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign, awning or canopy shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility. 
(b)  Number of signs permitted. No more than three signs of any type shall be located on any premises, except that premises occupied by a shopping center, strip mall, or multi-tenant building may have one wall sign per tenant for each street frontage plus one ground sign per shopping center, strip mall or multi-tenant building with the ground sign designed to accommodate one double-faced sign per tenant. Signs exclusively stating the name or identification of a business which are identical on both sides constitute one sign. Businesses with an alley or street fronting both sides shall be allowed three types of signs for alley or street frontage; no street frontage buildings shall be allowed three of the same type of sign on a particular building. 
(c)  Signs on public rights-of-way. Freestanding signs shall not be permitted on or over public rights-of-way, except for municipal traffic controls and parking and directional signs and signs advertising a community event, located within the city limits, may be permitted on a temporary basis as approved by the building inspector. 
(d)  Distance between freestanding signs. Shall be a minimum of 100 feet between freestanding signs throughout the street frontage in order to prevent congestion and maintain traffic visibility. 
(e)  Off-premises signs. A sign advertising anything other than the businesses located on the property the sign is located. 
(f)  Pole signs. Pole type signage is not permitted in any M-1 or M-2 zoned district. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(3)) 
Sec. 17-486. - Dangerous and abandoned signs. 
(a)  Removal. All signs shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when a business which it advertises has not been conducted for a period of 30 days or when, in the judgment of the building inspector, such sign is so old, dilapidated, or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous or unsafe, whichever occurs first. If the owner or lessee fails to remove it, the common council, or its designee, may remove the sign at the cost of the owner, following adequate written notice. The owner may appeal the common council's, or its designee's, decision to the board of appeals. 
(b)  Alterations. For signs erected before the adoption of this article, the signs shall be rebuilt or relocated to conform to this article if the cost of reconstruction or relocation is 50 percent or more of its replacement value. 
(c)  Violations. All signs constructed or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this article are declared public nuisances within the meaning of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(4)) 
Sec. 17-487. - Construction and maintenance. 
(a)  Installation. All signs shall be properly secured, supported and braced, shall be kept in reasonable structural condition and shall be kept clean and well painted at all times. Bolts or screws shall not be fastened to window frames. Every sign and its framework, braces, anchors and other supports shall be constructed of the material and with such workmanship as to be safe and satisfactory to the building inspector. 
(b)  Prohibited mounting. No signs shall be painted on, attached to or affixed to any trees, rocks, or other similar organic or inorganic natural matter, including utility poles or apparatus. 
(c)  Maintenance. All signs, including supports and attachments, shall be properly maintained and have an appearance that is neat and clean. All signs shall be kept in good structural condition, well painted, and clean at all times and the immediate premises shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition and kept free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds. 
(d)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any permit denial or decision by the building inspector relative to the provisions of these sign regulations may appeal and seek review of the decisions by the board of appeals. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(5)) 
Sec. 17-488. - Signs not requiring a permit. 
    The following signs shall not need a sign permit, provided that they are not located over a public road right-of-way or in, on or over public water: 
(1)  Real estate signs not to exceed eight square feet in area which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which the signs are temporarily located. These signs shall be removed within 30 days after sale, rental or lease of property. 
(2)  Name, occupation and warning signs not to exceed two square feet located on the premises. 
(3)  Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat against the structure. 
(4)  Official signs, such as traffic control, parking restriction, information and notices. 
(5)  Temporary signs, when authorized by the building inspector for a period not to exceed 30 days. An extension may be permitted not to exceed a total of 60 days. 
(6)  Rummage sales located within the city limits are permitted signs not to exceed two square feet in area, but use of the type of sign shall be limited to 72 hours per sale. 
(7)  A sign for the purpose of designating a new building or development, for promotion of a subdivision, for announcement of a special event or for similar special informational purposes may be permitted for a limited period of time in any district with the approval of the building inspector and subject to the following: 
a.  Drawings showing the specific design, appearance and location of the sign shall be submitted to the building inspector for approval. 
b.  The permitted size and location of any such sign shall be at the discretion of the building inspector based upon the character of the area, the type and purpose of the sign and the length of time permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(6)) 
Sec. 17-489. - Mobile signs (internally illuminated type). 
(a)  Permits for mobile signs shall be valid for a period of 30 days. Only three permits shall be granted for one address in a calendar year. Applicants shall provide a sketch indicating location and size of sign and pictures of sign; the sign must be good working order and free of any apparent defects. Failure to comply with these sections shall double the permit fee for the next permit. 
(b)  Such signs may be used only to advertise activities conducted on the premises. 
(c)  The maximum size shall be 25 square feet on each face, back to back. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(7)(a)) 
Sec. 17-490. - Electronic message unit signs. 
(a)  All electronic message unit signs shall have an automatic dimmer control adjusting to ambient light conditions. 
(b)  Duration. In all districts any image or portion of the message thereof must be scrolling or static with a two second duration. The use of flashing or animation is prohibited. 
(c)  The maximum area of electronic message unit signs in the B-2 zoning district shall not exceed 34 percent of the allowed sign area for said property with a maximum of 24 square feet. This area requirement may be increased by a factor of eight-tenths square feet for each one foot of curb setback beyond 25 feet to a maximum of 50 square feet. 
(d)  The maximum area of electronic message unit signs in the B-3, M-1, M-2, and M-3 zoning districts shall not exceed 34 percent of the allowed sign area for the property with a maximum of 75 square feet. 
(e)  The maximum area of electronic message unit signs in the civic use zoning district shall not exceed 16 square feet. 
(f)  Electronic message unit signs are prohibited in all other districts. 
(g)  Electronic message unit signs over 75 feet are prohibited in all zoning districts. 
(h)  All electronic message unit signs shall be submitted for approval by the city plan commission prior to installation. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(7)(b); Ord. No. 926, § 2, 3-15-2017) 
Sec. 17-491. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs eligible for characterization as legal nonconforming. Any sign located within the city limits of the date of adoption of this article hereafter which does not conform with the provisions of this article is eligible for characterization as a legal nonconforming sign and is permitted, providing it meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The sign was covered by a proper sign permit prior to the date of adoption of this article. 
(2)  If no permit was required under the prior ordinance. 
(b)  Loss of legal nonconforming status. A sign loses its nonconforming status if one or more of the following occurs: If the sign is damaged or structurally altered in any way, except for normal maintenance and repair; the sign may be reconstructed and used as before if it is reconstructed within three months after such damage, unless the damage to the sign is 50 percent or more of its replacement value, in which case the reconstructed sign shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Legal nonconforming sign maintenance and repair. Nothing in this article shall relieve the owner or use of a legal nonconforming sign or the owner of the property in which the sign is located from the provisions of this article regarding safety, maintenance or repair of signs. 
(d)  Amortization of off-premises signs. With the exception of M-3 zones, off-premises signs are amortized for a period not to exceed ten years from date of passage of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(8)) 
Sec. 17-492. - Lettered awnings and canopies. 
(a)  Permitted awnings. No awnings shall be erected or maintained, except such awnings as comply with the following requirements, and then only if the permit required hereunder is first obtained and the same conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which the same are to be located: 
(1)  Support. Awnings shall be securely attached to and supported by the building and shall be without posts or columns beyond the setback line. 
(2)  Height. All awnings shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest portion thereof shall not be less than eight feet above the level of the public sidewalk or public thoroughfare. 
(3)  Setback from curb line. In the historic district, no awning shall extend closer than four feet from the curb line. Outside the historic district, no awning shall extend closer than one foot from the curb line. 
(b)  Permitted canopies. No canopies shall be erected or maintained, except such canopies as comply with the following requirements, and then only if the permit required hereunder is first obtained and the same conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which the same are to be located: 
(1)  Support. The structural support of all canopies shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the building inspector as in compliance with building code of the city. All frames and supports shall be of metal and designed to withstand a wind pressure. All canopies shall be attached to a building, and no supports shall exist beyond the setback line between the canopy and the sidewalk or ground below. 
(2)  Height above sidewalk. All canopies shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest portion thereof shall not be less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk or public thoroughfare. 
(3)  Setback from curb. In the historic district, no canopy shall extend closer than four feet from the curb line. Outside the historic district, no canopy shall extend closer than one foot from the curb line. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(9)) 
Sec. 17-493. - Abandoned billboards and sign. 
    Except as otherwise herein provided, all billboards or sign messages shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which an off-premises sign/billboard is located when the business it advertised is no longer conducted where advertised. If the owner of lessee fails to remove the sign/billboard, the common council, or its designee, shall give the owner 30 days written notice to remove the sign/billboard and thereafter, upon the owner's or lessee's failure to comply, may remove such sign/billboard, any costs for which shall be charged to the owner of the property or may be assessed as a special assessment against the property, or the common council, or its designee, may take any other appropriate legal action necessary to attain compliance. 
(Prior Code, § 17.16(10)) 
Sec. 17-494. - Residential and agricultural zone. 
    The following types of non-advertising, non-flashing signs are permitted in the R and A zones: 
(1)  Any sign specified in section 17-488. 
(2)  Bulletin boards for public, veterans, charitable or religious institutions shall not exceed eight square feet in area located on-premises. Such sign shall not obstruct vision from the street. 
(3)  Temporary signs or banners, when authorized by the building inspector, for a period not to exceed 30 days. An extension may be permitted not to exceed a total of 60 days. 
(4)  House numbers or signs identifying parks not to exceed four square feet. 
(5)  Signs of schools, places of worship, nursing and convalescent homes, museums, libraries, community centers and medical facilities, day care centers, bed and breakfast establishments may be erected and maintained, provided that the size of any sign is not in excess of 20 square feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(11)) 
Sec. 17-495. - Business and manufacturing zones generally. 
    Signs permitted in commercial and industrial zones are as follows: 
(1)  Any sign specified in sections 17-488 through 17-490 and 17-492. 
(2)  Wall signs which do not extend more than 16 inches from the wall surface and are a maximum of 40 percent of the wall area. Wall signs shall not exceed the height of the building on which they are displayed. 
(3)  Outside the historic district, projecting signs fastened to, suspended from or supported by structures shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, shall not extend closer than one foot from the curb line, shall not be less than five feet from all side lot lines, shall not exceed a height of 20 feet above the mean centerline street grade and shall not be less than 13 feet six inches above a driveway or alley. Projecting signs in the historic district shall comply with section 17-496(b)(3). 
(4)  Freeway oriented signs shall not exceed 80 feet in height and shall be a minimum height of 20 feet from the bottom of the sign to the ground. These signs shall be a minimum of ten feet from the property line. Freestanding signs shall not exceed 500 square feet on one side or 1,000 square feet on all sides for any one premises. 
(5)  Except in M-1 and M-2 zones where pole signs are not permitted, other freestanding signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height. Freestanding signs shall not exceed 300 square feet on one side and 600 square feet on all sides for any one premises. The setback vision clearances shall conform to article VII of this chapter. 
a.  In commercial. The total amount of signage permitted for each business premises within a commercial district shall be determined by the greater of the product obtained by multiplying either: 
1.  The lineal front footage of the main building of the business facing the adjacent roadway by a factor of 1.5 square feet; or 
2.  Multiplying the linear front footage of the business premises lot by a factor of eight-tenths square feet. Either factor may be increased by a factor of five-hundredths square feet for each 50 feet of setback beyond 100 feet, to a maximum of 500 feet. However, each business premises located on the ground floor shall be entitled to minimum total signage of 40 square feet per ground floor business premises. The owner of a multi-tenant building is responsible for dividing the gross allowable signage among all tenants of the multi-tenant building. No business premises shall have more than three signs. Each business premises may have one projecting sign or one detached sign such as ground sign, pole sign, pylon sign, etc., provided such sign does not extend over the public right-of-way. 
b.  In manufacturing/industrial. The total amount of signage permitted for each business premises within manufacturing districts shall be determined by the greater of the product obtained by multiplying either: 
1.  The linear front footage of the main building of the business facing the adjacent roadway by a factor of two square feet; or 
2.  Multiplying the linear front footage of the business premises lot by a factor of eight-tenths square foot. The owner of a multi-tenant building is responsible for dividing the gross allowable signage among all tenants of the multi-tenant building. No M-1 or M-2 zoned premises may have more than three signs. Each M-1 or M-2 premises may have one projecting sign or one monument sign. Off-premises signage advertising a multi-manufacturing group at the Main Street entrance may be approved with a conditional use permit. 
c.  Window signs shall be placed only on the inside glass surface or window display area of commercial buildings and shall not exceed 25 percent of the glass area of the window upon which the sign is displayed. 
d.  Location. All freestanding signs when constructed parallel to a street line (defined as the paved portion of a street including the curb, if a curb is present) shall be set back from the street line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the structure measured from the point of its greatest height to the established grade at the place of location and a minimum of five feet from the public right-of-way line. No freestanding sign shall be located within 25 feet of an abutting residential zone. On lots abutting street intersections no sign shall be placed within 35 feet of the lot corner of the lot nearest the street intersection, and in no event shall the distance be less than the height of the sign. Lighting reflectors may extend eight feet beyond the fact of the freestanding sign. 
e.  Freestanding signs shall not be located within vision triangles or otherwise impede traffic or pedestrian visibility. 
f.  Monument signs. Sign area including structural and decorative framing may not exceed 96 inches in length in any business zoned district. In any manufacturing zoned district, the sign area including structural and decorative framing may not exceed 96 inches in height or 20 feet in length. The setback vision clearances shall conform to article VII of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(12)) 
Sec. 17-496. - B-1 Business District. 
(a)  All signs in the historic district shall first be approved by the historic preservation commission prior to applying for a city sign permit. 
(b)  Signs permitted in the historic district are as follows: 
(1)  Lettered awnings and canopies as specified in section 17-492. 
(2)  Wall signs placed against the exterior walls of buildings shall not extend more than 16 inches out from a building's wall surface, shall not exceed 25 percent of the wall surface (or 96 square feet, whichever is smaller) per wall for any one premises, and shall not exceed the height of the wall for which it is displayed. 
(3)  Projecting signs fastened to, suspended from or supported by structures shall not exceed 20 square feet in area for any one premises, shall not extend any further than four feet from the curb, shall not be less than five feet from all side lot lines, shall not exceed a height of 20 feet above the mean centerline street grade and shall not be less than 13 feet six inches above a driveway or alley. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(13)) 
Sec. 17-497. - Sandwich board sign. 
    Sandwich board signs are permitted in all business, industrial, and institutional districts and do not count against the total number of permitted permanent freestanding or ground signs, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Sandwich board signs shall be limited to a maximum width of two feet wide, maximum height of four feet (measured from the ground), a maximum of eight square feet per side, and maximum of two sides. Signs shall be of a weight or construction to withstand 20 pounds of wind loading, and be maintained in a good condition. 
(2)  Sandwich board signs shall be constructed of durable, high quality materials such as steel, wood, and simulated woods. Chalkboards and whiteboards are acceptable accents. Use of impermanent materials such as cardboard or corrugated plastic is prohibited. 
(3)  Sandwich board signs shall not be illuminated in any way, nor use metallic, fluorescent or reflective finishes. 
(4)  Sandwich board signs shall not advertise off-premises goods, services, or businesses. 
(5)  Sandwich board signs shall be limited to a maximum of one per business establishment or one per ground level customer entrance (whichever is more restrictive) and spaced at least 25 feet from any other sandwich board or private freestanding sign. No sandwich board sign may be placed farther than ten feet from the building entrance or entrance to an outdoor customer area nor in any parking areas associated with the business. 
(6)  Sandwich board signs will not be placed in any location that interferes with vehicular, pedestrian, or handicap access and safety or that otherwise presents a fire or other public safety hazard. Sandwich board Signs shall not obstruct or interfere with public safety or directional signs. 
(7)  Sandwich board signs shall be displayed only during hours of business operation. Business owners are responsible for securing signs in the event of hazardous weather. 
(8)  Sandwich boards may not be located within the required landscape areas. 
(9)  Except as allowed in the B-1 Downtown Business District, sandwich board signs shall not be permitted in public street rights-of-way or public street easements to include streets, sidewalks, grass terraces, or either private lawns or paved encroachments within the right-of-way. 
(10)  In the B-2 Central Business District, sandwich board signs may be allowed in a public sidewalk, subject to subsections (1) through (10) of this section and the following additional restrictions: 
a.  Sandwich board sign must be placed in such a way as to retain a minimum unobstructed sidewalk width of five feet for pedestrian use. 
b.  Sandwich board sign shall not project in any way onto or past a curb and into a public street, nor shall they obstruct in any way access to a marked public street crossing. 
c.  For each sign placed in the public right-of-way the business owner shall be required to submit evidence of liability insurance in a form approved by the city attorney in the amount of $1,000,000.00 and naming the city as an additional insured party. The business owner will provide guarantees in the form acceptable to the city attorney that the city will not be held liable for damage to any sign damaged while in the public right-of-way resulting from natural acts, routine municipal maintenance activities such as street cleaning and snow removal, and criminal acts by third parties. 
d.  Sandwich board signs in the public right-of-way that are erected in violation of the permit or permit requirements or posted without permit or otherwise deemed in violation of this Code are subject to immediate removal by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(14)) 
Sec. 17-498. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who begins, erects or completes the erection or construction of any sign controlled by this article prior to the granting of a permit shall pay a penalty of double the amount of the permit otherwise required. 
(b)  If the building inspector finds any sign regulated herein unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public, it shall give written notice to the sign owner and to the property owner. 
(c)  If such sign owner fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten days after such notice, the building inspector may cause such sign to be removed or altered at the expense of the owner of the sign or the owner of the property upon which it is located so as to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in section 25-11. Each day, or portion thereof, that such violation continues is deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 17.17(15)) 
Secs. 17-499-17-519. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 17-520. - Compliance required. 
    No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor, or other form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness; electrical or other substance, condition, or element in such a manner, or in such amount, as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(1)) 
Sec. 17-521. - Noise. 
(a)  Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance standards hereinafter prescribed, provided that such noises shall be capable of being so measured with such equipment. Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this article, shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter, with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (+/-2) decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular or intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(b)  At no point on the boundary of a residence or business district shall the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant (other than the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown in the following table: 
OCTAVE BAND MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVEL (decibels) 
(Frequency, cycles per second) Along Residence District Boundaries Along Business District Boundaries 0 to 75 72 75 75 to 150 67 70 150 to 300 59 63 300 to 600 52 57 600 to 1,200 46 52 1,200 to 2,400 40 45 2,400 to 4,800 34 40 Above 4,800 32 38  
(Prior Code, § 17.18(2)(a)) 
Sec. 17-522. - Fire and explosion hazards. 
    All activities involving, and all storage of, inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided at any point with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in the industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires shall be further subject to applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(2)(b)) 
Sec. 17-523. - Radioactivity or electric disturbances. 
    No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radiation. Radioactive emissions shall be further subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(2)(c)) 
Sec. 17-524. - Vibration. 
(a)  In non-industrial districts, no vibration, except during temporary construction activity, shall be permitted that is discernible without instruments beyond the property line of the source. 
(b)  In industrial districts there shall be no operation or activity that would cause ground transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set forth below at the boundary of this district under any conditions, nor beyond the property line if it would adversely affect any other use within the district. 
MAXIMUM VIBRATION LEVELS 
Frequency Cycles Maximum Permitted Displacement per second Industrial District Boundaries (in inches) 0 to 10.0008 10 to 20.0005 20 to 30.0002 30 to 40.0002 40 and over .0001  
Vibrations shall be further subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(2)(d)) 
Sec. 17-525. - Odors. 
    No emission of offensive odorous gases or other offensive odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable shall be permitted beyond the property lot lines of the source. Any process that may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail. Odors shall be further subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(2)(e)) 
Sec. 17-526. - Smoke. 
    No emission shall be permitted of visible grey smoke of a shade equal to or darker than No. 2 on the Ringlemann chart, except that visible grey smoke of a shade to No. 3 of the chart may be emitted four minutes in any 30-minute period. These provisions applicable to visible grey smoke shall also apply to visible smoke of a different color but with an apparently equivalent capacity. Smoke shall be further subject to applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(2)(f)) 
Sec. 17-527. - Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, and other forms of air pollution. 
    No emission shall be permitted that can cause any damage to health, animals, vegetation, or other forms of property, or any excessive soiling, at any point. No sulfur compound shall be emitted which would result in a ground level concentration of sulfur dioxide at the property line or beyond in excess of 1.0 part per million in a 20-minute period of any hour or average exposure in excess of 0.1 part per million in any eight-hour period, nor shall any gas be emitted that contains sulfur dioxide in excess of 2,000 parts per million. Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air pollution shall be further subject to applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(2)(g)) 
Sec. 17-528. - Glare or heat. 
    All lighting shall be arranged so as to deflect light away from any adjoining residences. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the property lot line of the source shall be permitted. Glare and heat shall be further subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(2)(h)) 
Sec. 17-529. - Liquid and solid waste. 
    No wastes shall be discharged into the public sewer system that are dangerous to the public health and safety. No waste shall be discharged into a storm sewer or roadside ditch or drainage area except clear and unpolluted water. Liquid and solid waste shall be further subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(2)(i)) 
Sec. 17-530. - State regulations pre-empt local. 
    The state department of natural resources, division of environment protection, pollution control standards shall take precedence over the above regulations except where city standards are higher. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(3)) 
Sec. 17-531. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Measurement. The determination of the existence of any objectionable elements shall be made at the location of the use creating the same and at any points where the existence of the elements may be more apparent; provided, however, that the measurements necessary for enforcement of performance standards set forth in this article shall be taken at property line boundaries. 
(b)  Notification. The administrator shall give written notice, by registered mail or other means ensuring a signed receipt for such notice, to the person responsible for the alleged violation. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the reasons why the administrator believes there is a violation in fact, and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the administrator. The notice shall state, and it is declared, that failure to reply or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the administrator within the time limit set constitutes admission of violation of the terms of this article. 
(c)  Costs of determination. The notice shall further state that upon request of those to whom it is directed, technical determinations as described in this article will be made, and that if violations as alleged are found, costs of the determinations shall be charged against those responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but if violations as alleged are not found, costs of the determination shall be paid by the city. 
(d)  Violation corrections. If there is no reply within the time limit set, but the alleged violation is corrected to the satisfaction of the administrator, he shall note "violation corrected" on his copy of the notice, and shall retain it among his official records, taking such other action as may be warranted. 
(e)  Enforcement. If there is no reply within the time limit set (thus establishing admission of violations) and the alleged violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the administrator within the time limit set, he shall proceed to take or cause to be taken such action as is warranted by continuation of a violation after notice to cease. 
(f)  Extensions. If a reply is received within the time limit set indicating that the alleged violation will be corrected to the satisfaction of the administrator, but requesting additional time, the administrator may grant an extension if he deems it warranted in the circumstances of the case and if the extension will not, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life, health, or property. 
(g)  Expert findings. If a reply is received within the time limit set requesting technical determination as provided in this article, and if the alleged violation continues, the administrator may call in properly qualified experts to make the determinations. If the expert findings indicate violation of the performance standards, the costs of the determinations shall be assessed against the properties or persons responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate under the provisions of this Code. If no violation is found, the costs of the determinations shall be paid by the city without assessment against the properties or persons involved. 
(h)  Additional enforcement provisions. Even though compliance with performance standards procedure in obtaining a development permit is not required for a particular use, initial and continued compliance with performance standards shall be invoked by the administrator against any use if there are reasonable grounds to believe that performance standards are being violated by the use. 
(Prior Code, § 17.18(4)) 
Secs. 17-532-17-555. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-556. - Purpose; scope. 
(a)  The city has enacted extraterritorial zoning for the purpose of achieving coordinated development of the city and its immediate environs. Extraterritorial zoning has been in effect since 1970 and has been coordinated with the towns of Sparta and Angelo through the joint extraterritorial review committee established in compliance with Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7). 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, this article shall be construed within the context of this article and shall be governed by the definitions, procedures and standards set forth in this article, except in those cases where the provisions, article X of this chapter, specifically state different provisions. In such cases, the provisions of article X of this chapter shall govern. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(1), (2)) 
Sec. 17-557. - Extraterritorial zoning map. 
    The zones established in the extraterritorial area are delineated on the extraterritorial zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter, is declared to be part of this article. The original map is one file and available for inspection in the city clerk's office. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(3)) 
Sec. 17-558. - Floodplain overlay zoning. 
    This article will govern all land use development proposals within the extraterritorial area except within the officially-designated floodplain areas. Floodplain areas within the extraterritorial limits shall be governed by the county floodplain ordinance. The floodplain ordinance shall be used as an overlay district to be used in combination with the underlying extraterritorial zoning districts. In cases where these provisions are in conflict, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. The limits of the floodplain in the extraterritorial area are defined in the flood insurance study for the county prepared by the federal emergency management agency. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(4)) 
Sec. 17-559. - Procedures for amendments and changes. 
    The following procedures for rezoning and zoning review shall be used in the extraterritorial area. 
(1)  All requests for rezonings and variances within the extraterritorial area shall be submitted to the city clerk in the application form specified by the clerk's office. The city clerk shall be responsible for notifying the respective extraterritorial committee, establish a public hearing date for the committee to review the proposed change and provide for a minimum of a Class I publication giving notice of the proposed meeting. The extraterritorial committee meeting shall be held within 45 days of submittal of the application unless an extension is mutually agreed to by the applicant and the city. If not acted on within the specified period, the request shall be deemed granted. 
(2)  In a request for rezoning, the extraterritorial committee representing the town within which the zoning amendment is being requested may recommend approval or deny the request. If the extraterritorial committee recommends approval, the recommendation shall be transmitted to the city council, which may either approve or deny the request following a public hearing preceded by Class II notification. If the extraterritorial committee denies the rezoning request, the city council only has the option of affirming the denial. The city council may not overrule the extraterritorial committee's decision to deny. 
(3)  In the case of variance, the request for variance shall be referred to the respective extraterritorial committee. The extraterritorial committee shall meet to consider the variance and provide a recommendation to the city board of zoning appeals. The extraterritorial committee may only recommend an action to approve or deny. The board of zoning appeals is not bound by the recommendation of the extraterritorial committee. 
(4)  After final decision is rendered by the city council or board of zoning appeals, depending upon the type of action requested, official notification shall be sent by the city clerk to the respective town clerk, conveying the final decision of the city council or board of zoning appeals. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(6)) 
Secs. 17-560-17-581. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 

Sec. 17-582. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to establish regulations for communication towers and antennas and facilitate the growth of personal communication services as defined in section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 USC par. 332, minimize the adverse visual impact of towers and antennas and provide for the safety of the adjacent property owners and general public. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(7)(a)) 
Sec. 17-583. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna means any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas. 
    Height means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on a tower or other structure, including an antenna. 
    Self-supporting means a lattice or monopole tower or antenna which employs no guy wires or cables for support or anchorage; freestanding. 
    Tower means any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(7)(b)) 
Sec. 17-584. - Residential zone requirements. 
(a)  Satellite earth-station antennas (dishes) less than ten feet in diameter which serve only dwelling units on the same parcel of land are a permitted accessory use, do not require a zoning permit, and are not subject to setback restrictions. 
(b)  Towers and antennas with a height not over 50 feet, which serve only dwelling units on the same parcel of land are a permitted accessory use, and do not require a zoning permit. Towers, and antennas other than dishes, shall conform with the yard setback restrictions for principal buildings. 
(c)  In a residential zone, no tower or antenna with a height more than 50 feet shall be erected, except a federally licensed amateur radio station operator (HAM) may erect a tower/antenna with a height not to exceed 75 feet above grade at his residence. 
(d)  Not more than two towers shall exist on a residential parcel at any one time. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(7)(c)) 
Sec. 17-585. - Commercial, manufacturing, and agricultural zone requirements. 
    In commercial, manufacturing, and agricultural zones: 
(1)  If a tower or tower/antenna combination is located on a lot which is adjacent to a residential or agricultural zone, the tower or tower/antenna shall be set back from the property line a minimum distance equal to its height. 
(2)  If a tower or tower/antenna combination is located on a lot which is not adjacent to a residential or agricultural zone, the tower or tower/antenna shall be set back a distance equal to half its height. 
(3)  A tower/antenna which is located on a lot which is adjacent to a public right-of-way shall not include the width of the right-of-way in the setback calculations. 
(4)  A guyed tower on a lot adjacent to a residential zone shall be located so that the earth attachment points for the guy wires shall be at least 100 feet from the residential zone. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(7)(a)) 
Sec. 17-586. - Requirements applying to all districts. 
(a)  Visual obtrusiveness. Towers shall be gray or black in color, or shall be some other neutral color acceptable to the plan commission, which blends with the surroundings. No lights or reflectors shall be placed on a tower or antenna other than those required by the FAA, FCC, or other governmental agency. No signs or advertising shall be placed on any tower or antenna except "caution," "keep off" or similar signs. 
(b)  Guyed towers. The earth attachment points for guy wires shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest property line. 
(c)  Fencing. A tower with a height over 50 feet shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest property line. 
(d)  Antennas on existing structure. The city plan commission may grant a conditional use to allow placement of an antenna on any existing structure. 
(e)  Additional antennas on existing communication towers. No additional antenna shall be placed on existing communication towers without a prior site plan review conducted by the plan commission. A site plan review does not require a public hearing. Following a successful site plan review, an extraterritorial zoning permit shall be obtained for each additional antenna installation. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(7)(e)) 
Sec. 17-587. - Removal of abandoned towers and antennas. 
    Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and, the owner of the tower or antenna or owners of the property where the tower site is located shall: 
(1)  Remove the tower or antenna including all supporting equipment and buildings within 90 days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of the abandonment. If removal does not occur within the 90 days, the governing authority may remove and salvage the tower or antenna and all supporting equipment and buildings at the property owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(2)  The applicant for a permit under this division shall submit a copy of a signed agreement between the property owner and the owner of the tower, antennas and supporting equipment and buildings assigning the obligation for abandonment and subsequent removal based on the provisions of the previous subsection. The agreement shall contain the requirement that notice of this division shall be given in writing by the owners to successor owners of the property or tower, antenna, supporting equipment and buildings. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(7)(f)) 
Secs. 17-588-17-607. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISTRICT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 17-608. - Residential. 
(a)  Principal uses. One-family dwelling; two-family dwelling; park or playground; place of worship; museum, library; community center; hospital, medical center; nursing or convalescent home; dental clinic. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Boardinghouse; planned residential development; private club or lodge; and public, parochial and private schools. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory use or structure; essential services; home occupation; private garage or parking area; and truck garden or greenhouse sign. 
(d)  Minimum lot area. Twenty thousand square feet. 
(e)  Minimum lot frontage. Fifty feet. 
(f)  Minimum yards: 
(1)  Front. Twenty-five feet. 
(2)  Rear. Twenty percent of lot depth with an absolute minimum of 15 feet. 
(3)  Side: 
a.  Where principal building is a dwelling. There shall be two side yards, one on each side of the building. Neither of the shall be less than six feet in width and the total width of the two side yards shall not be less than 14 feet, provided further, however, that for any building which exceeds 35 feet or two stories in height or 60 feet in length, neither of the side yards shall be less than ten feet in width. 
b.  Where principal building is not a dwelling. One-half the height of building. 
c.  Accessory building. Two feet or five feet where adjacent to alley or street. 
(g)  Coverage of lot area. 
(1)  Principal building. Thirty percent. 
(2)  Accessory building. Ten percent. 
(h)  Maximum building height. 
(1)  Principal building. Thirty-five feet except places of worship which may be 75 feet. 
(2)  Accessory building. Twenty feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(5)(a)) 
Sec. 17-609. - R-2 Suburban Residential. 
(a)  Purpose. To identify nonfarm residential areas not served by public sewer. To be applied only to two or more lots when considering rezoning. To protect residential neighborhoods by prohibiting uses which will not mix well with the homes. 
(b)  Principal uses. One-family dwelling. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Essential services and household occupation. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Two-family dwelling; public and semipublic uses. 
(e)  Minimum lot area. One acre per family or more if required by county sanitary code. 
(f)  Minimum width. One hundred feet. 
(g)  Minimum depth. One hundred fifty feet. 
(h)  Minimum yards: 
(1)  Front. Thirty feet. 
(2)  Rear. Forty feet. 
(3)  Side. Twenty feet. 
(i)  Maximum building height: 
(1)  Principal building. Three stories or 35 feet. 
(2)  Accessory building. Twenty feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(5)(b)) 
Sec. 17-610. - C-2 Commercial. 
(a)  Principal uses. Antique store; automobile service station; bakery; bank, bar or cocktail lounge; barber; beauty shop; boat sales showroom; book or stationery store; bus depot; car sales showroom; cigar store; department store; drug store; dry goods or variety store; eating or drinking place; florist shop; food store; funeral home; furniture store; government service building; hardware store; hotel; indoor amusement center; laundry or dry cleaning establishment; library; locksmith; lumber yards; medical or dental clinic; motel; music store; newsstand; newspaper office; nightclub; office: business, professional, utility, governmental; office equipment store; package liquor store; paint and wallpaper store; parking garage or parking area; pawn shop; photographic equipment and supply store; private club or lodge; professional, business or technical school or studio for art, music, dancing or photography; public garage; radio or TV repair shop; radio or TV studio; shoe repair shop; soda fountain; specialty store; sporting and athletic goods store; steam bath house; tailor or dressmaker; wholesale establishment; manufacturing in enclosed building of: brushes, dress or garments, jewelry, photographic processing, laboratory work, monuments, musical instruments, printing signs, toys or novelties; planned commercial development group; boat sales or rental establishment; car wash; car sales or rental establishment; outdoor amusements such as miniature golf course; planned commercial development group. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Mobile home park, including mobile home condominium. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Dwelling over or behind any permitted use; accessory use or structure; essential services; home occupation; parking garage or parking area; sign. 
(d)  Minimum lot area. 2,000 square feet for each mobile home used for dwelling purposes. 
(e)  Minimum yards. 
(1)  Front. Twenty-five feet. 
(2)  Side. Five feet where adjacent to an R-zone except where zones are divided by an alley or street. 
(f)  Maximum building height. 
(1)  Principal building. Thirty-five feet where adjacent to an R-zone. 
(2)  Accessory building. Twenty feet where adjacent to an R-zone. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(5)(c)) 
Sec. 17-611. - M-1 Manufacturing. 
(a)  Principal uses. Manufacturing, processing, repairing or warehousing; wholesale establishment; governmental service building; planned industrial development group. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Storage allowed on-premises outside enclosed building. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Caretaker's quarters; accessory use or structure; essential services; office; parking garage or parking area; sign. 
(d)  Extent of enclosure. All uses including storage shall be entirely within enclosed building. 
(e)  Minimum yards: 
(1)  Front. Twenty-five feet. 
(2)  Side. Ten feet including rail track or alley except where adjacent to an R-zone in which case yard shall be not less than 50 feet including rail track, alley or street width. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 
(1)  Principal building. Thirty-five feet where adjacent to an R-zone. 
(2)  Accessory building. Twenty feet where adjacent to an R-zone. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(5)(d)) 
Sec. 17-612. - GA General Agriculture. 
(a)  Purpose. To identify areas best suited for industrial development because of location, topography, existing streets and utilities and relationship to other land uses. Uses not compatible with industry are to be discouraged. 
(b)  Principal uses. Agriculture, horticulture, dairying, beekeeping, livestock raising, nursery, greenhouse, stable, truck farm; roadside stand for the sale of products grown or produced on the premises; single-family residence with additional dwellings if used by farm help; poultry farm housing 10,000 birds or less. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Essential services and household occupation. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Commercial raising of fish; poultry farm housing more than 10,000 birds, fur farm; mineral extraction and processing; campground, golf course, trap and skeet shoot, rifle range, motorcross course, race track and festival grounds; kennel; solid waste disposal operation, incinerator and salvage yard; veterinarian facility, animal hospital; public and semipublic uses; construction yard, bait production, farm machinery sales and recreational vehicle sales; stockyard; saw mill of a commercial nature permanently fixed to the ground. 
(e)  Minimum lot area. One acre. 
(f)  Minimum width. Two hundred feet. 
(g)  Minimum depth. Two hundred feet. 
(h)  Minimum yards: 
(1)  Front. Thirty feet, except for farm buildings which may be built at the existing setback, but not less than 20 feet from the right-of-way, and except for irrigation facilities which may be built at the right-of-way. 
(2)  Rear. Fifty feet. 
(3)  Side. Fifty feet. 
(i)  Maximum building height for dwellings and signs. Three stories or 35 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(5)(e)) 
Sec. 17-613. - EA Exclusive Agriculture. 
(a)  Purpose. To identify a primary agriculture economy, preserving land for food and fiber production and preventing conflicts between incompatible uses. 
(b)  Principal uses. 
(1)  Agricultural uses, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 91.01(2), including: beekeeping; commercial feedlots, dairying, egg production; floriculture; fish or fur farming; forest and game management; grazing; livestock raising; orchards; plant greenhouses and nurseries; poultry raising; raising of grain, grass, mint and seed crops; raising of fruits, nuts and berries; sod farming and vegetable raising. 
(2)  The only residences allowed as permitted uses are those to be occupied by a person who, or of a family at least one member which, earns a substantial part of his livelihood from farm operations on the parcel, or is a parent or child of the operator of the farm. Preexisting residences located in areas subject to zoning under this district which do not conform to this subsection may be continued in residential use. Such preexisting residences may be altered, repaired or rebuilt if destroyed, but are subject to setback, height and other dimensional requirements. Farm dwellings and related structures which remain after farm consolidation may be separated from the farm lot. Gas and electric utility uses not requiring authorization under Wis. Stats. § 196.491. Roadside stand used solely for the sale of products grown or produced on the premises. No structure or improvement may be built on the land unless consistent with agricultural uses. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Agricultural related, religious, other utility uses which are not permitted uses, institutional or governmental uses which do not conflict with agricultural use and are found necessary in light of alternative locations available for such uses. Single-family dwellings exceeding one per farm operation for occupancy by a person or family earning a substantial part of livelihood from the farm operation. 
(2)  Household occupations and professional home offices conducted within and accessory to permitted agriculture residence. 
(d)  Minimum lot area. Thirty-five acres, except as provided. The minimum lot size to establish a separate parcel for an additional residence for persons earning a substantial part of their livelihood from the farm operation or parents or children of the farm operator shall be one acre. The minimum lot size for farm residences or structures existing before adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived and which are separated from a larger parcel through farm consolidation shall be one acre. 
(e)  Minimum width. Two hundred feet. 
(f)  Minimum depth. Two hundred feet. 
(g)  Minimum yards: 
(1)  Front. Thirty feet, except for farm buildings which may be built at the existing setback but not less than 20 feet from the right-of-way and except for irrigation facilities which may be built at the right-of-way. 
(2)  Rear. Seventy-five feet. 
(3)  Side. Fifty feet combined. 
(h)  Maximum building height for dwellings and signs. Three stories or 35 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 17.32(5)(f)) 
Chapter 18 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Introduction and purpose. 
(a)  It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to laws; provided, however that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the subdivision and development of land than is required by other rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted to promote the health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity, development and general welfare of the city. 
(c)  This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting orderly development and improvement of the city by regulating and controlling the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 18.01) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a public right-of-way, with a width not exceeding 21 feet which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having half or less than its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by a combination of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision, and streams of water bodies. 
    Boulevard or parkway means that portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the property line. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from: 
(1)  The average elevation of the adjoining ground level; or 
(2)  The established grade, whichever is lower to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to a point of the roof directly above the highest wall of shed roof, to the uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, to the mean distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof. 
    Building line or building setback means the line indicating the limit beyond which building or structures may not be erected. 
    Cellar means that portion of the building having more than one-half of the floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade on the adjoining ground. 
    Certified survey map means a map of a survey prepared in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
    Development plan means a total site plan of an area of land under control of a subdivider at the time of submission for review. The development plan shall specify and clearly illustrate the location, relationship, and nature of all primary and secondary uses, public and private easements, public and private streets, pedestrian paths and common open spaces. 
    Easement means a grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons or utilities other than the owner or the general public. 
    Essential service means underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam and water transmission or distribution systems; collection, communication, supply or disposal systems including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, or other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith; but not including buildings. 
    Final plat means the final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the county register of deeds. The plat must conform to all state laws. 
    Frontage means all property abutting on one side of a street between two intersecting streets or the dead end of a street. 
    Lot means a parcel or portion of land designated by metes and bounds or by certified survey map or by plat or by assessor's plat or by a registered survey or by other means and separated from other parcels or portions of land by the description. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot. 
    Lot line means the property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way, the line of the public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this article. 
    Lot width means the maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured parallel to the front lines of a lot measured parallel to the front lot line and at the rear of the required front yard. 
    Lot of record means a platted lot or metes and bounds parcel which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds prior to the adoption of this article. 
    Lot, butt, means a lot at the end of a block and located between two corner lots. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135 degrees. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line, front, means that boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street, and in the case of a corner lot it shall be the shortest dimension on a public street except that a corner lot in a nonresidential area shall be deemed to have frontage on both streets. 
    Lot line, rear, means that boundary of a lot that is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side, means any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    Lot, through, means a lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this chapter. 
    Manufactured home means any type of structure or vehicle which can be readily adopted or does provide facilities for a person to eat or sleep which is mounted on wheels, has provisions for wheels or may be loaded on an ordinary flatbed truck, such as a house trailer, converted bus or truck, tent or small building. 
    Manufactured home park means any park, court, site, lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for two or more mobile homes shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof, whether or not a charge is made for the mobile home park and its facilities. The term "manufactured home park" shall not include automobile or mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for purposes of inspection and sales. 
    Median parkway means that portion of street right-of-way located between curbs used to divide the surfacing of a street to provide for separation of traffic. 
    Motor court, motor hotel or motel means a building or group of buildings other than a hotel used primarily as a temporary residence of a motorist. 
    Motor freight terminal means a building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is transferred or stored for movement in intrastate or interstate shipment by motor truck. 
    Motor fuel station means a retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels, but also may be engaged in supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles. These may include sale of petroleum products, sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories, and replacement items, washing and lubrication services; and the performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair. 
    Owner means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient propriety interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations. 
    Pedestrian way means the right-of-way across or within a block, for use by pedestrian traffic whether designated pedestrian way, crosswalk or however otherwise designated. 
    Plan commission means the plan commission of the city. 
    Plat, preliminary, means the preliminary plat map, drawing or chart to scale indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the plan commission for their consideration, as to compliance with the map of zoning district and these regulations along with required supporting data. 
    Property line grade means the elevation of the property line in front of a building measured at the center of the building. When no property line grade has been established, the mean elevation of the finished lot grade at the property line shall be considered the existing property line grade. 
    Protective covenants means contracts entered into between private parties and which constitute a restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair stability of values. 
    Story means that portion of a building located between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above; or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story and a cellar shall not be counted as a story. 
    Street means any public or private way dedicated or permanently open to pedestrian and vehicular use which is 21 feet or more in width if it exists at the time of enactment of this article; and any such public right-of-way 50 feet in width when established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Types of streets include: 
(1)  Collector street means a street that carries traffic from minor streets to thoroughfares or from thoroughfare to thoroughfare. It includes the principal entrance streets of a residential development for circulation of traffic within such a development. 
(2)  Connector means streets that perform a semi-arterial function as well as serving as distribution and land access streets. 
(3)  Cul-de-sac means a minor street with only one outlet and having a turnaround with a minimum specified radius. 
(4)  Service street or frontage street means marginal access street or otherwise designated; a minor street which is parallel and adjacent to a thoroughfare and which provides access across to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(5)  Minor street means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to the abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood. 
(6)  Arterial streets and highways means streets that provide for rapid movement of concentrated volume of traffic over relatively long distances between the activity areas. 
(7)  Principal arterials means streets serving the major interstate and interregional traffic corridors. These routes provide the highest level of mobility under a high degree of access control. 
(8)  Primary arterials means streets serving major regions or connecting several significant cities and intercommunity corridors within the metropolitan area. These routes provide for a high degree of mobility under a high degree of access control. 
(9)  Standard arterials means streets which more commonly provide for intermediate length trips, thus serving through traffic movement in trade areas, or feeding traffic to the primary and principal arterials from lower activity areas not served by such routes. 
(10)  Street width means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street. 
(11)  Thoroughfare means a street primarily designed to carry large volumes of traffic and provide for vehicular movement between and among large areas. 
    Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into five or more lots or successive divisions creating five or more lots or parcels within a five-year period, any of which resultant parcels are less than 11/2 acres in area, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or if a new street is involved, and division of a parcel of land. The term "subdivision" includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
    Subdivision design standards means the guides, principals and specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating among other things, the controlling minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the preliminary plan as are required herein. 
    Subdivider means any person commencing proceedings under these regulations to affect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another. 
    Use-principal means the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses. A "principal use" may be either permitted or conditional. 
    Yard means a required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky except as expressly permitted in this article. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Zoning districts means districts created for the purpose of regulating, restricting and determining the use of land and location of buildings thereon and as established by the city. 
    Zoning district map means the map of zoning districts approved by the common council indicating the boundary lines of the various zoning districts shown thereon and includes any unit or part of the plan separately adopted and any amendment to such map or parts thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 18.03) 
Sec. 18-3. - Authority. 
    These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 236.45 and pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23 and 281.31. 
(Prior Code, § 18.01(1)) 
Sec. 18-4. - Interpretation and application. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and welfare and shall be interpreted as set forth herein. 
(b)  No subdivision of land shall hereinafter be made for any purpose or in any manner whatsoever within areas included within the jurisdiction of this chapter unless they shall be in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 18.01(2)) 
Sec. 18-5. - Abrogation and greater restriction. 
    This chapter supersedes provisions of any ordinance relating to subdivisions only as set forth herein. Any other applicable administrative codes or ordinances shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive. It is not otherwise intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance restrictions; however, where this chapter imposes greater restriction, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Prior Code, § 18.01(3)) 
Sec. 18-6. - Interpretation and severability. 
    Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail. No land shall be subdivided or used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. It is declared to be the intention of the council that the several provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in the judgment. 
(2)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of the provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically included in the judgment. 
(Prior Code, § 18.01(4)) 
Sec. 18-7. - Jurisdiction. 
    The jurisdiction of this chapter includes all lands within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 18.01(5)) 
Sec. 18-8. - Compliance with ordinances, statutes, regulations and plan. 
    No parcel of land shall hereafter be subdivided or altered unless in compliance with the provisions of the applicable portions of this chapter and the applicable provisions of state law and administrative code and unless they are in strict compliance with the plans approved by the city for the subdivision. 
(Prior Code, § 18.01(6)) 
Sec. 18-9. - Exception. 
    Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans for the subdivision of a parcel which has been approved before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and the development of which shall have been started within six months from the date of the approval. 
(Prior Code, § 18.01(7)) 
Sec. 18-10. - Land suitability. 
(a)  General. No land shall be divided or subdivided which is held unsuitable for the proposed use by the commission for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage disposal capabilities, incompatible surrounding land use, or any other condition likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents or users of the area, or harmful to the community or city. 
(b)  Information required. 
(1)  Except as provided herein, the commission shall determine such unsuitability at the time the preliminary plat is considered for approval. The subdivider shall furnish such maps, data and information as may be necessary to make a determination of land suitability. In addition to the data required to be submitted with the preliminary plat, the subdivider may be required to submit some or all of the following additional information for development located in an area where flooding or potential flooding may be a hazard. 
a.  Two copies of an aerial photograph, or two maps prepared by a registered land surveyor or engineer, which accurately locates the proposed development with respect to floodplain zoning district limits if present, channel or stream, full limits and elevations, and flood proofing measures taken or proposed to be taken. 
b.  Two copies of a typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the stream, the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water information. 
c.  Two copies of a profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream. 
d.  Such other data as may be required. 
(2)  The subdivider may, as part of the pre-application procedures, request a determination of land suitability, providing that he shall provide all necessary maps, data and information for such a determination to be made. 
(c)  Flood hazard areas. 
(1)  When a proposed subdivision is located in an area where flooding or potential flooding may be a hazard, the commission shall transmit to the division of the environmental protection, state department of natural resources, one set of the information required and shall request the agency to provide technical assistance in determining whether the land is suitable or unsuitable for the use and development proposed, or whether certain modifications, limitations, improvements, or other conditions on the development can overcome the land unsuitability. 
(2)  Where a proposed subdivision is located wholly or partly in an area where flooding or potential flooding may be a hazard, the commission shall apply the following standards in addition to all other requirements in the approval of plats and certified survey maps. The development shall be in accordance with the floodplain ordinance of the city. 
(d)  Commission action. In applying the provisions of this section the commission shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusions that the land is unsuitable for the intended use or development and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability, if he so desires. Thereafter the commission may affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability. 
(e)  Appeals. The subdivider may appeal the determination of land suitability as provided by Wis. Stats, § 62.23(7)(e)10-15. 
(f)  Exception. The provisions of this article shall not apply to transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order; leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements; or the sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this chapter, the city zoning regulations or other applicable laws or ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 18.04) 
Sec. 18-11. - Exception for division of non-subdivision lots of record. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to the division of one or more lots plotted into lots or blocks and designated on the subdivision plat or into tracts of land designated on the assessor's plat, either of which is on file in the office of register of deeds of the county, when such division shall create one or more separately described tracts, and this article shall also apply when the consolidation of two or more such platted lots or tracts or parts thereof into one or more tracts, upon compliance with the conditions set forth herein. 
(b)  Procedures. The owner of the platted lots or lot, to be so divided or consolidated shall file in the office of the city clerk a proposed survey plat or proposed certified survey map prepared by a registered land surveyor of the lots to be divided or consolidated. Such plat of survey shall show the dimensions of the lots as measured from the recorded plat and also the proposed division thereof. A written description of the separately described tracts which shall result from the proposed subdivision or consolidation shall be filed with such plat or survey. This procedure shall be followed in place of the requirements of sections 18-35 through 18-37. The tracts of land which will result from such division or consolidation shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district wherein they are located. As a result of the division or consolidation as herein authorized, no remaining part of the original lot or tract shall become a separately described lot upon completion of the proposed plat which will not be in conformance to the minimum dimensions of the zoning district where it is located. This division or consolidation of land shall be approved by the plan commission and common council prior to construction of any improvements thereon. 
(c)  Requirements. Before any improvements or structures are made or built, and before any new use can be made of a part of the tracts of the division or consolidation of individual lots of record, the developer shall guarantee that he will pay for the cost of extensions of required improvements set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 18.08) 
Sec. 18-12. - Replats. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to any or all replats of an existing subdivision or any part of a recorded subdivision. 
(b)  Procedures. The person causing the replat shall be required to conform to all of the requirements of articles II, III and IV of this chapter. The procedure to be followed shall be as set forth in the applicable sections. 
(c)  Requirements. The person causing such replat shall be required to provide for all improvements in conformance to the subdivision design standards as set forth in the applicable sections. The replat shall be in conformance to the design standards and to the requirements of the zoning district within which it is located. 
(Prior Code, § 18.09) 
Sec. 18-13. - Administration. 
(a)  The city plan commission shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. The common council shall refer matters pertaining to the control of subdivisions to the plan commission. The plan commission may designate such persons as they deem necessary to assist in the administration of this chapter. 
(b)  The plan commission shall consider each proposed subdivision and shall make recommendations to the common council as to whether the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Approval of the final plat or preliminary plats for any proposed subdivision must be by the common council upon receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission. 
(Prior Code, § 18.10(1)) 
Sec. 18-14. - Variances and modification. 
(a)  The plan commission may permit modifications and variances from the requirements of this chapter under the following conditions: 
(1)  Because of unique topographic or other conditions of the land involved, literal application of the provisions of this chapter would impose undue hardship. 
(2)  Conditions are attached to the approval that ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter insofar as practical. 
(3)  Compliance with Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and with other applicable state law. 
(4)  The public interest is secured and that such variance or modification will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  A public hearing on the proposed variances and modifications shall be held prior to approval by the plan commission. 
(c)  Any variances and modifications thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the plan commission setting forth the reasons which, in the judgment of the plan commission, justified and variance of modification. 
(d)  All variances and modifications thus granted by the plan commission must be approved by the common council before becoming effective. 
(Prior Code, § 18.10(2)) 
Sec. 18-15. - Violations and penalty. 
    Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalties and forfeitures as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.30, 236.31, 236.32, 236.335, and 236.35. 
(Prior Code, § 18.10(3)) 
Secs. 18-16-18-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 18-34. - Pre-application procedures. 
    Prior to filing an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider may consult with the city for advice and assistance for the purpose of reviewing the procedures and requirements of this article and other ordinances, and for any plans of data which may affect the proposed development. 
(Prior Code, § 18.05(1)) 
Sec. 18-35. - Preliminary plat approval. 
    Prior to submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat and file with the city clerk a written application for approval of the preliminary plat, which shall include all data required by this article accompanied by six copies of the plat. The preliminary plat shall cover the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider even though only a small portion thereof is proposed for development at that time. The subdivider may elect to submit a development plan in lieu of a preliminary plat when he owns or controls ten acres or more of land. The subdivider shall still submit a preliminary plat for that part which is to be included in the final plat. The plan commission and the public works board shall hold a joint meeting to review the preliminary plat and shall either approve, conditionally approve, conditionally approve, or deny the plat within 60 days of the date the preliminary plat is submitted and shall promptly notify the common council of the decision. 
(Prior Code, § 18.05(2)) 
Sec. 18-36. - Final plat procedures. 
    If the preliminary plat has been approved or been approved conditionally, the subdivider may submit a final plat of the subdivisions, accompanied by six copies of the plat and an electronic copy utilizing the county coordinate system, or payment to the city clerk in an amount to cover the cost of printing six copies of the recorded plat. All improvements required by this article shall be made or guaranteed in a manner described in this article. The public works board and plan commission shall each review the final plat and make written recommendations to the common council concerning final approval. If the final plat meets the requirements of this article, and has been submitted within 12 months from the approval date of the preliminary plat and the conditions have been met in the case of preliminary plats given conditional approval, the city shall within 60 days of submission of the final plat approve the plat. 
(Prior Code, § 18.05(3)) 
Sec. 18-37. - Certified survey map procedures. 
    When a land division is created as defined herein, the developer shall submit two copies of a certified survey map prepared in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.34 and in accordance with this article. The requirements of this article regarding preliminary plat procedures shall also apply to certified survey maps unless specifically waived by the commission. The commission shall within 60 days approve, approve conditionally, or reject the certified survey map based on its determination of conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 18.05(4)) 
Sec. 18-38. - Plat and data submission requirements. 
(a)  Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor and shall be submitted in six copies at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch, and shall show correctly on its face: 
(1)  Date, graphic scale and north point. 
(2)  Name of proposed subdivision. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person to be contacted regarding the plat. 
(4)  Location of the proposed subdivision by government lot, quarter section, section, township, range and county. 
(5)  A scaled drawing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision referenced to a corner established in the U.S. Public Land Survey, and the total acreage encompassed thereby. 
(6)  Location and names of adjacent subdivisions, parks and cemeteries. 
(7)  Location, right-of-way width and names of any existing or proposed streets, alleys or other public ways; easements, and railroad and utility rights-of-way included within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(8)  Location of existing property lines, buildings, drives, streams and water courses, lakes, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, and other similar significant features within the tract being subdivided. 
(9)  Water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey, and approximate high and low water elevations. 
(10)  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet shall be required when the average ground slope is five percent or more. 
(11)  Location and approximate dimensions of any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainage ways, or other public uses which are to be used for group housing, shopping centers, church sites or other uses that are not required lotting. 
(12)  Existing and proposed land use and zoning included within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(13)  Approximate dimensions of all lots, and proposed lot and block numbers. 
(14)  When requested by the city, a draft of a protective covenant whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(b)  Development plan. The development plan, as provided for in this article shall be submitted in six copies at a scale not more than 200 feet to one inch and shall show: Information required under preliminary plat (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (l0), (11), and (12). 
(c)  Final plat. The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and this article. 
(d)  Certified survey map. The certified survey map shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 236.34 and the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 18.05(5)) 
Secs. 18-39-18-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-65. - Conformance to comprehensive zoning and street plan. 
    All subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive map of the zoning districts of the city and to either the street plan or the official map of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(1)) 
Sec. 18-66. - Conformance to zoning requirements. 
    All subdivisions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district wherein they will be located. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(2)) 
Sec. 18-67. - Streets. 
    All streets within the subdivision shall be in conformance to the following requirements: 
(1)  The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to all official maps and plans as set forth in section 18-65 and shall be related to existing and planned streets; topographic conditions, existing natural features including streams, lakes and tree growth; public conveyances and safety; existing and proposed uses of land served by such streets; and to the most advantageous development of adjoining uses. 
(2)  The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide, where possible, for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing or proposed collector and arterial streets in the area. 
(3)  Local streets shall be laid out so as to discourage their use by through traffic. 
(4)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the city may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear of the property line, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(5)  The number of intersections along arterial streets shall be held to a minimum. 
(6)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall also be determined with regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separation. 
(7)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be avoided. 
(8)  A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(9)  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no streets shall intersect any other street at less than 75 degrees, and not more than two streets shall intersect at one point. 
(10)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the commission under conditions approved by the commission. 
(11)  Streets shall be laid out in conformance to the following applicable requirements for the type of street shown. 
Alleys Marginal Access Road Local Collector Arterial Minimum R/W 20 50 60-66 66-80 80-120 Minimum surface width face-to face of curbs 32 38 38 48 Residential one-way 20 Residential two-way 20 Industrial/commerical 25 Maximum grade 10% 10% 10% 8% 6% Minimum grade 0.4% 0.4% 0.4% 0.4% 0.4% Maximum length of cul-de-sac 660 feet 660 feet 660 feet Not allowed Not allowed Minimum cul-de-sac turn around radius 50 feet 50 feet 60 feet Not allowed Not allowed Minimum radius of curb and gutter at corner 15 feet 15 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet Sidewalks Optional width and necessity determined by zoning requirements.  
(Prior Code, § 18.06(3)) 
Sec. 18-68. - Alleys. 
    Alleys shall be required at the option of the commission. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(4)) 
Sec. 18-69. - Sidewalks and pedestrian ways. 
    The developer shall provide sufficient right-of-way to allow for sidewalks. The developer shall provide sufficient right-of-way to allow for pedestrian ways where required by the commission. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(5)) 
Sec. 18-70. - Utility easements. 
    The subdivider shall provide necessary easements to allow for the construction of sanitary sewer, water lines, storm sewers, power lines, gas lines, telephone lines and cable television lines and whatsoever other utilities are necessary in locations along the back lines of his property. The utility easement shall be along the rear lot lines or wherever else is necessary for the proper installation of the respective utilities. The easements shall include allowances for not only the construction, but also the maintenance of the utility. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(6)) 
Sec. 18-71. - Drainageway easements. 
    Wherever necessary to maintain the natural drainage of the area, the subdivider shall provide an adequate drainageway easement as required by the commission. The easement shall be of sufficient discharge from the property being subdivided and also the anticipated run-off which will occur when property at a higher elevation than the drainage basin is developed. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(7)) 
Sec. 18-72. - Park land improvement requirements. 
(a)  Pursuant to the 2005 public parks needs assessment, and effective for plats approved after March 14, 2005, a subdivider shall deposit an impact fee of $309.00 for each platted residential unit into a segregated interest bearing fund to be expended for park and recreation improvements in the subdivision. Upon approval by the city council, a quantity of land of equivalent value may be donated in lieu of the cash deposit. For purposes of this subsection, land is valued at $10,000.00 per acre. The term "residential unit" is defined as one unit per R-1 lot, two units per R-2 lot, and three or more units per R-3 lot measured by the area of the lot (three units for the first 10,000 square feet and one unit for each additional 2,000 square feet). 
(b)  Funds accumulated and not expended for the purposes described above within five-years shall be refunded or disbursed pro rata to the current owners of the property with respect to which the impact fees were imposed. 
(c)  The subdivider may file a written appeal to the city council contesting the amount, collection or use of the impact fees and the council shall hold a public hearing thereon. Decisions of the city council are final. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(8)) 
Sec. 18-73. - Reservation of lands for parks, playgrounds, schools, or public use. 
    The subdivider will be required to reserve such lands as the commission and common council deem necessary for parks, playgrounds, schools and other public uses. The area of the lands shall be in excess of those lands required under section 18-72. In the event the city requires the subdivider to reserve such land, the city will pay a fair market price for the value of the lands. In the event a fair market price cannot be agreed upon by the city and subdivider, a panel of three appraisers shall be selected and the average price based on their appraisals shall determine the fair market price. One appraiser shall be appointed by the city, one by the subdivider and these two appraisers shall select the third. The cost of the appraisals shall be borne equally by the city and the subdivider. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(9)) 
Sec. 18-74. - Blocks. 
(a)  The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the planned use of the land, zoning requirements of the district it will be in, needs for convenient access, control of street traffic, and the limitation and opportunities of the topography. 
(b)  Blocks shall have sufficient widths to provide two tiers of lots of the appropriate depth except where otherwise required to separate residential development from through traffic, or where the size and shape of the parcel to be subdivided limits such development. Pedestrian ways or crosswalks not less than ten feet in width shall be provided near the center and entirely across any block that is 800 feet or more in length where such pedestrian ways or crosswalks are deemed essential to provide adequate pedestrian circulation and access to schools, shopping centers, churches or transportation facilities. Block lengths shall be not less than 300 feet nor more than 1,500 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(10)) 
Sec. 18-75. - Lots. 
    The size, shape and orientation of the lots shall be appropriated for the location and type of subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated and shall be in conformance to the requirements of the appropriate zoning district. The lots shall be designed to provide an aesthetically pleasing building site and a proper architectural setting for the building contemplated. All lots shall front or abut on a publicly dedicated street. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to the street lines. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(11)) 
Sec. 18-76. - Set backs. 
    Lots shall be of sufficient size so that they can be developed in conformance to the requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(12)) 
Sec. 18-77. - Building location. 
    No building shall be located on any lot nearer the front lot line or nearer the side street than the minimum setback line on any side and shall be in accordance and conformance with the zoning regulations. For this purpose eaves and steps shall not be considered a part of the building; provided, however, that this shall not be construed to permit any portion of the building on a lot to encroach upon another lot. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(13)) 
Sec. 18-78. - Building elevation. 
    All buildings within the subdivision shall be constructed so that the first floor elevation shall be a minimum of one foot above the centerline of the established street grade along the lot frontage. The purpose of this section of the specifications is to provide for adequate drainage from the structure to the street and so as not to have excessive difference in elevation between the structures on adjacent parcels of land. This section shall not be construed so as to limit the architectural freedom and the design of the house, but rather, shall be a guideline in providing for drainage around the structure. 
(Prior Code, § 18.06(14)) 
Secs. 18-79-18-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 18-100. - Survey monuments. 
(a)  The subdivider shall be required to place survey monuments at all corners of his plat, at the intersection of all street right-of-way lines, at all block corners and at all of the parcels within the plat. 
(b)  The survey monuments shall be in conformance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(c)  The plan commission may waive the placing of monuments before the plat is recorded for a reasonable time period after the plat is recorded. Such waiver shall be granted only upon receipt of a written request describing unusual conditions which in the opinion of the plan commission may warrant approval of the request and then only upon the subdivider furnishing a surety bond to ensure the placement of the monuments within the time period granted. Any such waiver must be in conformance to the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(1)) 
Sec. 18-101. - Public water utility. 
(a)  The public water supply system shall be extended to all lots within the subdivision. 
(b)  The subdivider shall share, as specified elsewhere herein, in the cost of construction of up to 12-inch mains, valves, and appurtenances, even if mains of larger sizes are constructed. However, if the subdivider shall have a specific need for or requested a main of larger size, he shall share in the cost of the larger sized mains. In the event the city water utility decides to construct a main larger than 12 inches in part or all of the subdivision, the cost of these facilities in excess of the cost of 12-inch mains shall be borne by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(2)) 
Sec. 18-102. - Public sanitary sewerage system. 
(a)  The public sanitary sewerage system shall be extended to all lots within the subdivision. 
(b)  The subdivider shall share as specified elsewhere herein in the cost of construction of the portion of the extension of the sanitary sewerage system that is necessary to provide service to his subdivision as required by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(3)) 
Sec. 18-103. - Stormwater drainage facilities. 
(a)  A complete and adequate system for drainage of stormwater shall be provided for the entire subdivision as required by state department of natural resources regulations and city ordinance. This system may consist of an underground storm sewer system with inlets, catch basins, manholes and mains or consist of a surface system with open ditches, culverts, inlets, catch basins, manholes and pipes or a combination of underground and surface systems. The choice of systems must be approved by the city. 
(b)  The subdivider shall share, as specified elsewhere herein in the cost of the stormwater drainage facilities within his subdivision. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(4)) 
Sec. 18-104. - Underground electric service. 
    Underground electric service shall be provided to all lots in the subdivision. The power distribution system shall be underground wherever practical. Any cost of providing such underground electric service and power distribution system throughout the subdivision shall be borne by either the water utility or the subdivider. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(5)) 
Sec. 18-105. - Underground telephone service. 
    Underground telephone service shall be provided throughout the subdivision. Any cost of providing such underground telephone service throughout the subdivision shall be borne either by the telephone company or by the subdivider. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(6)) 
Sec. 18-106. - Underground cable television. 
    Underground cable television shall be provided throughout the subdivision. Any cost of providing such underground cable television shall be borne either by the cable television company or by the subdivider. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(7)) 
Sec. 18-107. - Natural gas supply. 
    Ducts shall be provided for present or possible future gas lines at all intersections. Ducts shall be rigid conduit such as asbestos cement pipe, concrete pipe, cast iron pipe, coated steel pipe or other permanent materials approved by the city. Any cost of providing such duct shall be borne by the developer. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(8)) 
Sec. 18-108. - Schedule for construction of service. 
    All work and improvements necessary to provide water service, sanitary sewage service, stormwater drainage, power service, telephone service, cable television and natural gas service and whatsoever else is necessary to provide services to the individual structures and the individual lots throughout the entire subdivision shall be constructed before curb and gutter and permanent street surfacing is constructed. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(9)) 
Sec. 18-109. - Street grading. 
    The entire width of the right-of-way of each and every street, alley and cul-de-sac within the entire subdivision shall be graded. The grading shall be completed throughout the entire subdivision before any building permits are issued for structures throughout the entire subdivision. The subdivider shall share, as specified elsewhere herein, in the cost of the street grading. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(10)) 
Sec. 18-110. - Curb and gutter. 
    Curb and gutter shall be provided along each and every street and cul-de-sac within the entire subdivision. The subdivider or the owners of individual parcels within the subdivision shall share, as specified elsewhere herein, in the cost of curb and gutter. The plan commission may allow a later completion date but only if the subdivider provides an executed surety bond guaranteeing performance of the work on or before the agreed upon completion date. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(11)) 
Sec. 18-111. - Street surfacing. 
    Surfacing including base course and surface course shall be provided for all streets, cul-de-sacs and alleys throughout the entire subdivision. Gravel or crushed stone base course shall be placed immediately after completion of the grading. Either flexible (hot mix bituminous surfacing) or rigid (concrete) street surfacing shall be placed over the base course at such time as designated by the city. The subdivider or owners of individual parcels within the subdivision shall share, as specified elsewhere herein, in the cost of street surfacing. The plan commission may allow a later completion date but only if the subdivider provides an executed surety bond guaranteeing performance of the work on or before the agreed upon completion date. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(12)) 
Sec. 18-112. - Sidewalks. 
    The subdivider shall be required to construct concrete sidewalk on at least one side of each street within the subdivision. The city may waive this requirement for minor streets. Sidewalks shall be constructed on a lot as the home is constructed, but all sidewalks must be completed within three years of final plat approval. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(13)) 
Sec. 18-113. - Erosion. 
    Erosion control measures shall be provided for all grading, excavation, open cuts, side slopes and other disturbed land surfaces throughout the entire subdivision. Erosion control measures may consist of but shall not be limited to mulching, topsoil, seeding, sodding and other methods. Regardless of the measures used it shall prevent erosion, siltation, sedimentation and washing of surface materials. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(14)) 
Sec. 18-114. - Street trees and shrubs. 
    The subdivider shall plant no fewer than two trees on each boulevard in the subdivision, and shall submit a boulevard tree plan to be approved by the city at the time of plat approval. The trees may be planted as part of the infrastructure construction at one time, or on each individual lot as it is developed. A time limit will be placed on the planting plan, at which time all remaining undeveloped lots will have boulevard trees planted. The plan shall include as a minimum the species of tree to be planted, specific locations on each lot, and the schedule of planting. Lots fronting more than one street shall have no fewer than two trees on each street's boulevard. If trees are planted throughout the subdivision before homes are constructed, driveway locations should be established at the time of plat approval and care shall be taken to avoid damage to the trees during construction. Consideration shall be given to overhead power lines and existing or future sidewalk locations when planting the trees. Homeowners shall plant a minimum of five trees per lot within one year from the time of the construction of the home. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(15)) 
Sec. 18-115. - Street sign. 
    The city shall install street signs after completion of the construction of the various portions of the subdivision. Cost of street signs shall be borne by the developer. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(16)) 
Sec. 18-116. - Approval of design and construction. 
(a)  All of the construction of all the improvements that are needed to complete the subdivision shall conform to the applicable requirements and standards of the city. The subdivider shall submit the preliminary design for all of the construction that is needed to complete the subdivision as is required herein to the public works board for review and shall obtain their approval of all preliminary designs before continuing with the project. 
(b)  The subdivider shall submit the final plans and specifications for all of the construction that will be needed to complete the subdivision to the public works board for review and shall obtain their approval of all final plans and specifications for all of the needed construction before commencing any of the construction. The city shall reserve the right to supervise and inspect any or all of the needed construction. Record drawings of the construction plans and a two foot contour map shall be submitted electronically utilizing the county coordinate system and in hard copy to the city within six months of construction completion. All of the needed construction shall be approved by the city before any building permits shall be issued. A developer's agreement shall be negotiated between the subdivider and the city and approved by the common council prior to commencing any construction. This agreement shall include any special arrangements, incentives, special conditions imposed by the city during plat review, and a cost sharing agreement (including the upper limit available from the city). 
(c)  The subdivider shall be required to provide a surety bond that the design or construction of the project shall conform to the requirements of this section and of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(17)) 
Sec. 18-117. - Guarantee. 
    Before the city shall consider or begin review of the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to post a guarantee with the city that he shall conform to all of the applicable requirements of this article. The guarantee shall be for the amounts as specified elsewhere herein in connection with the performance of the particular item. The guarantee may be in the form of a cash deposit with interest to be credited to the subdivider on the unexpended portion of the deposit until such time as all events being guaranteed are performed. The guarantee may be in the form of a performance bond approved by the city attorney. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(18)) 
Sec. 18-118. - Sharing of costs for development of a subdivision. 
    The costs of the various items of work and improvements required for the development of any particular subdivision shall be shared by the subdivider or the city as listed below. The costs of other items of work not listed below shall be shared as indicated elsewhere herein. Costs not listed below or elsewhere herein shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(Prior Code, § 18.07(19)) 
Sec. 18-119. - Schedule of share of cost. 
    The subdivider's share of the cost as described below are required to be paid in full by the subdivider upon demand by the city. 
SCHEDULE OF SHARING OF COSTS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF A SUBDIVISION 
Item of Work Share of Cost Subdivider Borne by City Preliminary engineering and investigations 100% Required Guarantee $2,500.00 Water mains, valves and appurtenances (up to 12 inches) 100% 0% Sanitary sewer mains 100% 0% Lift station and force main 75% 25% Stormwater drainage facilities 75% 25% Street grading 100% 0% Curb and gutter 100% 0% Gravel or crushed stone base course 40 feet wide by 9 inches thick 100% 0% Pavement (surface course including additional base course) 100% 0% Sidewalks 100% 0% Fire protection 100% 0% Street lights 100% 0% Engineering, legal, administrative review, construction, engineering, supervision and inspection 100% 0% Electric wire 100% 0%  
(Prior Code, § 18.07(20)) 
Chapter 19 - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The city has determined that there are or may be, dwelling structures which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unhygienic or unsanitary as to constitute a menace to the health and safety of the people of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of dwellings; establish minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical conditions essential to make dwellings safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation; establish minimum standards governing the condition of dwellings offered for rent; fix certain responsibilities of owners and occupants of dwellings, and the condemnation of dwellings unfit for human habitation; coordinate the activities of the building inspector and the code compliance officer; fix penalties for violation and fix a time when the same shall take effect. 
(Prior Code, § 19.01) 
Sec. 19-2. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basement means a space of full story height below the first floor which is not designed or used primarily for year-round living accommodations. Space, partly below grade, which is designed and finished as habitable space is not basement space. 
    Building inspector means the building inspector of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Cellar means a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, having two-thirds or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Code compliance officer means the designated authority of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Dwelling means any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided temporary housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling, forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized, legal pest elimination methods approved by the code compliance officer. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, and consuming of food. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
    Multiple-unit dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
    Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator means any person who has charge or care of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are offered for rent. 
    Or any part thereof. Whenever the terms "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit," "premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Ordinary minimum winter conditions means the temperature 15 degrees Fahrenheit above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten-year period, winter base temperature not less than -15 degrees Fahrenheit with inside room temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit minimum for range. (Bathroom, 80 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Owner means any person who, alone, jointly or severally: 
(1)  Shall have a legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; provided, whenever the dwelling or dwelling unit is subject to conditional sales contract lease with option to purchase or any other form of written contract under the terms of which any person is entitled to a conveyance of legal title upon payment of a specified sum; the term "owner" shall mean the person who shall have such a contractual right, rather than the person holding the legal title; or 
(2)  Shall have charge or care of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, agent of the owner, as personal representative, administrator, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any person representing the owner shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as if he were the owner. Any person acting as the agent of the owner shall not be construed to be the owner within the terms of this chapter, but shall be bound to notify the owner, by means of a registered letter addressed to the owner at his last known address, of any order or notice to be issued by the code compliance officer or building inspector relating to the property of the owner. 
    Plumbing means all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washers, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating. 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term "rubbish" shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter designed to be transportable which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(Prior Code, § 19.02) 
Sec. 19-3. - Building and zoning regulations applicable. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not abrogate the responsibility of any person to comply with any provisions of the state building code and the building and zoning codes of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 19.13) 
Secs. 19-4-19-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-25. - Inspection. 
(a)  Required. The code compliance officer and building inspector shall make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, nursing units, hotel units, and premises located within the city to safeguard the health and welfare of the occupants of dwellings and the general public. 
(b)  Right of entry. For the purpose of making such inspections, the code compliance officer and the building inspector may enter, examine and survey, at proper times after due notice, all dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or the person in charge shall give the code compliance officer and the building inspector access to such dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at proper time after due notice, for such inspection, examination and survey. 
(c)  Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a dwelling unit, rooming unit, nursing unit, or hotel unit shall give the owner or operator thereof, or his agent or employee access to any part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, nursing unit, hotel unit, or its premises at all reasonable times for maintenance, making repairs or alterations as necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful notice or order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 19.03) 
Sec. 19-26. - Service of notice. 
    Whenever the code compliance officer determines that there has been a violation or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of the violation or alleged violation to the person responsible therefor. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
(3)  Include a statement of the reason why it is being issued; 
(4)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(5)  Be served upon the owner, operator, or the occupant, provided such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner, operator or occupant if a copy thereof is delivered to him personally, or sent by registered mail to his last known address, or posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice or if he is served by any other method authorized or required under state law. 
Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, shall effect compliance with the provisions of this article and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto. 
(Prior Code, § 19.04(1)) 
Sec. 19-27. - Petition for hearing; opportunity to be hear; order if no petition. 
    Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of this article, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the council; provided a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a statement of the grounds therefor shall be filed in the office of the code compliance officer or the building inspector within ten days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of the petition, the code compliance officer or the building inspector shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and show cause why such notice should not be complied with. 
(Prior Code, § 19.04(2)) 
Sec. 19-28. - City council to sustain, modify or withdraw notice. 
    After such hearing the city council shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its finding as to whether the provisions of this and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto have been complied with. If the council sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed an order. Any order served pursuant to this section shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the code compliance officer or building inspector within ten days after such notice is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice has been sustained by the council, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the code compliance officer or building inspector within ten days after such notice is served. 
(Prior Code, § 19.04(3)) 
Sec. 19-29. - Review by circuit court by certiorari. 
    The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the council, shall be reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the council. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. A copy of the written decision of the council shall then be served in the manner prescribed under section 19-26(5) on the person who filed the petition for hearing. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the council or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city, may seek relief therefrom by having the decision reviewed by the circuit court certiorari; if the petition for the writ is presented to the court within 30 days after the date on which such officer's decision was served on the person who filed the petition for hearing, and if the person aggrieved notifies such officer within ten days after such officer's decision was served on him of his intention to present such petition to the court. Such verified petition shall set forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part, or does not comply with the provision of section 19-28, specifying the grounds thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 19.04(4)) 
Sec. 19-30. - Issuance of order when emergency exists. 
    Whenever the code compliance officer finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order stating the existence of an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately, but upon petition to the code compliance officer a hearing shall be afforded as soon as possible, in the manner provided in section 19-27. After such hearing, depending upon the findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with, the council shall continue such order in effect, modify it, or revoke it. 
(Prior Code, § 19.04(5)) 
Sec. 19-31. - Authority of code compliance officer to act on nuisance. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit the city in defining and declaring nuisances or the code compliance officer in removing or abating nuisances by summary or other appropriate proceedings. 
(Prior Code, § 19.12) 
Sec. 19-32. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any order of the code compliance officer based on the provisions of this chapter or any provisions of any rule or regulation adopted by the code compliance officer, pursuant to authority granted by this chapter, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture as provided by section 25-11. After conviction and punishment for violation of the order of the code compliance officer based upon the provisions of this chapter or any provisions of any rule or regulation adopted by the code compliance officer, if such person continues to violate such order, such person shall be liable for further prosecution, conviction, and punishment upon such order, without the code compliance officer issuing a new order, until such order has been complied with. 
(Prior Code, § 19.20) 
Secs. 19-33-19-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONDEMNATION 

Sec. 19-53. - Applicability. 
    The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of the unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 19.11) 
Sec. 19-54. - Condemnation criteria. 
    Any dwelling or dwelling unit which the code compliance officer shall find to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation: 
(1)  One which is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary, difficult to heat, unsafe, or vermin infested, creating a hazard to the health or welfare of the occupants or the public; 
(2)  One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities adequate to protect the health or welfare of the occupants or the public; or 
(3)  One which, because of its general condition or location, is insanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or welfare of the occupants or the public. 
Any dwelling or dwelling unit may be condemned as unfit for human habitation by the code compliance officer if the owner or occupant failed to comply with any order based on the provisions of this division or rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto; provided, such dwelling or dwelling unit is, in the opinion of the code compliance officer, unfit for human habitation. 
(Prior Code, § 19.11(1)) 
Sec. 19-55. - Notice to owner of condemnation and intent to placard. 
    Whenever the code compliance officer has condemned a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation, he shall give notice to the owner of the condemnation and of his intent to placard the dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be put in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
(3)  Include a statement of the reason why it is being issued; 
(4)  Include a description of the repairs and improvements required to bring the condemned dwelling or dwelling unit into compliance with the provisions of this section and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto; 
(5)  Include an explanation of the owner's right to seek modification or withdrawal of the notice by petition to the code compliance officer in accordance with the provision of sections 19-27 and 19-28; and 
(6)  Be served upon the owner; provided, such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to him personally or if not found, by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode, in the presence of someone of the family of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof, or by sending a copy thereof by certified mail with return receipt requested to his last known address, or, if the certified letter with the copy is returned with a receipt showing it has not been delivered to him, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice. Copies of all condemnation notices shall be forwarded to the building inspector, but failure to fulfill this notification to the building inspector shall not invalidate the condemnation procedure. 
(Prior Code, § 19.11(2)) 
Sec. 19-56. - Appeal of notice relating to condemnation. 
    Any owner affected by any notice relating to the condemnation of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the code compliance officer, under the procedure set forth in sections 19-2 through 19-30. 
(Prior Code, § 19.11(3)) 
Sec. 19-57. - Placarding or condemning structure as unfit for human habitation. 
    After the condemnation notice which is required under section 19-55 has resulted in an order in accordance with sections 19-2 through 19-30, the code compliance officer shall placard the affected dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation. The code compliance officer shall post, in a conspicuous place upon the affected dwelling or dwelling unit, a placard bearing the following words: "Condemned as Unfit for Human Habitation." 
(Prior Code, § 19.11(4)) 
Sec. 19-58. - Vacation of condemned structures. 
    Any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation by the code compliance officer shall be vacated within a reasonable time as required by such officer. No owner or operator shall let to any person for human habitation and no person shall occupy any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded by the code compliance officer after the date on which such officer has required the affected dwelling or dwelling unit to be vacated. 
(Prior Code, § 19.11(5)) 
Sec. 19-59. - Placard not to be removed until defects are eliminated. 
    No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall be occupied until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the code compliance officer. The code compliance officer shall remove such placard whenever the defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. 
(Prior Code, § 19.11(6)) 
Sec. 19-60. - Placard to be removed only by code compliance officer. 
    No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in section 19-59. 
(Prior Code, § 19.11(7)) 
Secs. 19-61-19-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINIMUM DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 19-79-19-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 19-100. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for living, sleeping, cooking or eating meals therein which does not comply with the requirements of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 19.05) 
Sec. 19-101. - Kitchen sink required. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink and laundry tray in good working condition, properly connected to a water and sanitary sewer system approved by the plumbing division of the building inspector's office. 
(Prior Code, § 19.05(1)) 
Sec. 19-102. - Private bathroom facilities. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy to a person which is equipped with a flush water closet, a lavatory basin, bathtub or shower and the necessary accessories therefor in good working condition, properly connected to hot and cold water lines and sanitary sewer system approved by the code compliance officer or building inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 19.05(2)) 
Sec. 19-103. - Kitchen/lavatory sink connection. 
    Every kitchen sink and lavatory basin shall be properly connected with water lines. 
(Prior Code, § 19.05(3)) 
Sec. 19-104. - Rubbish facilities. 
    Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage facilities. 
(Prior Code, § 19.05(4)) 
Sec. 19-105. - Garbage disposal facilities. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers. 
(Prior Code, § 19.05(5)) 
Sec. 19-106. - Exits. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe, open space at ground level, as required by state and city laws. 
(Prior Code, § 19.05(6)) 
Secs. 19-107-19-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING 

Sec. 19-126. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for living therein which does not comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 19.06) 
Sec. 19-127. - Window area. 
    Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the floor area of the room. (See Federal Housing Administration Bulletin No. 30, Minimum Property Requirements for skylight area.) 
(Prior Code, § 19.06(1)) 
Sec. 19-128. - Ventilation generally. 
    Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least four percent of the floor area, except where there is supplied a mechanical device affording adequate ventilation per Federal Housing Administration regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 19.06(2)) 
Sec. 19-129. - Light and ventilation for bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
    Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in sections 19-127 and 19-128, except no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and toilet rooms equipped with an adequate ventilation system which is kept in continuous operation. 
(Prior Code, § 19.06(3)) 
Sec. 19-130. - Heating facilities. 
    Every dwelling shall have heated facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 70 degrees Fahrenheit 30 inches above floor level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions. 
(Prior Code, § 19.06(6)) 
Sec. 19-131. - Lighting of public halls and stairways. 
    Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted in conformity with the current issue of the National Electrical Code and Federal Housing Administration regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 19.06(4)) 
Sec. 19-132. - Basements and cellars. 
    Every basement shall receive natural and artificial light and shall be ventilated according to Federal Housing Administration requirements or equal minimum. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents shall be screened with a wire mesh of not less than #16 or other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(Prior Code, § 19.06(5)) 
Secs. 19-133-19-162. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPACE USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 19-163. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy and dwelling any unit, for living therein which does not comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08) 
Sec. 19-164. - Minimum floor area for dwelling unit. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not less than 150 square feet for the first occupant, 100 square feet for the second occupant, and 75 square feet for each additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all the habitable rooms. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08(1)) 
Sec. 19-165. - Minimum hot water requirements. 
    Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner, properly maintained and capable of heating water to such a temperature to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower, and laundry facility or other similar units, at a temperature of not less than 130 degrees Fahrenheit when needed. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08(2)) 
Sec. 19-166. - Electrical service; number of electrical outlets or fixture. 
    While there is electric service available to the buildings, every habitable room of a dwelling unit shall contain at least two separate, remote outlets, one of which may be a ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. Every public hall, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one electric light fixture. In addition, every bathroom and laundry room shall be provided with at least one electric outlet. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08(3)) 
Sec. 19-167. - Screen requirements. 
    From May 1 to October 1, in every dwelling unit for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoors shall have supplied and installed screens and self-closing device; and every window or other device with openings to outdoors, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens installed. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08(4)) 
Sec. 19-168. - Floor area for sleeping rooms. 
    In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied by more than one occupant shall contain at least 40 square feet of space for each occupant thereof over the age of 12 years and at least 30 square feet for each occupant under the age of 12 years. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08(5)) 
Sec. 19-169. - Arrangement of sleeping, bath and toilet rooms. 
    No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or toilet room intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room, bathroom or a toilet room. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08(6)) 
Sec. 19-170. - Minimum ceiling height. 
    At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet six inches; and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area to determine the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08(7)) 
Sec. 19-171. - Cellar space not habitable. 
    No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08(8)) 
Sec. 19-172. - Basement space may be habitable. 
    No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(1)  The floor and walls are of waterproof and dampproof construction; 
(2)  The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area sizes as required in section 19-127; 
(3)  Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and 
(4)  The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required under section 19-128, except where there is supplied some other approved device affording adequate ventilation. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08(9)) 
Sec. 19-173. - Occupants to have access to sanitary facilities. 
    Every occupant of every dwelling shall have unrestricted access to a kitchen sink, toilet, bath and lavatory basin. 
(Prior Code, § 19.08(10)) 
Secs. 19-174-19-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EXIT REQUIREMENTS FOR RENTAL HOUSING 

Sec. 19-200. - Scope and applicability. 
    This section applies to all bedrooms and sleeping areas of existing hotels, motels, apartments, roominghouses, multifamily dwellings, duplexes; and rented or leased single-family dwellings, that is, all single-family dwellings which are not entirely owner-occupied. 
Sec. 19-201. - Minimum means of escape. 
(a)  Every sleeping room and every living area shall have at least one primary means of escape and one secondary means of escape. 
(b)  The primary means of escape shall be a door, stairway, ramp, hallway, or passage providing a means of unobstructed travel to the outside of the dwelling unit at street or ground level. 
(c)  The secondary means of escape shall be one of the following: 
(1)  A door, stairway, passage, or hall providing a way of unobstructed travel to the outside of the dwelling at street or ground level that is independent of and remote from the primary means of escape. 
(2)  An outside window or door operable from the inside without the use of tools, keys, or special effort. If equipped with a storm or screen, it shall be removable from the inside. 
a.  Exception No. 1. A secondary means of escape shall not be required if the occupant of the bedroom or living area can exit through a door leading directly outside at or above grade level without climbing any stairs. 
b.  Exception No. 2. A secondary means of escape shall not be required if the dwelling unit is protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13. 
(Prior Code, §§ 19.14(1)-(3)) 
Sec. 19-202. - Windows used for exiting. 
    Windows used for exiting shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Windows shall have a clear opening at least 20 inches in width by 24 inches in height. 
(2)  The sill height shall not be more than 46 inches above the floor or the top of a permanent platform. 
(3)  An areaway shall be provided for below grade exit windows. The bottom of the areaway shall not be more than 46 inches below grade. The width of the areaway shall be at least equal to the width of the window. The areaway shall be a minimum of three feet measured perpendicular to the wall. 
(4)  The window sill for above grade exit windows shall be within 20 feet of grade. 
(Prior Code, § 19.14(4)) 
Sec. 19-203. - Arrangement of means of escape. 
    No required path of travel in a means of escape from any room to the outside shall be through another room or apartment not under the immediate control of the occupant of the first room, or through a bathroom or other space subject to locking. 
(Prior Code, § 19.14(5)) 
Secs. 19-204-19-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ROOMINGHOUSES 

Sec. 19-230. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall operate a roominghouse, occupy, or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any roominghouse, except in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10) 
Sec. 19-231. - Permit required. 
    No person shall operate a roominghouse unless he holds a valid roominghouse permit issued by the code compliance officer in the name of the operator for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit within which the roominghouse is contained. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(1)) 
Sec. 19-232. - Application for permit. 
    The operator shall file in duplicate an application for a roominghouse permit in the office of the code compliance officer on application forms prepared by such office. The operator shall file with the permit application for occupancy, an occupancy permit, issued by the building inspector for the operation of a roominghouse in the dwelling or dwelling unit designated in the roominghouse permit application; provided such an occupancy permit need not be filed with the roominghouse permit application if, on June 13, 1967, a valid sanitary inspection certificate was in effect for the same portions of the dwelling or dwelling unit designated in the application for roominghouse permit. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(2)) 
Sec. 19-233. - Inspection by code compliance officer. 
    The code compliance officer shall, whenever an application for a roominghouse which does not have a valid roominghouse permit, inspect the roominghouse within 30 days of the filing. Within 72 hours after the operator files an application for permit, the code compliance officer shall transmit to the building inspector a duplicate copy of the application. The building inspector shall, within 30 days after the date on which such application was filed, report in writing to the code compliance officer the maximum number of persons which may occupy the roominghouse in accordance with the provisions of applicable zoning laws. No permit shall be issued to any operator which would authorize occupancy of the roominghouse by a larger number of persons than is permitted under the provisions of applicable zoning laws. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(3)) 
Sec. 19-234. - Issuance of permit and occupancy record card; fee. 
    When all applicable provisions of this chapter and of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto have been complied with by the operator, the code compliance officer shall issue a roominghouse permit and an occupancy record card upon the payment of a fee of $5.00 for a Type I roominghouse and fee of $10.00 for a Type II roominghouse. All roominghouse permits shall expire on June 30 following the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as herein provided. The permit shall list the maximum number of persons that may reside in the total of all rooming units and second class dwelling units, if there are any such second class dwelling units, located in the dwelling or portions thereof for which the roominghouse permit is issued. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(4)) 
Sec. 19-235. - Occupancy record card. 
    Every occupancy record card shall list the maximum number of persons that may reside in the total of all rooming units and second class dwelling units, if any, located in the dwelling or portions thereof for which the roominghouse permit is issued. The occupancy record cards shall also list the maximum number of persons which may occupy each individual rooming unit and each individual second class dwelling unit, if any, located in the dwelling or portions thereof for which the roominghouse permit is issued. Whenever the operator shall file for an occupancy permit, in accordance with the provisions of section 19-232, all rooming units and second class dwelling units listed on the occupancy record card shall be located in such portions of the dwelling as are permitted to be occupied under the provisions of the occupancy permit. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(5)) 
Sec. 19-236. - Posting of permit and occupancy record card. 
    Every roominghouse permit issued by the code compliance officer shall be conspicuously posted by the operator in a public corridor or hallway or other public portion of the roominghouse for which it is issued and shall remain posted. Every occupancy record card shall be posted in the roominghouse by the operator in a place where such cards are readily accessible for examination by the code compliance officer. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(6)) 
Sec. 19-237. - Operator to control occupancy. 
    No operator shall allow a larger number of persons to occupy the total of all rooming units and second class dwelling units located within a roominghouse than the maximum number of persons listed on the roominghouse permit and the occupancy record cards. No operator shall allow a larger number of persons to occupy any individual rooming unit or any individual second class dwelling unit than the maximum number of persons listed on the occupancy record cards for each such rooming and each such second class dwelling unit. No operator shall permit any person to occupy a rooming unit or second class dwelling unit which is not listed on the occupancy record cards. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(7)) 
Sec. 19-238. - Nontransferability of permit. 
    No roominghouse permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable. Every operator shall notify the code compliance officer in writing within 24 hours after having relinquished proprietorship or having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of the interest or control of any roominghouse, and shall file in writing with the code compliance officer the name and address of the operator to whom proprietorship has been relinquished by sale, gift, or other method of transferal or disposition. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(8)) 
Sec. 19-239. - Relationship of permit to building code; enforcement of building code. 
    The issuance of a roominghouse permit and occupancy record card to any roominghouse shall not imply that the roominghouse conforms with the state building code or the building and zoning code of the city. The building inspector shall enforce the provisions of the building and zoning codes. The issuance of a roominghouse permit shall not relieve the owner or operator of the responsibility for compliance with such building and zoning codes and shall not relieve the building inspector of the responsibility for enforcement of the building and zoning codes. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(9)) 
Sec. 19-240. - Applicability of other sections of this article. 
    No person shall operate a roominghouse unless all requirements of this article are complied with; provided, in interpreting the requirements of the designated sections applicable in the enforcement of this section, the terms "multiple dwelling" or "dwelling" mean "roominghouse" and the terms "dwelling unit" mean "rooming unit." Every dwelling unit located within a roominghouse shall comply with all requirements for dwelling units as established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(10)) 
Sec. 19-241. - Toilets and lavatory basin. 
    At least one toilet and one lavatory basin supplied with hot water, properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight persons or fewer residing within a roominghouse, including members of the operator's family wherever they share such facilities; provided, in a roominghouse where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number of toilets. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(11)) 
Sec. 19-242. - Baths. 
    At least one bath, properly connected to an approved water and sewer system, supplied with hot water, and in good working condition shall be supplied for each eight persons or fewer residing within a roominghouse, including members of the operator's family whenever they share the use of the facilities. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(12)) 
Sec. 19-243. - Location of sanitary facilities. 
    Every toilet, lavatory basin, and bath shall be located within a room which affords privacy to a person within such room. All such facilities shall be located within the roominghouse to be accessible to occupants of each rooming unit sharing such facilities without going outside the dwelling or through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of another occupant. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(13)) 
Sec. 19-244. - Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. 
    Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 80 square feet or floor space. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 40 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof over 12 years of age and at least 30 square feet for each occupant therein under 12 years of age. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(14)) 
Sec. 19-245. - Bed linens and towels. 
    The operator of every roominghouse shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to an occupant. The operator shall maintain all supplied bedding in a reasonably clean, sanitary manner. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(15)) 
Sec. 19-246. - Exits. 
    Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe open space at ground level as required by state and city laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(16)) 
Sec. 19-247. - Applicability. 
    Every provision of this section shall also apply to efficiency apartments, motels, cabins, hotels and similar accommodations except when such provision may be found in conflict with state law or the regulations of any state board or agency. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(17)) 
Sec. 19-248. - Suspension of operation. 
    The code compliance officer may suspend the operation of any regulation hereunder by special or general order in writing when he shall deem an emergency exists, which in his discretion warrants such suspension; provided, no suspension of operation of sections 19-164 and 19-235 shall be longer than ten days. 
(Prior Code, § 19.10(18)) 
Secs. 19-249-19-274. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 19-275. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit or portion thereof for living therein, which does not comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 19.07) 
Sec. 19-276. - Foundations, exterior walls, roofs. 
    Every foundation, exterior wall, and roof shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, rodentproof and insect proof and shall be kept in a reasonably good state of repair. 
(Prior Code, § 19.07(1)) 
Sec. 19-277. - Interior walls, floors, ceilings. 
    Every interior partition, wall, floor, and ceiling shall be capable of affording privacy, kept in a reasonably good state of repair, and maintained to permit them to be kept in a clean, sanitary condition. 
(Prior Code, § 19.07(2)) 
Sec. 19-278. - Windows, exterior doors, basement hatchways. 
    Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight and rodent proof, kept in reasonably good working condition and a reasonably good state of repair. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall hang all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever required under the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where the owner has agreed to supply such service. 
(Prior Code, §§ 19.07(3), 19.09(5)) 
Sec. 19-279. - Stairways and porches. 
    Every inside and outside stairway, porch and appurtenance thereto shall be constructed to be reasonably safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and kept in sound condition and in a reasonably good state of repair. 
(Prior Code, § 19.07(4)) 
Sec. 19-280. - Supplied plumbing fixture. 
    Every supplied plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Prior Code, §§ 19.07(5), 19.09(7)) 
Sec. 19-281. - Bathroom and toilet room floors. 
    Every toilet room floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water, permitting such floor to be kept in a clean, sanitary condition. 
(Prior Code, § 19.07(6)) 
Sec. 19-282. - Safe and effective functioning of supplied facilities. 
    Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function properly and shall be maintained in reasonably good working condition. 
(Prior Code, § 19.07(7)) 
Sec. 19-283. - Discontinuance of required services, facilities, equipment, or utilities. 
    No owner or operator shall cause any service facility, equipment, or utility which is required to be supplied under the provisions of this chapter to be removed from, or shut off from, or discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs, replacements, or alterations are being made. 
(Prior Code, § 19.07(8)) 
Sec. 19-284. - Clean and sanitary condition required. 
(a)  No owner shall occupy or rent to any other person for occupancy or allow any other person to occupy any vacant dwelling unit unless it is reasonably clean, sanitary, and complies with all provisions of this chapter and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(b)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he occupies and controls. 
(c)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers. 
(Prior Code, §§ 19.07(9), 19.09((2), (3)) 
Sec. 19-285. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents in a clean, sanitary manner by placing it in garbage disposal facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than four dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on-premises where more than four dwelling units share the same premises. In all other cases the occupant shall furnish such facilities or containers. 
(b)  Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall exterminate any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Prior Code, §§ 19.09(4), (6)) 
Sec. 19-286. - Public areas. 
    Every owner of a dwelling containing four or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 19.09(1)) 
Chapter 20 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the historic preservation commission created under this chapter. 
    Historic District (HD) means an area designated by the common council on recommendation of the commission, composed of two or more improvement parcels that together comprise a district of special character or special historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, the state or nation, and which has been designated as an historic district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Historic site means any parcel of land whose historic significance is due to a substantial value in tracing the history of aboriginal people, or upon which an historic event has occurred, and which has been designated as an historic site under this section, or an improvement parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the historic structure is situated. 
    Historic structure means any improvement which has a special character or special historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, the state or nation and which has been designated as an historic structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Improvement means any building, structure, place, work of art or other object constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of the betterment. 
    Improvement parcel means the unit of property which includes a physical betterment constituting an improvement and the land embracing the site thereof, and is treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying real estate taxes; provided, however, that the term "improvement parcel" shall also include any unimproved area of land which is treated as a single entity for such tax purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 20.02) 
Sec. 20-2. - Penalties for violations. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $200.00 for each separate violation. Each day during which a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. In addition, in any instance where work commences as regulated in this chapter without the owner or agent having secured a certificate of appropriateness and where applicable, plan commission approval, the building inspector shall promptly issue a stop work order which shall take immediate effect and remain in effect until such certificate and other applicable approaches shall have been secured. Issuance of a certificate in such instances shall require payment of a $100.00 fee. If, in the process, provisions of the building code shall also have been violated, the penalties for such violation called for in that building code shall be applied. 
(Prior Code, § 20.01) 
Secs. 20-3-20-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 20-23. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of property, improvements, and materials of special architectural character or special historical interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. The city has established an historic preservation commission, the purpose of which shall be to: 
(1)  Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of the improvements and of districts which represent or reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political, engineering and architectural history. 
(2)  Safeguard the city's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such historic structures, sites and districts. 
(3)  Stabilize and improve property values. 
(4)  Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past. 
(5)  Protect and enhance the city's attractions to residents, tourists and visitors, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry. 
(6)  Strengthen the economy of the city. 
(7)  Promote the use of historic structures, sites and districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 20.01) 
Sec. 20-24. - Composition, members, terms, vacancies and compensation. 
(a)  An historic preservation commission is created, consisting of seven members. Of the membership, one shall be an alderperson, appointed annually by the mayor, who shall also be a member of the city plan commission, and six qualified persons, whom shall be residents of the city. The persons shall be competent and informed in the historical, architectural and cultural traditions of the community. They shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the common council of the city by majority vote. 
(b)  Of the initial members so appointed, one shall serve a term of one year, one shall serve a term of two years, and two shall serve a term of three years. Thereafter, the term for each member shall be three years. A vacancy occurring in the membership for any cause shall be filled by a person appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the common council for the unexpired term. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall receive no compensation except for necessary expenses sustained in carrying out their duties, which expenses shall be paid by the city as may be authorized by the common council. 
(Prior Code, § 20.03) 
Sec. 20-25. - Powers and duties. 
    In addition to all other authority and duties granted the commission in this article and by state law, the commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  The commission shall work for the continuing education of city citizens about the historic heritage of the city and the historic structures and historic sites designated under this article. 
(2)  The commission shall assume responsibilities of an historic preservation commission for the city and shall conduct local preservation planning efforts, often in conjunction with the planning department. 
(3)  The commission shall conduct or supervise an on-going survey to identify and evaluate properties of historical, prehistorical or architectural interest, prepare reports of its findings and sponsor educational activities in the community. 
(4)  The commission may recommend designation of an historic district to the plan commission and the city council based upon the criteria established in this article. 
(5)  The commission shall maintain appropriate records, including photographs and plans, which shall be kept as a part of the city's official zoning file in the city building inspector's office. 
(6)  The commission shall cooperate with the state historic preservation officer and state historic preservation review board, in attempting to include city historic properties as historic structures, sites or districts in the National Register of Historic Places. 
(7)  As it deems advisable, the commission shall receive and solicit funds for the purpose of historic preservation in the city, provided that such funds shall be placed in a special city account for such purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 20.04(E)) 
Sec. 20-26. - Authority for designation of structures, sites and districts as historical; categories. 
(a)  The commission, in addition to the city council, may designate historic structures, historic sites, and recommend historic districts within the city. Historic district designations must be approved by the plan commission and the common council. Such designation shall be based upon criteria established in section 20-56(1). Appropriate records, including photographs and plans, shall be kept as a part of the city's official zoning file. Once designated by the commission or council, such historic structures, sites, and districts shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Designations shall be made according to the following categories: 
(1)  Historic structures or sites. Any physical feature or improvement having significance to the city, state, or nation. This category most often would be used for individual buildings, as well as archaeological sites. 
(2)  Historic District (HD). An area containing physical features or improvements which are of significance to the city, state or nation and cause such area to constitute a distinctive section of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 20.04(A)) 
Secs. 20-27-20-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGNATION CRITERIA, DESIGN STANDARDS AND PROCEDURE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-56. - Designation criteria. 
    Historic structure or historic site designation may be granted to any site, natural or improved, including any building, improvement or structure located thereon, or any area of particular historic, architectural or cultural significance to the city, such as historic structures or sites which: 
(1)  Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state or community: 
(2)  Are identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local history; 
(3)  Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen, inherently valuable for a study of a period, style, method of construction, or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or architect whose individual genius influenced his age. 
(Prior Code, § 20.05) 
Sec. 20-57. - Designation procedure generally. 
(a)  Authority. The commission may, after notice and public hearing, establish historic structures and sites and may recommend historic districts, or rescind such designation or recommendation, after application of the criteria specified in this article. 
(b)  Public notice. At least ten days prior to such hearing, the commission shall notify the owners of record, as listed in the office of the city assessor who are owners of property in whole or in part situated within 200 feet of the boundaries of the property affected. These owners shall have the right to confer with the commission prior to final action by the commission on the designation. Notice of the hearing shall also be published as a Class I notice, under state law. 
(c)  Notice to city departments and personnel. The historic preservation commission shall also notify the city public works department, park board, fire and police departments, health department, building inspection department, and plan commission. Each such department shall respond to the commission within 30 days of notification with its comments on the proposed designation or rescission. 
(d)  Public hearing. The commission shall conduct the public hearing and, in addition to the notified persons, may hear expert witnesses and shall have the power to subpoena such witnesses and records as it deems necessary. The commission may conduct an independent investigation into the proposed designation or rescission. 
(e)  Final determination. Within ten days after the close of the public hearing, the commission may designate the property as either an historic structure, an historic site, or recommend its inclusion in an historic district, or may rescind the designation. 
(f)  Notice of final action; recording. After the designation, recommendation or rescission has been made, notification shall be sent to the property owner and to the persons who appeared at the public hearing. Notification shall also be given to the city clerk, building inspector department, and the city assessor. The commission shall cause the designation or rescission to be recorded, at city expense, in the county register of deeds office, or the recommendation to be submitted to the common council as provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 20.06(A)) 
Sec. 20-58. - Plaques to be posted on designated structures and sites. 
(a)  When an historic structure or site has been properly designated in accordance with this article, a suitable plaque may be prepared and erected on the property, declaring that it is an historic structure or site. Information to be included on such a sign must be reviewed by the historic preservation commission. Plaques shall be placed as to be easily visible to passing pedestrians. 
(b)  For an historic structure, the plaque shall state the accepted name of the structure, the date of its construction, and other information deemed proper by the commission. For an historic site that is not the site of an historic structure, the plaque shall state the common name of the site, and such other information deemed appropriate by the commission. 
(c)  The size and specific style of plaques authorized by this section will be determined by the historic preservation commission so that signage throughout the historic districts and the city will be consistent. 
(Prior Code, § 20.06(B)) 
Sec. 20-59. - Voluntary restrictive covenants. 
    The owner of any historic structure or site may, at any time following such designation of his property, enter into a restrictive covenant on the subject property after negotiation with the commission. The commission may assist the owner in preparing such covenant in the interest of preserving the historic property. The owner shall record such covenant in the county register of deeds office, and shall notify the city assessor of the covenant and the conditions thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 20.06(C)) 
Sec. 20-60. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city council may appoint the building inspection department or any other individual or group of individuals to enforce this article. The duties of the inspection officer shall include periodic inspection at intervals provided by the city council of designated historic structures, sites and districts. These inspections may include physical entry upon the property and improvement, with permission of the owner, to ensure that interior alterations or maintenance will not jeopardize the exterior appearance or structural stability of the improvement. 
(b)  If an owner refuses permission for the enforcement officer to enter for purposes of inspection, the inspection officer may obtain a warrant of entry pursuant to state law and take any other reasonable measures to further enforcement of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 20.07) 
Sec. 20-61. - Maintenance required. 
    Every person in charge of an improvement on an historic site or in an historic district shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of the improvement and all interior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portions of the improvement to fall into a state of disrepair. This provision shall be in addition to all other provisions of law requiring such improvement to be kept in good repair. 
(Prior Code, §§ 20.07, 20.08) 
Sec. 20-62. - Construction codes applicable; variances and waivers. 
    Insofar as they are applicable to an historic structure, historic site, or improvement in an historic district designated under this section, any provision of the plumbing code, the minimum housing and property maintenance code, building code, heating, ventilating, and air conditioning code, and outdoor signs and outdoor advertising structures regulations of the general ordinances may be varied or waived, on application, by the appropriate board having such jurisdiction over such chapter or, in the absence of the board, by the building inspection department, provided such variance or waiver does not endanger public health or safety. 
(Prior Code, § 20.08) 
Sec. 20-63. - Conditions dangerous to life, health or property. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the making of necessary construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any historic structure, any improvement on an historic site or in an historic district pursuant to order of any governmental agency or pursuant to any court judgment, for the purpose of remedying emergency conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health or property. In such cases, no approval from the commission shall be required. 
(Prior Code, § 20.09) 
Secs. 20-64-20-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 20-85. - Criteria for designation of an historic district. 
(a)  For preservation purposes, the historic preservation commission shall select geographically defined areas within the city to be designated as historic districts and shall, with the assistance of the city plan commission, prepare an historic preservation plan in ordinance form for each area. An historic district may be designated for any geographic area of particular historic, architectural or cultural significance to the city that: 
(1)  Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state, or community; 
(2)  Is identified with historic personage or with important events in national, state, or local history; 
(3)  Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of architectural type specimens inherently valuable for the study of periods, styles, methods of construction, indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Is representative of the notable works of master builders, designers, or architects who influenced their age. 
(b)  Each historic preservation plan prepared for or by the historic preservation commission shall include a cultural and architectural analysis supporting the historic significance of the area, the specific guidelines for development and a statement of preservation objectives. 
(Prior Code, § 20.06(D)(1)) 
Sec. 20-86. - Criteria for the review of alterations in historic districts. 
    Alterations in historic districts shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Height. All additions shall be no higher than the existing building. 
(2)  Second exit platforms. Second exit platforms shall not be applied to the front or sides of a building, unless they are not visible from the street. 
(3)  Solar apparatus. Passive and active solar apparatus shall be allowed only if such devices do not detract from the architectural integrity of the building and are as unobtrusive as possible. Solar apparatus will not be permitted if such device hides from street view significant architectural features of the building or neighboring buildings, if their installation requires the loss of significant architectural features, or if they are of such a large scale that they become a major feature of the design. 
(4)  Repairs. Repairs in materials that exactly duplicate the original in composition, texture, and appearance are encouraged. Repairs in new materials that duplicate the original in texture and appearance are also permitted. Repairs in materials that do not duplicate the original in appearance shall be permitted on an individual basis if the repairs are compatible with the character and materials of the existing building and if repairs that duplicate the original in appearance are prohibitively expensive. 
(5)  Restoration. Projects that will return the appearance of the building to an earlier appearance are encouraged and shall be permitted if such projects are documented by photographs, architectural or archaeological research, or other suitable evidence. 
(6)  Residing with aluminum or vinyl. Residing with aluminum or vinyl that replaces clapboards or nonoriginal siding on buildings originally sided with clapboards is not recommended, but may be permitted if the new siding imitates the width of the original siding within one inch, and provided that all architectural details (such as window trim, wood cornices, and ornament) either remain uncovered or are duplicated exactly in appearance. Aluminum, vinyl and other materials shall be considered on an individual basis. Siding that imitates wood graining will not be permitted. If more than one layer of siding exists on the building, all layers except the first must be removed before new siding is applied. If insulation is applied under the new siding, all trim must be built up so that it projects from the siding as in the original. 
(7)  Storms, screens and storm doors. The repair and retention of original storms, screens and storm doors, or the replacement of same with new units that duplicate the original in materials and appearance is encouraged. Replacements with non-original materials, such as combination metal components may also be permitted. If metal components are used, owners are encouraged to use metal components which have been factory-enameled. Painting of raw aluminum storms after a year of weathering of the finish is encouraged. Storm doors that imitate a specific style shall be permitted only if the style matches the style of the building. 
(8)  Additions and alterations to street facades. The appearance of all street facades of a building shall not be altered unless the design is sensitive to the historic character of the building. Specifically, the design shall be compatible with the existing building in scale, color, texture, and the proportion of solids to voids. Materials and architectural details used in such alterations and additions shall either match those on the existing building or shall be materials and details used for the original construction of other buildings in the historic district of similar materials, age, and architectural style. 
(9)  Additions and alterations not visible from the street. Additions and alterations that are not visible from streets contiguous to the lot lines shall be permitted if their design is compatible with the scale of the existing building and, in addition, materials used shall be compatible with the existing in texture, color and architectural details. Alterations shall harmonize with the architectural design of the building, rather than contrast with it. 
(10)  Side additions. Side additions shall be set back from the front wall of the building. 
(11)  Alterations to the roof. Roof alterations, resulting in an increased building volume, to provide additional windows, headroom, or area are not permitted unless approved as a variance by the zoning board of appeal. Such alterations shall comply with the following: 
a.  The roof shape of the front of the building shall remain the same, unless the owner wishes to restore an earlier, documentable appearance. Roof alterations on the back and sides of the building shall be compatible with the design of the building. 
b.  If the existing roofing material is the same as the original, changes in the appearance of roofing materials (not including color), will not be permitted except when the repair of the existing roof is unfeasible and the cost of replacing it in kind is prohibitive. The new roof shall match the original in appearance (not including color), as closely as is economically possible. 
c.  If the existing roofing material is not original to the building, the new roofing materials shall harmonize in color with the building. Thick wood shakes, rolled roofing and hexagonal shingles will not be allowed. Restoration to a documentable earlier appearance is encouraged. 
(Prior Code, § 20.06(D)(2)) 
Sec. 20-87. - Criteria for the review of new construction in historic district. 
(a)  Primary buildings. Alteration of primary buildings in historic districts shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Height. The maximum height for new buildings in the R zoning districts shall be 35 feet. Exceptions may be granted by the plan commission for three story buildings of exceptional design in the R zoning districts. The maximum height for new buildings in the C1 and C2 zoning districts shall be 40 feet. 
(2)  Roof. The following roof shapes shall be allowed: hipped, gable, gambrel, shed. Other roof shapes shall be considered on an individual basis. The shape shall be compatible with the buildings in the visually related area. 
(3)  Materials. Materials for the exterior walls of new buildings shall be the same or similar to the materials prevalent in the city. The following materials shall be permitted: brick, narrow gauge horizontal clapboards under four inches in exposed width, stone, stucco, smooth shingles or any combination of the above. The following materials will not be permitted: concrete block, asbestos, wide clapboards over four inches in exposed width, diagonal boards, vertical boards, rough sawn wood, rough split shingles, shakes. Other materials, such as aluminum or vinyl, shall be considered on an individual basis. 
(4)  Visual size. The gross area of the front facade (all walls facing the street) of a single-family, two-unit, or commercial building shall not be greater than 125 percent of the average gross area of the front facades of all buildings within the visually related area. If this is not possible, changes in the setback should be designed in the front facade of the building to repeat the rhythm and proportions of buildings versus space between them within the visually related area. 
(5)  Solar panels. Solar panels shall be permitted on new buildings, including the front facades. Solar apparatus will not be permitted if such devices hide from street view significant architectural features of neighboring buildings, or if they are of such a large scale that they become a major feature of the design. 
(6)  Parking lots. No new surface parking lots shall be allowed in the R district. Any proposed new parking must be reviewed by the commission. Each proposal shall be considered on an individual basis. 
(b)  Accessory buildings. Alteration of accessory buildings in historic districts shall be compatible with the design of the existing buildings on the zoning lot and shall be as unobtrusive as possible. Exterior wall materials permitted are the same as for construction of new primary buildings but the materials should be the same as the exterior materials of existing buildings on the same zoning lot wherever possible. 
(Prior Code, § 20.06(D)(3)) 
Sec. 20-88. - Review and adoption procedure. 
(a)  Public hearing; notice. The historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing when considering the plan for an historic district. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be given by publication as a Class II notice under state law in the official city paper. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall also be sent by the city clerk to the alderperson of the aldermanic districts in which the historic district is located, and the owners of record, as listed in the office of the city assessor, who are owners of property situated in whole or in part within 200 feet of the boundaries of the proposed historic district. The notice shall be sent at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. Following the public hearing, the historic preservation commission shall vote to recommend, reject, or withhold action on the plan. This recommendation shall be forwarded to the city plan commission and the city council. 
(b)  Review by plan commission. The plan commission shall review the historic district plan and make a recommendation to the city council. The plan commission shall make its recommendation on the historic district plan within 30 days. 
(c)  Review by city council. The city council, upon receipt of the recommendations from the historic preservation commission and plan commission, shall hold a public hearing; notice to be given in the same manner as the notice given for hearing before the commission. 
(d)  Final determination. Following the public hearing the city council will either designate or reject the historic district. Designation of the historic district shall constitute adoption of the plan in ordinance form prepared for that district and direct the implementation of the plan. 
(Prior Code, § 20.06(D)(4)) 
Sec. 20-89. - Building permit may not be issued without commission approval. 
    No permit to develop, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, or alter historic structures, historic sites or property in an historic district shall be issued and no lands shall be removed from the historic district until the historic preservation commission has reviewed the application or petition and has recommended approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application or petition. 
(Prior Code, § 20.04(B)(1)) 
Sec. 20-90. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
    There shall be no alteration in the architectural appearance of historic structures, historic sites, or any structure within the historic district without the review and approval of plans for such alterations by the historic preservation commission. For the purpose of this section, alterations shall include any change, addition to, or demolition of all or any part of a structure. 
The historic preservation commission shall make its determination within 30 days of the filing of the application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Prior Code, § 20.04(B)(2)(a)) 
Sec. 20-91. - Basis for approval generally. 
(a)  Any changes or alterations of an historic structure, historic site, or historic district shall be permitted if they do not destroy, seriously impair, or significantly alter its character in terms of its historical or architectural interest; or particular character and quality of the historic district. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, total lifetime structural repairs, restoration or alteration of a preservation structure may exceed 50 percent of the assessed value if the historic preservation commission determines that the structure shall be repaired, restored, or altered in such a way as to maintain the character of the structure and the character of the historic district without significant alteration or change in such character. 
(Prior Code, § 20.04(B)(2)(b)) 
Sec. 20-92. - Exterior alterations. 
(a)  Permit application to be filed with commission. Any application for a permit from the building inspector involving the exterior of a designated historic site or structure within an historic district shall be filed with the historic preservation commission. 
(b)  Certificate of appropriateness required. No owner or person in charge of an historic site or structure within a designated historic district shall construct, alter, reconstruct or permit all or any improvements on any part of the exterior of the properties located within an historic district unless a certificate of appropriateness has been granted by the historic preservation commission. Until such certificate has been granted by the commission, the building inspector shall not issue a permit for any such work. 
(c)  Review by commission; factors considered. Upon filing of any application with the historic preservation commission, the historic preservation commission shall, within 30 days of the date of filing, determine: 
(1)  Whether, in the case of a designated historic structure or site, the proposed work would detrimentally change, destroy or adversely affect any exterior architectural feature of the improvement upon which the work shall be done; 
(2)  Whether, in the case of the construction of a new improvement upon an historic site, the exterior of the improvement would adversely affect or not harmonize with the external appearance of other neighboring improvements on such site; and 
(3)  Whether, in the case of any property located in an historic district designated pursuant to the terms of sections 20-8 through 20-88, the proposed construction, reconstruction or exterior alteration does not conform to the objectives and design criteria of the historic preservation plan for the district as duly adopted by the common council. 
(d)  Approval by commission. If the commission determines subsections (c)(1) through (3) of this section in the negative, it shall issue the certificate of appropriateness. Upon the issuance of the certificate, the building permit shall then be issued by the building inspector. 
(e)  Denial by commission; appeal to council. Should the commission refuse to issue a certificate of appropriateness due to failure of the proposal to conform to the above guidelines, the applicant may appeal such decision to the common council, which may grant the certificate by a five-eighths vote only, and then only upon a clear showing of economic hardship by the applicant to the common council. In addition, if the commission fails to issue a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall, at the request of the applicant, cooperate and work with the applicant to obtain a certificate of appropriateness within the guidelines of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 20.04(B)(3)) 
Sec. 20-93. - Demolitions. 
(a)  Demolition permit requires commission approval. No permit to demolish or move all or part of an historic structure, or improvement in an historic district, shall be granted by the building inspector except as provided in this section. No person in charge of an historic property, shall be granted a permit to demolish or move such property under any circumstances without first receiving the written approval of the commission. Application for a permit to demolish or move historic property shall be filed with the historic preservation commission. 
(b)  Eight-month delay period for development of alternatives. The following time periods shall apply to the review of applications for demolition permits by the commission: 
(1)  Six-month waiting period for consideration of alternatives to demolition. For a period of up to six months from the filing of the application, the commission and the applicant shall work together in good faith toward finding a method to save the property from demolition. At the end of the six-month period, if no agreeable way to save the subject property has been found, and no funding from any source to preserve the property is pending, the building inspector may issue the demolition permit for the subject property without the approval of the commission. 
(2)  Failure of alternative plan; two-month waiting period for issuance of demolition permit by building inspector. If the mutually agreeable method for saving the subject property is not successful or the funding for the preservation of the property is not available within a two-month period following the six-month period, the building inspector may issue the demolition permit without approval of the commission. 
(c)  Factors to be considered by commission. In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness for any demolition, the commission shall consider and may give decisive weight to any or all of the following: 
(1)  Whether the building or structure is of the architectural or historic significance that its demolition would be detrimental to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the people of the city and the state; 
(2)  Whether the building or structure, although not itself a designated historic structure, contributes to the distinctive architectural or historic character of the historic district as a whole and therefor should be preserved for the benefit of the people of the city and the state; 
(3)  Whether demolition of the subject property would be contrary to the purpose and intent of this chapter as set forth in section 20-23 and to the objectives of the historic preservation plan for the applicable district as duly adopted by the common council; 
(4)  Whether the building or structure is of the old and unusual or uncommon design, texture or material that it could not be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficulty or expense; 
(5)  Whether retention of the building or structure would promote the general welfare of the people of the city and the state by encouraging study of American history, architecture and design or by developing an understanding of American culture and heritage; 
(6)  Whether the building or structure is in such a deteriorated condition that it is not structurally or economically feasible to preserve or restore it, provided that any hardship or difficulty claimed by the owner which is self-created or which is the result of any failure to maintain the property in good repair cannot qualify as a basis for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness; 
(7)  Whether any new structure proposed to be constructed or a proposed change in use is compatible with the buildings and environment of the district in which the subject property is located. 
(d)  Notice to historical society; society to have access to structure. If an order is issued to raze an historic building or the city intends to raze a municipally-owned historic building, the city shall notify the state historical society of the order, application or intent. No historic building may be razed for 30 days after the notice is given. During the 30-day period, the state historical society shall have access to the historic building to create or preserve an historic record. 
(e)  Appeal. 
(1)  An appeal from the decision of the commission to grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness, whether this determination is made upon receipt of the application for the demolition permit or at the end of the eight-month period in a case where action on the application is delayed, may be taken to the common council by the applicant for the demolition permit or by the alderperson of the district in which the subject building or structure is located. 
(2)  The appeal shall be initiated by filing a petition to appeal, specifying the grounds, with the city clerk within ten days of the date the final decision of the commission is made. The city clerk shall file the petition to appeal with the common council. 
(3)  After a public hearing, the city council may by favorable vote of five-eighths of its members, reverse or modify the decision of the commission if, after balancing the interest of the owner in using it for his own purposes, the city council finds that, owing to special conditions pertaining to the specific piece of property, demolition will preclude any and all reasonable use of the property or will cause serious hardship for the owner, provided that any self-created hardship shall not be a basis for reversal or modification of the commission's decision. Self-created hardship shall be determined by the common council. 
(Prior Code, § 20.04(B)(4), (5)) 
Sec. 20-94. - Rescission of designation as historic structure. 
    Any party who is listed as the owner of record of an historic structure on-site at the time of its designation, who can demonstrate to the commission that, by virtue of the designation, he is unable to find a buyer willing to preserve such an historic structure or site, even though he has made reasonable attempts in good faith to find and attract such a buyer, may petition the commission for a rescission of its designation. Following the filing of the petition with the secretary of the commission: 
(1)  The owner and the commission shall work together in good faith to locate a buyer for the subject property who is willing to abide by its designation. 
(2)  If, at the end of a period not exceeding six months from the date of the petition, no such buyer can be found, and if the owner still desires to obtain such rescission, the commission shall rescind its designation of the subject property; provided, however, if the owner has received any financial or tax benefits from designation as an historic structure or site, the waiting period may not exceed 12 months. 
(3)  In the event of the rescission, the commission shall notify the city clerk, the building inspector, and the city assessor of same, and shall cause the same to be recorded, at its own expense, in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(4)  Following any such rescission, the commission may not redesignate the subject property an historic structure or site for a period of not less than five years following the date of rescission. 
(Prior Code, § 20.04(D)) 
Chapter 22 - PARKS AND WATER BODIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Park commission. 
(a)  Composition. The park commission shall consist of seven members: three council members and four citizen members. The three council members shall be elected by the council on the third Tuesday of April to take office on May 1 following their election and shall serve for one year. On the third Tuesday of April in each year, the mayor shall appoint one citizen member, subject to confirmation by the council for a term of three years, expiring on April 30 of the third year following appointment. 
(b)  Vacancies, compensation and oaths. 
(1)  Vacancies. Each commissioner shall serve until his successor is appointed or elected and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled in the original manner of election or appointment for any unexpired term. 
(2)  Compensation. The members shall receive no compensation. 
(3)  Oath. The citizen members shall take the official oath required by Wis. Stats. § 19.01 which oath shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(c)  Powers and duties. In addition to the powers and duties set forth in Wis. Stats. §§ 27.08, 27.09 and 27.10 and such other powers and duties as prescribed by the council from time to time, the park commission shall: 
(1)  Hire such employee as may be necessary. 
(2)  Expend for the use, maintenance, protection, development and improvement of city parks such sums as necessary within the limit of the budget established by the council and in conformity with all ordinances and resolutions enacted by the council. 
(3)  Utilize the services of all existing city officials and employees. 
(d)  Election and quorum. 
(1)  The park commission shall elect a chairman and city clerk and shall keep a written record of its proceedings to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(2)  Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions require the affirmative approval of a majority of the members. 
(e)  Rule. The park commission shall adopt rules governing its proceedings and regulations for proper use, care and operation of property under their control, provided such rules and regulations shall not conflict with state or city laws or ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 22.01) 
Sec. 22-2. - Enforcement, penalties and deposits. 
(a)  Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the police department. 
(b)  Penalties and deposits. 
(1)  Major violations. Any person who shall violate sections 22-56, 22-60 or 22-61 shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $500.00 nor less than $25.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until full payment is made, but not exceeding 60 days. 
(2)  Minor violations. Any person who shall violate any other provision of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $1.00 nor more than $100.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the county jail until full payment is made, but not exceeding 60 days. 
(3)  Money deposit. Any officer arresting a person for violation of this chapter who is unable to bring the person arrested before a court of appropriate jurisdiction without unnecessary delay shall permit such person to make a money deposit pursuant to state law. The deposit shall be made to the police headquarters or the clerk of court. 
(Prior Code, § 22.20) 
Secs. 22-3-22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK RULES 

Sec. 22-23. - Permits required. 
    The city parks department may grant permits for the use of city public parks before and after the hours specified in section 22-24. Permits shall be in writing and granted upon the condition that the person obtaining the permit shall remove all litter and trash and replace any equipment that may be disturbed during the use of the park. 
(Prior Code, § 22.02(1)) 
Sec. 22-24. - Park hours. 
    City public parks shall be open between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. No person shall remain in or enter such parks at any other time unless such person has obtained a permit as provided in section 22-23. Park hours may be extended for participants in programs or special events hosted by the city parks and recreation department. 
(Prior Code, § 22.02(2)) 
Sec. 22-25. - Parking and attendance charge. 
    No person shall impose, levy or collect any charge or fee for parking in the city parks or attendance or admission to any park activity without the prior authorization of the city park commission. 
(Prior Code, § 22.02(3)) 
Sec. 22-26. - Motor vehicles in parks. 
(a)  No person shall operate, drive, park or allow to stand, any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, in any city park, including the municipal golf course, except on any established roadways and parking areas. This subsection shall not apply to motorized golf carts operated on the city golf course and shall not apply to any city owned vehicles or equipment, or other vehicles and equipment operating or parked on park grounds with authority of the park director or the park board. Any person violating this section shall pay a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(b)  Any person who, in the course of violating subsection (a) of this section, caused damage to the park grounds or other city property, shall pay a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Prior Code, § 22.02(4)) 
Sec. 22-27. - Golf course. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any activity, go upon or be present on the city golf course, defined as the areas of, and adjacent to, the tees, fairways, rough, and greens and those areas between greens and tee boxes unless such person has paid the appropriate green fees or permit fees therefor. No person shall use the golf course to enter Perch Lake to wade during such restricted periods. All persons on the golf course are required to check in with the starter and have their names listed on the starter sheet. Caddies are allowed on the golf course for special events but must have permission of the golf pro or parks and recreation director prior to the event. Any person physically unable to golf may receive special permission from the golf pro or parks and recreation director to accompany a golfer on the course for a fee of $1.00 per nine holes and they shall be so listed on the starter sheet. 
(b)  These restrictions do not apply to golf course maintenance personnel or others who have received permission to be present on the golf course for maintenance and installation of improvements to the golf course or to visit the former Wisconsin Child Care Center cemetery grounds located thereon. 
(Prior Code, § 22.03) 
Sec. 22-28. - Beaver Creek Park. 
    Bicycles, tricycles and other wheeled vehicles shall not be used in or about Beaver Creek Park. 
(Prior Code, § 22.04) 
Sec. 22-29. - Dogs prohibited in parks. 
    No dog shall be permitted in any city park unless it is on a leash and in the control of its owner or person in possession thereof. The owner or person in possession of any dog on park grounds in violation of this section shall be subject to forfeiture as provided therein. 
(Prior Code, § 22.041) 
Sec. 22-30. - Digging in parks prohibited. 
    No person shall dig holes in the grounds of city parks or otherwise disturb the soil in a similar fashion, whether by hand or by tool. 
(Prior Code, § 22.042) 
Sec. 22-31. - Glass beverage containers prohibited. 
    Glass bottles used or designed for use as beverage containers are prohibited in all city parks and any person in possession of such a bottle or container on city park grounds shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 22.043) 
Sec. 22-32. - Alcohol beverages prohibited. 
    No person shall possess or consume alcohol beverages in Beaver Creek Park Plaza or in the unnamed park at 120/122 Water Street unless approved by permit issued upon the approval of the park board. 
(Prior Code, § 22.044) 
Sec. 22-33. - Blyton Park. 
    Blyton Park shall be known as Blyton Veterans Park and all future references and designations of the park shall include the same. 
(Prior Code, § 22.045) 
Secs. 22-34-22-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC WATER BODY USE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 22-55. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the waters of Perch Lake, which is the La Crosse River dammed within the city, which waters are described as follows: Commencing at the east line of East Ave., thence east to the east corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 22.05) 
Sec. 22-56. - State boating and water safety laws adopted. 
    The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to water traffic, boats, boating and related water activities in the following enumerated sections of the statutes, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of the statutes, are adopted and by reference may a part of this section as if fully set forth herein: 
Wis. Stats. § 30.50 Definitions Wis. Stats. § 30.51 Certificate of Number and Registration; Requirements; Exemptions Wis. Stats. § 30.52 Certificate of Number and Registration; Application; Certificate and Registration Period; Fees; Issuance Wis. Stats. § 30.523 Certification or Registration Card to be on Board; Display of Decals and Identification Number Wis. Stats. § 30.53 Certificate of Origin; Requirements; Contents Wis. Stats. § 30.531 Certificate of Title; Requirements; Exemptions. Wis. Stats. § 30.533 Application for Certificate of Title; Hull and Engine Identification Numbers Wis. Stats. § 30.54 Transfers of Boat Titles Wis. Stats. § 30.541 Lost, Stolen or Mutilated Certificates Wis. Stats. § 30.55 Notice of Abandonment or Destruction of Boat or Change of Address Wis. Stats. § 30.60 Classification of Motorboats Wis. Stats. § 30.61 Lighting Equipment Wis. Stats. § 30.62 Other Equipment Wis. Stats. § 30.64 Patrol Boats Wis. Stats. § 30.65 Traffic Rules Wis. Stats. § 30.66 Speed Restrictions Wis. Stats. § 30.67 Accidents and Accident Reports Wis. Stats. § 30.68 Prohibited Operation Wis. Stats. § 30.69 Waterskiing Wis. Stats. § 30.70 Skindiving Wis. Stats. § 30.71 Disposal of Wastes From Boats Equipped with Toilets Wis. Stats. § 30.543 Report of Stolen or Abandoned Boats Wis. Stats. § 30.544 Inspection of Boats Purchased Out of State Wis. Stats. § 30.547 Alterations and Falsifications Prohibited Wis. Stats. § 30.549 Transfer of Ownership of Boats With a Certificate of Title, Certificate of Number or Registration. Wis. Stats. § 30.681 Intoxicated Boating Wis. Stats. § 30.682 Preliminary Breath Screen Test Wis. Stats. § 30.683 Implied Consent Wis. Stats. § 30.684 Chemical Tests Wis. Stats. § 30.686 Report Arrest to Department Wis. Stats. § 30.687 Officer's Action After Arrest for Violating Intoxicated Boating Law Wis. Stats. § 30.12 Structures and Deposits in Navigable Waters  
(Prior Code, § 22.06) 
Sec. 22-57. - Restrictions on motorboats. 
    No persons shall operate on the waters covered by this article any boat or vessel so as to create a wake. 
(Prior Code, § 22.07) 
Sec. 22-58. - Capacity restriction. 
    No person shall operate, loan, rent or permit a boat to leave the place where it is customarily kept for operation on the waters covered by this article with passengers or cargo in excess of the capacity recommended by the manufacturer's rating or, if a canoe, with more than the following number of persons aboard: 
(1)  Canoe 16 feet or under: no more than two persons. 
(2)  Canoe 16 feet to 18 feet: no more than three persons. 
(3)  Canoe 18 feet to 20 feet: no more than four persons. 
(Prior Code, § 22.08) 
Sec. 22-59. - Additional traffic rule. 
    In addition to the traffic rules in Wis. Stats. § 30.65, the following rules apply to boats using the waters covered by this article: 
(1)  Right-of-way at docks, piers and wharves. All boats leaving or departing from a pier, dock or wharf have the right-of-way over watercraft approaching such dock, pier or wharf. 
(2)  Right-of-way of sailboats. Boats propelled entirely by muscular power shall yield the right-of-way to sailboats when necessary to avoid collision. 
(Prior Code, § 22.09) 
Sec. 22-60. - Intoxication and intoxicating liquors. 
(a)  Intoxicated persons not to ride in boats. In addition to Wis. Stats. § 30.68, no person shall permit any person who is so intoxicated as the be unable to provide for his own safety or the safety of others to ride as a passenger in any boat operated by him. 
(b)  Intoxicating liquors not to be consumed on boats. No person shall open or consume intoxicating liquors on any boat. 
(Prior Code, § 22.10) 
Sec. 22-61. - Safe operation required. 
    No person shall operate or direct a boat in such manner as to unreasonably annoy, unnecessarily frighten or endanger the occupants of his or other boats. In addition, no person shall operate or direct a boat in a negligent manner or in any other manner that could endanger the life, property or person of another. Continued violations of this section by a minor could subject the parent, guardian, lessor or owner to arrest and prosecution for contributing to the delinquency of a minor. 
(Prior Code, § 22.11) 
Sec. 22-62. - Swimming. 
(a)  Swimming from boats prohibited. No person shall swim from any boat unless such boat is anchored. 
(b)  Distance from shores. No person shall swim more than 50 feet from the shore unless he is accompanied by a boat containing a ring buoy and a person trained in life saving technique. 
(c)  Hours limited. No person shall swim more than 50 feet from the shoreline between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise, unless accompanied by a properly lighted boat. 
(Prior Code, § 22.12) 
Sec. 22-63. - Littering waters prohibited. 
    No person shall deposit or throw from any boat, raft, pier, platform or similar structure any cans, paper, bottles, debris, refuse, garbage or solid or liquid waste into the lake. 
(Prior Code, § 22.13) 
Sec. 22-64. - Anchorages and stationary objects. 
(a)  Mooring lights required. No person shall anchor any boat, raft, buoy or other floating object more than ten feet from the shoreline between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise unless there is prominently displayed thereon a white light of sufficient size and brightness to be visible from any direction for 1,500 feet on a dark night with clear atmosphere. 
(b)  Regulate anchorage. The park board shall make such rules and regulations governing the location, type and use of anchorages as they deem necessary for the public safety and convenience. 
(c)  Rafts and buoys. No person shall erect or maintain any raft or stationary platform more than ten feet from shore unless it is so anchored that is has at least six inches of freeboard above the water line, painted white and has attached thereto not less than one-half inch from each corner or projection a red reflector not less than three inches in diameter. 
(Prior Code, § 22.14) 
Sec. 22-65. - Markers and navigation aids. 
(a)  Duty of parks department. The parks department shall place and maintain suitable markers, navigation aids and signs in such water areas as shall be appropriate to advise the public of the provisions of this article and post and maintain a copy of this chapter at all public access points within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Standard markers. All markers placed upon the lake shall comply with the regulations of the state department of natural resources or any state statutory provision. 
(c)  Interference with markers prohibited. No person shall, without authority, remove, damage or moor any watercraft to any buoy, beacon or marker placed in the waters of the lake by the authority of the United States, state, village or town or by any private person pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 22.15) 
Sec. 22-66. - Races, regattas, sporting events and exhibitions. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall direct or participate in any boat race, regatta, water ski meet or other water sporting event unless such event has been authorized and a permit issued therefor by the park board. 
(b)  Permit. A permit issued under this section shall specify the course or area of water to be used by the participants in such events. The permittee shall place all markers, flags, or buoys approved by the police chief designating the specific area. Permits shall be issued only if, in the opinion of the police chief, the proposed use of the water can be carried out safely, without danger to or substantial obstruction of other watercraft or persons using the lake. Permits shall be valid only for the hours and area specified thereon. 
(c)  Right-of-way of participants. Boats and participants in such permitted event shall have the right-of-way on the marked area. No person shall obstruct such area during such race or event or interfere therewith. 
(Prior Code, § 22.16) 
Chapter 23 - FLOODPLAIN ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(Prior Code, § 23.01) 
Sec. 23-2. - Finding of fact. 
    Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base. 
(Prior Code, § 23.02) 
Sec. 23-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to: 
(1)  Protect life, health and property; 
(2)  Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers; 
(4)  Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain; 
(6)  Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain; 
(7)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers; 
(8)  Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and 
(9)  Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Prior Code, § 23.03) 
Sec. 23-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A zones means those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A zones. The A zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
    Accessory structure or use means a facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM. 
    Basement means any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
    Building. See Structure. 
    Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by county ordinance and approved by the state department of natural resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and that allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this chapter. 
    Campground means any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or that is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
    Camping unit means any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent or other mobile recreational vehicle. 
    Certificate of compliance means a certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
    Crawlways or crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
    Deck means an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
    Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Dry land access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
    Encroachment means any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or development in the floodway. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for serving the lots is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Expansion to existing mobile/manufactured home park means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
(2)  The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(3)  The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or 
(4)  The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche or by some similarly unusual event. 
    Flood frequency means the probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year. 
    Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a city on which the federal insurance administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. This map can only be amended by FEMA. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means a technical engineering examination, evaluation and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A zones. Flood insurance rate maps, that accompany the flood insurance study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
    Flood protection elevation means an elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see Freeboard. ) 
    Flood storage means those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
    Floodfringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by the floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. 
    Floodplain means land which has been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
    Floodplain island means a natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
    Floodplain management means policy and procedures to ensure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
    Freeboard means a safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed. 
    Habitable structure means any structure or portion thereof used or designated for human habitation. 
    Hearing notice means publication or posting meeting requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. For appeals, a Class I notice, published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class II notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums. 
    High flood damage potential means damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is either: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain, but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
    Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see Development. ) 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more section, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include the term "mobile recreational vehicle." 
    Mobile recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of the term "mobile recreational vehicles." 
    NAVD or North American Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
    NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
    New construction , for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this city and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, the term "new construction" includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.) 
    Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.) 
    Obstruction to flow means any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future similar development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
    Official floodplain zoning map means that map, adopted and made part of this chapter that has been approved by the state department of natural resources and FEMA. 
    Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
    Ordinary high watermark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Private sewage system means a sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the state department of natural resources of commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
    Public utilities means those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in the state. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the regional flood elevation (RFE) is equivalent to the base flood elevation (BFE). 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
    Subdivision means has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12). 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Unnecessary hardship means where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this chapter. 
    Variance means an authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface profile means a graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
    Watershed means the entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
    Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. 
(Prior Code, § 23.56) 
Sec. 23-5. - Areas to be regulated. 
    This chapter regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the flood insurance study. Regional flood elevations may be derived from other studies. Areas covered by the base flood are identified as A zones on the flood insurance rate map. 
(Prior Code, § 23.05) 
Sec. 23-6. - Official maps and revisions. 
    The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as floodplains or A zones on the maps listed below and the revision in the city's floodplain appendix. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) in the FIS or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations (RFE) on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the city clerk. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. The city's official maps, based on the FIS are flood insurance rate map (FIRM), panel numbers 55081C0329D, 55081C0333D, 55081C0334D, 55081C0336D, 55081C0337D, 55081C0339D, 55081C0341D, 55081C0342D, dated January 20, 2010 with corresponding profiles that are based on the Monroe County FIS dated January 20, 2010, volume number 55081CV000A, approved by the DNR and FEMA. 
(Prior Code, § 23.06) 
Sec. 23-7. - Establishment of districts. 
    The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows: 
(1)  The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters. 
(2)  The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between the regional flood limits and the floodway. 
(3)  The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that have been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. 
(Prior Code, § 23.07) 
Sec. 23-8. - Locating floodplain boundaries. 
    Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in subsections (1) or (2) of this section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to section 23-187. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to section 23-183(3) and the criteria in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  If floodplains exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. 
(2)  Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale, visual on-site inspection and any information provided by the state department of natural resources. 
(3)  Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must also approve any map amendment pursuant to section 23-187. 
(Prior Code, § 23.08) 
Sec. 23-9. - Removal of lands from floodplain. 
    Compliane with the provisions of this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to section 23-187. This procedure does not remove the requirements for the mandatory purchase of flood insurance. The property owner must contact FEMA to request a letter of map change (LOMC). 
(Prior Code, § 23.09) 
Sec. 23-10. - Compliance. 
    Any development or use within the areas regulated by this chapter shall be in full compliance with the terms of this chapter, and other applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 23.10) 
Sec. 23-11. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of natural resources of transportation are exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. 
(Prior Code, § 23.11) 
Sec. 23-12. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23 which relate to floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this chapter, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Prior Code, § 23.12) 
Sec. 23-13. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by state law. If a provision of this chapter, required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116 is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 23.13) 
Sec. 23-14. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The flood protection standards in this chapter are based on engineering experience and scientific research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. This chapter does not create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 23.14) 
Sec. 23-15. - Annexed areas. 
    The county floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the county for all annexed areas until the city adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116 and the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the city's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the city zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the location of the floodway. 
(Prior Code, § 23.16) 
Sec. 23-16. - Development standards. 
(a)  The city shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a floodprone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(b)  Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 23.17) 
Sec. 23-17. - Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
(a)  Except as allowed in subsection (c) of this section, no floodplain development shall: 
(1)  Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, increasing regional flood height; or 
(2)  Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost, which equals or exceeds 0.01 foot. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or increase regional flood heights 0.01 foot or more, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of subsection (c) of this section are met. 
(c)  Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be permitted if amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 23-187. 
(Prior Code, § 23.20) 
Sec. 23-18. - Watercourse alterations. 
(a)  No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the state department of natural resources and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(b)  As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the zoning administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or scientific data in accordance with NFIP guidelines that shall be used to revise the FIRM, risk premium rates and floodplain management regulations as required. 
(Prior Code, § 23.21) 
Sec. 23-19. - Development under certain statutory chapters. 
    Development which requires a permit from the state department of natural resources, under Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams, and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles, BFEs established in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted FIRM, or other floodplain zoning maps or this chapter are made according to section 23-187. 
(Prior Code, § 23.22) 
Sec. 23-20. - Public or private campgrounds. 
    Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
(1)  The campground is approved by the state department of natural resources of health and family services. 
(2)  A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator. 
(3)  The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground is such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants. 
(4)  There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation. 
(5)  This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the officials identified in subsection (4) of this section, to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state department of natural resources of health and family services and all other applicable regulations. 
(6)  Only camping units are allowed. 
(7)  The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours. 
(8)  All camping units that remain on-site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section. 
(9)  The city shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to ensure compliance with the terms of this section. 
(10)  All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either articles II or III of this chapter for the floodplain district in which the structure is located. 
(11)  The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued. 
(12)  All service facilities, including, but not limited to, refuse collection, electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Prior Code, § 23.23) 
Secs. 23-21-23-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW) 

Sec. 23-44. - Applicability. 
    This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 23-135. 
(Prior Code, § 23.25) 
Sec. 23-45. - Permitted uses. 
    The following open space uses are allowed in the Floodway District and the floodway areas of the general Floodplain District, if: 
(1)  They are not prohibited by any other ordinance; 
(2)  They meet the standards in sections 23-46 and 23-47; and 
(3)  All permits or certificates have been issued according to section 23-181: 
a.  Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting. 
b.  Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
c.  Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of section 23-46(d). 
d.  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses or classified as historic structures that comply with sections 23-46 and 23-47. 
e.  Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials according to section 23-46(d). 
f.  Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31. 
g.  Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with section 23-46(c). 
(Prior Code, § 23.26) 
Sec. 23-46. - Standards for developments in floodway areas. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Any development in floodway areas shall comply with section 23-17 and have a low flood damage potential. 
(2)  Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to section 23-17: 
a.  A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or 
b.  An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will increase flood elevations upstream or downstream 0.01 foot or more, based on the data submitted for subsection (2)(b) of this section. 
(b)  Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  The structure is not designed for human habitation and does not have a high flood damage potential; 
(2)  It must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
(3)  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
(4)  It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood. 
(c)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and 
(2)  Construction meets the development standards of section 23-17. 
(d)  Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  The requirements of section 23-17 are met; 
(2)  No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is issued by the state department of natural resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 30, and a permit pursuant to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this section are met; 
(3)  The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and 
(4)  The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material. 
(Prior Code, § 23.27) 
Sec. 23-47. - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses not listed as permitted uses in section 23-45 are prohibited, including the following uses: 
(1)  Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open-space uses; 
(2)  Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life; 
(3)  Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts; 
(4)  Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and state department of natural resources-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383; 
(5)  Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812; 
(6)  Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(7)  Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 110.15(3)(b); 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Prior Code, § 23.28) 
Secs. 23-48-23-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF) 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-68. - Applicability. 
    This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 23-135. 
(Prior Code, § 23.30) 
Sec. 23-69. - Permitted uses. 
    Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the Floodfringe District if the standards in division 2 of this article are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in section 23-181 have been issued. 
(Prior Code, § 23.31) 
Secs. 23-70-23-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 23-97. - Generally. 
    Section 23-17 shall apply in addition to the requirements of this division according to the use requested. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32) 
Sec. 23-98. - Residential uses. 
    Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved into the floodfringe area shall meet or exceed the following standards: 
(1)  The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. The state department of natural resources may authorize other floodproofing measures if the elevations of existing streets or sewer lines make compliance with the fill standards impractical. 
(2)  The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation. 
(3)  Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subsection (4) of this section. 
(4)  In existing developments where existing streets or sewer line elevations make compliance with subsection (3) of this section impractical, the city may permit new development and substantial improvements where access roads are at or below the regional flood elevation, if: 
a.  The city has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
b.  The city has a natural disaster plan approved by state emergency management and the state department of natural resources. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(1)) 
Sec. 23-99. - Accessory structures or uses. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, an accessory structure which is not connected to a principal structure may be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation. 
(b)  An accessory structure which is not connected to the principal structure and which is less than 600 square feet in size and valued at less than $10,000.00 may be constructed with its lowest floor no more than two feet below the regional flood elevation if it is subjected to flood velocities of no more than two feet per second and it meets all of the provisions of sections 23-46(b)(1), (2), (3) and (4) and 23-102. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(2)) 
Sec. 23-100. - Commercial uses. 
    Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall meet the requirements of section 23-98. Subject to the requirements of section 23-102, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(3)) 
Sec. 23-101. - Manufacturing and industrial uses. 
    Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is to be erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall be protected to the flood protection elevation using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other floodproofing measures in section 23-185. Subject to the requirements of section 23-102, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(4)) 
Sec. 23-102. - Storage or processing of materials. 
    Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with section 23-185. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(5)) 
Sec. 23-103. - Public utilities, streets and bridges. 
    All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with the comprehensive floodplain development plans; and 
(1)  When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction of and substantial improvements to such facilities may only be permitted if they are floodproofed in compliance with section 23-185 to the flood protection elevation; 
(2)  Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(6)) 
Sec. 23-104. - Sewage systems. 
    All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 23-185, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(7)) 
Sec. 23-105. - Wells. 
    All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 23-185, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the applicable provisions of Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 111 and 112. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(8)) 
Sec. 23-106. - Solid waste disposal sites. 
    Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(9)) 
Sec. 23-107. - Deposition of materials. 
    Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(10)) 
Sec. 23-108. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)  Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities. 
(b)  In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall: 
(1)  Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and 
(2)  Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
(c)  Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in section 23-98. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(11)) 
Sec. 23-109. - Mobile recreational vehicles. 
    All mobile recreational vehicles that are on-site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in section 23-108(b) and (c). A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Prior Code, § 23.32(12)) 
Secs. 23-110-23-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP) 

Sec. 23-132. - Applicability. 
    The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains for which flood profiles are not available or where flood profiles are available but floodways have not been delineated. Floodway and floodfringe districts shall be delineated when adequate data is available. 
(Prior Code, § 23.35) 
Sec. 23-133. - Permitted uses. 
    Pursuant to section 23-135, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or floodfringe area. Those uses permitted in floodway (section 23-45) and floodfringe areas (section 23-69) are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of section 23-134, provided that all permits or certificates required under section 23-181 have been issued. 
(Prior Code, § 23.36) 
Sec. 23-134. - Standards for development in the general floodplain district. 
    Section 23-28 applies to floodway areas, section 23-32 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this division applies to either district. 
(Prior Code, § 23.37) 
Sec. 23-135. - Determining floodway and floodfringe limits. 
    Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which accurately shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures; 
(2)  Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the state department of natural resources to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries: 
a.  A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel, the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed development, and all historic high-water information. 
b.  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information. 
c.  Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream. 
d.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(3)  Transmit one copy of the information described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section to the state department of natural resources regional office along with a written request for technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations and, where applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of section 23-181 apply, the applicant shall provide all required information and computations to delineate floodway boundaries and the effects of the project on flood elevations. 
(Prior Code, § 23.38) 
Secs. 23-136-23-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 23-154. - General. 
(a)  Applicability. If these standards conform with Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this article or any amendment thereto. 
(b)  The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may continue subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this article. The terms "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered an extension, modification or addition; these include painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not include any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure. 
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this article; 
(3)  The city shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent; 
(4)  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 23-98. The costs of elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provisions of this subsection: 
a.  Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition exceeds 50 percent of the structure's present equalized assessed value. 
b.  For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by a non-flood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building may be permitted to restore it, provided that the nonconforming building after repair or reconstruction will meet all of the minimum requirements under applicable FEMA regulations (44 CFR part 60), or the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(5)  A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, the alteration will comply with section 23-46(a), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with section 23-185 are used. 
(Prior Code, § 23.40) 
Sec. 23-155. - Floodway areas. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such modification or addition: 
(1)  Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance requirements; 
(2)  Meets the requirements of section 23-154; 
(3)  Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height; 
(4)  Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 23-185, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; 
(5)  If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards apply: 
a.  The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade; 
b.  The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials; 
c.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
d.  The use must be limited to parking or limited storage. 
(b)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all city ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(c)  No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all city ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(Prior Code, § 23.41) 
Sec. 23-156. - Floodfringe areas. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the city, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the standards for that particular use in section 23-98, except where section 23-156(b) is applicable. 
(b)  Where compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the board of adjustment/appeals, using the procedures established in section 23-183, may grant a variance from those provisions of subsection (a) of this section for modifications or additions using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
(1)  No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
(2)  Human lives are not endangered; 
(3)  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed; 
(4)  Flood depths will not exceed two feet; 
(5)  Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; 
(6)  The structure will not be used for storage of materials described in section 23-102. 
(c)  If neither the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section can be met, one addition to an existing room in a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use may be allowed in the floodfringe, if the addition: 
(1)  Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or variance; 
(2)  Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and 
(3)  In combination with other previous modifications or additions to the building, does not exceed 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the building. 
(d)  All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(e)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this article and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(Prior Code, § 23.42) 
Secs. 23-157-23-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 23-181. - Zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator is hereby authorized to administer this article and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and ensure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(2)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this article and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate. 
(3)  Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(4)  Keep records of all official actions, such as: 
a.  All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved; 
b.  Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations for floodplain development; 
c.  Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments; 
d.  All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures. 
(5)  Submit copies of the following items to the state department of natural resources regional office: 
a.  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments. 
b.  Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information required by the state department of natural resources including an annual summary of the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken. 
c.  Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments. 
(6)  Investigate, prepare reports and report violations of this article to the city attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the state department of natural resources regional office. 
(7)  Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA regional office. 
(Prior Code, § 23.45(1)) 
Sec. 23-182. - Plan commission. 
(a)  The plan commission shall: 
(1)  Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; 
(2)  Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to this article, maps and text. 
(b)  This plan commission shall not: 
(1)  Grant variances to the terms of the article in place of official action by the board of adjustment/appeals; or 
(2)  Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the governing body. 
(Prior Code, § 23.46) 
Sec. 23-183. - Board of adjustment/appeals. 
    Created; administrator not to act as secretary. The board of adjustment/appeals, created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), is authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this article. The zoning administrator may not be the secretary of the board. 
(1)  Powers and duties. The board shall exercise the powers conferred by state law and adopt rules for the conduct of business, including, without limitation: 
a.  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
b.  Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map. 
c.  Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the ordinance standards. 
(2)  Appeals to the board. 
a.  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or state department of natural resources of the city affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records concerning the matter appealed. 
b.  Notice and hearing for appeals including variances. 
1.  Notice. The board shall: 
(i)  Fix a reasonable time for the hearing; 
(ii)  Publish adequate notice pursuant to state law, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; 
(iii)  Ensure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the state department of natural resources regional office at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
2.  Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent and the board shall: 
(i)  Resolve boundary disputes according to section 23-183(3). 
(ii)  Decide variance applications according to section 23-183(4). 
(iii)  Decide appeals of permit denials according to section 23-184. 
c.  Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall: 
1.  Be made within a reasonable time; 
2.  Be sent to the state department of natural resources regional office within ten days of the decision; 
3.  Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the board; 
4.  State the specific facts which are the basis for the board's decision; 
5.  Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application; 
6.  Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the board proceedings. 
(3)  Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries: 
a.  If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined. 
b.  In all cases, the person contesting boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board. 
c.  If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should inform the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to section 23-187. 
(4)  Variance. 
a.  The board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this article if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
1.  Literal enforcement of the ordinance will cause unnecessary hardship; 
2.  The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions, not common to a group of adjacent lots or premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be amended; 
3.  The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and 
4.  The variance is consistent with the purpose of this article stated in section 23-3. 
b.  In addition to the criteria in subsection (4)a of this section, to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met: 
1.  The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation; 
2.  Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE; 
3.  Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. 
c.  A variance shall not: 
1.  Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district. 
2.  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss. 
3.  Be granted for a hardship which is self-created. 
4.  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area. 
5.  Allow actions without the amendments to this article or map required in section 23-187. 
6.  Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
d.  When a floodplain variance is granted the board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase flood insurance premiums and risks to life and property. A copy of this notification shall be maintained with the variance appeal record. 
(Prior Code, § 23.47) 
Sec. 23-184. - To review appeals of permit denials. 
(a)  The plan commission or board of appeals shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include: 
(1)  Permit application data listed in section 23-181(a)(2). 
(2)  Floodway/floodfringe determination data in section 23-135. 
(3)  Data listed in section 23-46(a)(2) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator. 
(4)  Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(b)  For appeals of all denied permits the board shall: 
(1)  Follow the procedures of section 23-183; 
(2)  Consider plan commission recommendations; and 
(3)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(c)  For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the board shall: 
(1)  Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners. 
(2)  Grant the appeal where the board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(Prior Code, § 23.48) 
Sec. 23-185. - Floodproofing. 
(a)  No permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation. 
(b)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed to: 
(1)  Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional flood factors; 
(2)  Protect structures to the flood protection elevation; 
(3)  Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; and 
(4)  Ensure that structural walls and floors are watertight to the flood protection elevation, and the interior remains completely dry during flooding without human intervention. 
(c)  Floodproofing measures could include: 
(1)  Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris. 
(2)  Addition of mass or weight to structures to prevent flotation. 
(3)  Placement of essential utilities above the flood protection elevation. 
(4)  Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve foundation wall and basement floor pressures. 
(5)  Constructing water supply wells and waste treatment systems to prevent the entry of floodwaters. 
(6)  Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity flow basement drains. 
(Prior Code, § 23.49) 
Sec. 23-186. - Public information. 
(a)  Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood. 
(b)  All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be made available and widely distributed. 
(c)  All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real property is in. 
(Prior Code, § 23.50) 
Sec. 23-187. - Amendments. 
(a)  Generally. The city council may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this article in the manner provided by law. Actions which require an amendment include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any change to the official floodplain zoning map, including the floodway line or boundary of any floodplain area. 
(2)  Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain zoning maps. 
(3)  Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain. 
(4)  Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs, increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more. 
(5)  Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.05 or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the city. 
(6)  All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA. 
(b)  Procedures. Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any interested party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. Such petitions shall include any necessary data required by sections 23-135 and 23-181(a)(2). 
(1)  The proposed amendment shall be referred to the plan commission for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the state department of natural resources regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(2)  No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the state department of natural resources. 
(3)  All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body. 
(4)  For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the plan commission or board shall consider data submitted by the state department of natural resources, the zoning administrator's visual on-site inspections and other available information. 
(Prior Code, § 23.55) 
Sec. 23-188. - Land use permit. 
    A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development or any structural repair or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall include: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor. 
b.  Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification. 
(2)  Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot; 
b.  Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
c.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street center lines; 
d.  Location on any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
e.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
f.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps; 
g.  The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study; either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
h.  Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of articles II or III of this chapter are met; and 
i.  Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to section 23-17. This may include any of the information noted in section 23-46(a). 
(3)  Data requirements to analyze developments. The applicant shall provide all surveys and computations required to show the effects of the project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain storage, for all subdivision proposals, as the term "subdivision" is defined in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(3), and other proposed developments exceeding five acres in area or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000.00 The applicant shall provide: 
a.  An analysis of the effect of the development on the regional flood profile, velocity of flow and floodplain storage capacity; 
b.  A map showing location and details of vehicular access to lands outside the floodplain; and 
c.  A surface drainage plan with adequate details showing how flood damage will be minimized. 
The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural development, landscaping, access and road development, utilities, and other pertinent items, but need not include land costs. 
(4)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire one year after issuance. 
(Prior Code, § 23.56(2)) 
Sec. 23-189. - Certificate of compliance. 
    No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conforms to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit; 
(3)  If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is completed. 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that floodproofing measures meet the requirements of section 23-185. 
(Prior Code, § 23.56(3)) 
Sec. 23-190. - Other permits. 
    The applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 4.04 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Prior Code, § 23.56(4)) 
Sec. 23-191. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the city attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the city a penalty of not less than $10.00 and not more than $500.00, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the city, the state or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Prior Code, § 23.56) 
Chapter 24 - PUBLIC MARKETS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

Sec. 24-1. - Mueller Square Park location. 
    The property described as north 100 feet of lots one, two, three, four, five and six of Goss' subdivision of the city, and now owned by the city is designated as the Mueller Square Park. 
(Prior Code, § 24.04) 
Sec. 24-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty as provided in section 25-11. 
(Prior Code, § 24.10) 
Chapter 25 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 25-1. - Title; effective date; citation. 
    These ordinances shall be known as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Sparta, Wisconsin," and shall take effect from and after passage and publication as provided in Wis. Stats. § 60.80. All references thereto shall be cited by section number. This Code may also be referred to by the shortened form "Sparta Municipal Code." 
(Prior Code, § 25.07) 
Sec. 25-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the ordinance: 
    Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
    Department; board; agency. The name or title of any department, board, or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise, shall be read as though the words "of the City of Sparta, Wisconsin" were added thereto. 
    Gender, singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any ordinance imparting the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as males, and every word imparting the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; provided these rules of construction shall not be applied to any provision which contains any express language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or context of the provision may be repugnant thereto. 
    General rule of interpretation. All words and phrases shall be construed according to their plain meaning in common usage. However, words or phrases with a technical or special meaning shall be understood and construed according to that technical or special meaning if such is the intent of the city council. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or employees shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be constructed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Officials; offices. Whenever reference is made to officials, commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the words "of the City of Sparta, Wisconsin." 
    Tense. The use of any verb in the present tense shall not preclude the interpretation of the verb in the future tense where appropriate. 
(Prior Code, § 25.01) 
Sec. 25-3. - Definitions. 
    The following rules and meanings shall be applied in the construction and interpretation of ordinances codified in this Code unless such application would be clearly inconsistent with the plain meaning or intent of the ordinances: 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Sparta, Wisconsin. 
    Code; this Code. The terms "Code" and "this Code" when used in any section of this Code shall refer to the Code of Ordinances described in section 25-1 unless the context of the section clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Council, city council, common council. The terms "council," "city council," and "common council" means the city council of Sparta, Wisconsin. 
    County. The term "county" means Monroe County, Wisconsin. 
    Fine; forfeiture. The term "fine" shall be the equivalent of the word "forfeiture," and vice versa. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. Terms in the singular include the plural. Terms in the plural include the singular. 
    Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
    Person. The term "person" means any of the following entities: natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, bodies politic or any other entity of any kind which is capable of being sued. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any place subject to the primary control of any public agency, including, but not limited to, any park, street, public way, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space and any lake or stream. 
    Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the county governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Wisconsin. 
    Statute. The term "statute," unless otherwise specifically stated, refers to the indicated portion of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
    Wisconsin Statutes and Wis. Stats. The term "Wisconsin Statutes" and its abbreviation as "Wis. Stats." means the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
    Wisconsin Administrative Code and Wis. Admin. Code. The term "Wisconsin Administrative Code" and its abbreviation as "Wis. Admin. Code" means the Wisconsin Administrative Code as amended from time to time. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
Sec. 25-4. - Catchlines, notes, and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, not as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or section of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 25-5. - Conflict and separability. 
(a)  Conflict of provision. If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of the chapter. 
(b)  Separability of Code provision. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof. The council declares that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Prior Code, § 25.02) 
Sec. 25-6. - Clerk to file documents incorporated by reference. 
    Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein and the clerk shall file, deposit and keep in his office a copy of the Code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any person during the clerk's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations which the clerk may prescribe for their preservation. 
(Prior Code, § 25.03) 
Sec. 25-7. - Repeal of general ordinances. 
    All ordinances heretofore adopted by the city council are repealed, except all ordinances or parts of ordinances relating to the following subjects and not conflicting with any of the provisions of this Code: 
(1)  The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the city of whatever name or description. 
(2)  The establishment of grades, curb lines and widths of sidewalks in the public streets and alleys. 
(3)  The fixing of salaries of public officials and employees. 
(4)  Rights, licensed or franchises or the creation of any contract with the city. 
(5)  The lighting of streets and alleys. 
(6)  The annexation of territory to the city. 
(7)  The naming and changing of names of streets, alleys, public grounds and parks. 
(8)  The letting of contracts without bids. 
(9)  The establishment of aldermanic districts, aldermanic district boundaries and election precincts. 
(10)  Tax and special assessment levies. 
(11)  Release of persons, firms or corporations from liability. 
(12)  Construction of any public works. 
(13)  Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main construction. 
(14)  Budget ordinances, resolutions and actions. 
(Prior Code, § 25.05) 
Sec. 25-8. - Effect of repeals. 
    The repeal or amendment of any section or provision of this Code or of any other ordinances or resolutions of the city shall not: 
(1)  By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing at the time at which such repeal or amendment takes effect. 
(2)  Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed or amended, unless the privilege of repealing such obligation or privilege has been reserved by the city. 
(3)  Affect any offense committed or penalty or forfeiture incurred, previous to the time when any ordinance shall be repealed or amended, except when any forfeiture or penalty shall have been mitigated by the provisions of any ordinance, such provisions shall apply to and control any judgement to be pronounced after such ordinance takes effect for any offense committed before that time. 
(4)  Affect any prosecution for any offense, or the levy of any penalty or forfeiture pending at the time when any ordinance shall be repealed or amended, but the right of action shall continue and the offender shall be subject to the penalty as provided in such ordinances, and such prosecution shall proceed, in all respects, as if such ordinance had not been repealed, except all such proceedings had after the time this Code shall take effect, shall be conducted according to the provisions of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 25.06) 
Sec. 25-9. - Keeping Code current: revisor's amendments. 
    As each ordinance or resolution affecting this Code becomes effective, the city clerk shall forward such ordinance or resolution to the revisor, who shall incorporate same into this Code. The revisor shall make no substantive changes to such ordinances and resolutions but may renumber, rearrange and edit them without first submitting them to the city council; and such rearranging, renumbering and editing shall not affect the validity of the ordinances and resolutions or the provisions of this Code affected thereby. 
(Prior Code, § 25.08) 
Sec. 25-10. - Tampering with Code or other public documents and notices. 
(a)  It is unlawful and a violation of this Code, punishable as set forth in this chapter, for any person, with intent to injure or defraud, to destroy, damage, remove, or conceal, any public record of the city, including, but not limited to, this Code. 
(b)  It is unlawful and a violation of this Code, punishable as set forth in this chapter, for any person to intentionally damage, alter, remove, or conceal any public notice, posted as authorized by law, before the expiration of the time for which the notice was posted. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 946.72; publication of legal notices, public newspapers, and fees, Wis. Stats. § 985.01 et seq. 
Sec. 25-11. - General penalties. 
(a)  General penalty. Except where otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of the violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense; penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $5.00 or more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(2)  Second offense; penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense, together with costs of prosecution and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs may be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding six months. The city may use tax intercept or a city-approved collection agency to recover such forfeiture and costs of prosecution. 
(b)  Continued violation. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the city from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(c)  Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of the city, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs. 
(Prior Code, § 25.04) 
Chapter 26 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Authority. 
(a)  This chapter is adopted by the common council under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.23. This article supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23 that relate to stormwater management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats. § 62.234, Wis. Stats. § 62.23 applies to this article and to any amendments to this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same city council. 
(c)  The common council designates the city engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  The requirements of this chapter do not preempt more stringent stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of the following: 
(1)  State department of natural resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33. 
(2)  Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the state department of natural resources under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 151.004. 
(Prior Code, § 26.01) 
Sec. 26-2. - Findings of fact. 
    The common council finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can: 
(1)  Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature. 
(2)  Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants. 
(3)  Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads. 
(4)  Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading. 
(5)  Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers, drainage ways, and other minor drainage facilities. 
(6)  Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks and volumes. 
(7)  Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding. 
(Prior Code, § 26.02) 
Sec. 26-3. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The general purpose of this chapter is to establish long-term, post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to: 
(1)  Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions. 
(2)  Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth. 
(3)  Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger downstream property. 
(b)  Intent. It is the intent of the common council that this article regulates post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the state. This article may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The common council recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the stormwater performance standards set forth in this article is through the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level stormwater management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices or systems, any of which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in conformance with the performance standards developed under Wis. Stats. § 281.16 for regional stormwater management measures and have been approved by the common council, it is the intent of this chapter that the approved plan be used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for the community. 
(Prior Code, § 26.03) 
Sec. 26-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administering authority means a governmental employee that is designated by the common council to administer this article. The common council has designated the city engineer as the administering authority. 
    Agricultural facilities and practices has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.16(1). 
    Average annual rainfall means a typical calendar year of precipitation as determined by the department for users of models such as SLAMM, P8, or equivalent methodology. The average annual rainfall for the purposes of this article shall be the rainfall record for Madison, Wisconsin, from March 12, 1981 to December 2, 1981. 
    Best management practice or BMP means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state. 
    Business day means a day the office of the city engineer is routinely and customarily open for business. 
    Cease and desist order means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit. 
    Combined sewer system means a system for conveying both sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff. 
    Connected imperviousness means an impervious surface connected to the waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious flow path, or a minimally pervious flow path. 
    Department means the state department of natural resources. 
    Design storm means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall. 
    Development means residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land uses and associated roads. 
    Division of land shall have the same meaning as the term "subdivision" in chapter 18. 
    Effective infiltration area means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment. 
    Erosion means the process by which the land's surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Exceptional resource waters means waters listed in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 102.11. 
    Extraterritorial means the unincorporated area within three miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village. 
    Final stabilization means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform, perennial, vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures. 
    Financial guarantee means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the city engineer by the responsible party to ensure that requirements of the ordinance are carried out in compliance with the stormwater management plan. 
    Impaired water means a water body impaired in whole or in part and listed by the department pursuant to 33 USC 1313(d)(1)(A) and 40 CFR 130.7, for not meeting a water quality standard, including a water quality standard for a specific substance or the water body's designated use. 
    Impervious surface means an area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Roof-tops, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples of areas that typically are impervious. 
    In-fill area means an undeveloped area of land located within an existing urban sewer service area, surrounded by development or development and natural or manmade features where development cannot occur. The term "in-fill area" does not include any undeveloped area that was part of a larger new development for which a notice of intent to apply for a stormwater permit in accordance with subchapter III of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 216 was required to be submitted after October 1, 2004, to the state department of natural resources or the state department of commerce. 
    Infiltration means the entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil. 
    Infiltration system means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as swales or road side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only. 
    Karst feature means an area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets. 
    Land disturbing construction activity means any manmade alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. The term "land disturbing construction activity" includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating and pit trench. 
    MEP or maximum extent practicable means the highest level of performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance standard identified in subchapter III or IV of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 151.006. 
    Maintenance agreement means a legal document that provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
    New development means development resulting from the conversion of previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses. For the purposes of this article, redevelopment of sites previously granted coverage by the department under the WPDES general statewide permit after October 1, 2004 as new development, shall be classified as new development. 
    Of the channel means an edge, or point on the landscape, landward from the ordinary high- water mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12 percent continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12 percent or less continually for the initial 50 feet, landward from the ordinary highwater mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark. 
    Off-site means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application. 
    On-site means located within the property boundary described in the permit application. 
    Ordinary high-water mark has the meaning given in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 115.03(6). 
    Outstanding resource waters means waters listed in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 102.10. 
    Percent fines means the percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes through a #200 sieve. 
    Performance standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice. 
    Permit means a written authorization made by the city engineer to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state. 
    Permit administration fee means a sum of money paid to the city engineer by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit. 
    Pervious surface means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious. 
    Post-construction site means a construction site following the completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization. 
    Pre-development condition means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of land disturbing construction activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner. 
    Preventive action limit has the meaning given in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 140.05(17). 
    Redevelopment means areas where development is replacing older development. 
    Responsible party means any entity holding fee title to the property or other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement and maintain post-construction stormwater BMPs. 
    Runoff means stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
    Separate storm sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff. 
(2)  Is not part of a combined sewer system. 
(3)  Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system. 
(4)  Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state. 
    Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity occurred. 
    Stop work order means an order issued by the city engineer which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped. 
    Stormwater management plan means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater after the site has undergone final stabilization following completion of the construction activity. 
    Stormwater management system plan means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale. 
    Technical standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method. 
    TR-55 means the Federal Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service's Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986. 
    Type II distribution means a rainfall type curve as established in the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published 1973. The Type II curve is applicable to all of the state and represents the most intense storm pattern. 
    Waters of the state has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 283.01(20). 
(Prior Code, § 26.05) 
Sec. 26-5. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Where not otherwise limited by law, this article applies to sites having land disturbing construction activity of one or more acres, unless the site is otherwise exempt under subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  A site that meets any of the criteria in this subsection is exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
a.  A post-construction site with less than ten percent connected imperviousness based on the area of land disturbance provided the cumulative area of all impervious surfaces is less than one acre. 
b.  Agricultural facilities and practices. 
c.  Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and fiber optic lines. This exemption does not apply to the construction of any aboveground structures associated with utility construction. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to create, permit, establish, maintain, or allow to be maintained any condition or activity that causes excessive runoff or erosion to adjacent land, public streets, or water bodies. Penalties and remedies may be sought for such activities. Erosion and runoff is excessive when, in the opinion of the city engineer or building inspector, an unsafe condition results in the streets, sedimentation occurs in lakes and streams, environmentally sensitive lands are threatened, runoff endangers downstream property, or the public health, safety, or general welfare of the citizens of the city is otherwise threatened or harmed. Compliance with the standards and criteria in this article shall not bar a nuisance action or other civil action brought by an injured public or private party for damage to property or other rights that were damaged by runoff. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. This article applies to all division of land, land disturbing and land developing activities occurring within the corporate limits of the city; and to the division of land within the city's extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction. 
(c)  Exclusion. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 227.01(1), but also including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under Wis. Stats. § 281.33(2). 
(Prior Code, § 26.04) 
Sec. 26-6. - Enforcement. 
    The city engineer is authorized to post a stop work order upon land which has had a permit revoked or to post a stop work order upon land which is currently undergoing any land disturbing activity in violation of this article. The city engineer shall supply a copy of each stop work order to the city attorney. In lieu of the stop work order, the city engineer may issue a written cease and desist order to any land occupier or land user whose activity is in violation of this chapter. These orders shall specify that the activity must be ceased or brought into compliance within seven days. Any revocation, stop work order or cease and desist order shall remain in effect unless retracted by the public works board, the city engineer, or by a court of general jurisdiction; or until the land disturbing activity is brought into compliance with the chapter. The city engineer is authorized to refer any violation of this article or of a stop work order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this chapter to the city attorney for the commencement of legal proceedings. 
(Prior Code, § 26.13) 
Sec. 26-7. - Appeals. 
    The public works board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city engineer in administering this chapter. The board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial judge done. The rules, procedures, duties, and powers established by the city for the board of zoning appeals shall apply to appeals to the public works board under this chapter. Appeals may be made by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by the order, requirement, decision or determination made by the city engineer. For the purpose of this chapter, an aggrieved person may include a permit applicant and property owners of land subject to this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 26.14) 
Secs. 26-8-26-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-33. - Technical standards. 
    The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak flow shaving and infiltration components of stormwater practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this article: 
(1)  Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the state department of natural resources under subchapter V of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 151. 
(2)  Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the state department of natural resources, other technical standards may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the city engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 26.06) 
Secs. 26-34-26-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 26-55. - Responsible party. 
    The responsible party shall implement a post-construction stormwater management plan that incorporates the requirements of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 26.07(1)) 
Sec. 26-56. - Plan. 
    A written stormwater management plan in accordance with this chapter shall be developed and implemented for each post-construction site. 
(Prior Code, § 26.07(2)) 
Sec. 26-57. - Requirements. 
    The plan required under section 26-56 shall include the following: 
(1)  Total suspended solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from the post- construction site. BMPs shall be designed in accordance with Table 1, or to the maximum extent practicable. The design shall be based on an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls. 
Table 1: TSS Reduction Standards Development Type TSS Reduction New Development (including in-fill) 80 percent Redevelopment 40 percent of load from parking areas and roads  
Off-site drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from off-site shall be taken into account in determining the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP accordingly. 
(2)  Peak discharge. 
a.  By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce the peak runoff discharge rates from the post-construction site, to the maximum extent practicable, as compared to pre-development conditions for the one-, two-, and ten-year, 24-hour design storm. For the purposes of this article, the design storm depths for the one-, two-, and ten-year events shall be 2.5 inches, 2.9 inches, and 4.2 inches, respectively. 
b.  By design, BMPs shall be employed to reduce the peak runoff discharge rates from the post-construction site for the 100-year, 24-hour design storm such that the site BMPs and conveyance systems (including all public or private engineered systems and all natural drainage courses) both upstream and downstream of the site can safely pass the design storm discharge from the site and adjoining contributing drainage areas. For the purposes of this division, the design storm depths for the 100-year events shall be 7.1 inches. For the purposes of this division, the term "safely pass" shall mean: 
1.  For existing stormwater conveyance systems, whether upstream or downstream from the project site, flood elevations shall not be increased. For purposes of this division, unless additional information in the form of a detailed engineering study has been conducted, it may be assumed that flood elevations will not be increased if 100-year peak discharge rates from the post-construction site are limited to no more than pre-developed conditions. 
2.  For new stormwater detention facilities, flow from the facility shall be contained within an engineered conveyance such as a pipe, swale, overflow section, or similar, and shall not overtop perimeter berms. 
3.  For areas adjacent to new conveyance systems (on-site, and off-site both upstream and downstream of the site), one foot of freeboard to the adjacent ground elevation of any existing building shall be maintained. 
4.  For new public roads, no overtopping shall occur. For new driveways and other minor vehicular ways, overtopping depths shall be limited to six inches. 
c.  Pre-development conditions shall assume "good hydrologic conditions" for appropriate land covers as identified in TR-55 or an equivalent methodology. The meaning of "hydrologic soil group" and "runoff curve number" are as determined in TR-55. The runoff curve numbers in Table 2. Shall be used to represent the actual pre-development condition where the pre-development condition is a combination of land uses, the runoff curve number shall be prorated by area. 
d.  This subsection of the division does not apply to a redevelopment site or an in-fill development area less than five acres. 
Table 2 ± Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers for Cropland Areas Hydrologic Soil Group A B C D Woodland 30 55 70 77 Grassland 39 61 71 78 Cropland 55 69 78 83  
(3)  Infiltration. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff to the maximum extent practicable in accordance with the following, except as provided in subsections (3)e through h of this section. 
a.  Low imperviousness. For development up to 40 percent connected imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and low density residential development, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 90 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
b.  Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than 40 percent at up to 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as medium and high density residential, multifamily development, industrial and institutional development, and office parks, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than two percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
c.  High imperviousness. For development with more than 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as commercial strip malls, shopping centers, and commercial downtowns, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume, based on an average rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than two percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
d.  Pre-development condition shall be the same as in Table 2. 
e.  Source areas. 
1.  Prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not be infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to meeting the requirements of this section unless demonstrated to meet the conditions of section 26-60. 
(i)  Areas associated with tier one industrial facilities identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 216.21(2)(a), including storage, loading, rooftop and parking. Rooftops may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority. 
(ii)  Storage and loading areas of tier two industrial facilities identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 216.21(2)(b). 
(iii)  Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. 
2.  Exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirement when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate runoff from these source areas is optional: 
(i)  Parking areas and access roads within 5,000 square feet for commercial development 
(ii)  Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for industrial development not subject to subsection (3)e.1 of this section. 
(iii)  Redevelopment sites. 
(iv)  In-fill development areas less than five acres. 
(v)  Roads in commercial, industrial, and institutional land uses, and arterial residential roads. 
f.  Locations of practices. 
1.  Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located in the following areas. 
(i)  Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet downgradient of direct conduits to groundwater 
(ii)  Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.16(4) or within the separation distances listed in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 812.08 for any private well or non-community well for runoff infiltrated from commercial, including multi-family, residential, industrial, and institutional land uses or regional devices for one- and two-family residential development. 
(iii)  Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 720.03(2) are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur. 
2.  Separation distances. 
(i)  Infiltration practices shall be located so that the characteristics of the soil and the separation distance between the bottom of the infiltration system and the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock are in accordance with table 3. 
Table 3: Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics Source Area Separation Distance Soil Characteristics Industrial, commercial, institutional parking lots and roads 5 feet or more Filtering layer Residential arterial roads 5 feet or more Filtering layer Roofs draining to subsurface infiltration practices 1 foot or more Native or engineered soil with particles finer than coarse sand Roofs draining to surface infiltration practices Not Applicable All other impervious source areas 3 feet or more Filtering layer  
(ii)  Notwithstanding subsection (2) of this section applicable requirements for injection wells classified under Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 815 shall be followed. 
3.  Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices located in the following areas may be credited toward the requirement under the following conditions, but the decision to infiltrate under these conditions is optional: 
(i)  Where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6 inches/hour measured at the site using a scientifically credible field test method 
(ii)  Where the least permeable soil horizon to five feet below the proposed bottom of the infiltration system using the federal department of agriculture method soils is one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay. 
g.  Alternate use. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry, or irrigation or storage on green roofs where an equivalent portion of the runoff is captured permanently by rooftop vegetation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by this section. 
h.  Groundwater standards. 
1.  Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this section shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards application. 
2.  Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, the discharge from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard at the point of standard application. 
i.  Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial, and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to schedule maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance with subsection (3)h of this section. Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil and grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales, or filter strips. 
(4)  Protective areas. 
a.  The term "protective area" means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this subsection, the term "protective area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location. 
1.  For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters, and for wetlands in areas of special natural resource interest, as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 103.04, 75 feet. 
2.  For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a United States geological survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more current, 50 feet. 
3.  For lakes, 50 feet. 
4.  For wetlands not subject to subsection (4)a.5 or 6 of this section, 50 feet. 
5.  For highly susceptible wetlands, 50 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands include the following types: fens, sedge meadows, bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps, shrub swamps, other forested wetlands, fresh wet meadows, shallow marshes, deep marshes and seasonally flooded basins. Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 103.08(1m). This subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been placed. 
6.  For less susceptible wetlands, ten percent of such average wetland width, but no less than ten feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass. 
7.  In subsections (4)a.1, 4 and 5 of this section, determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 103.03. 
8.  Wetland boundary delineation shall be made in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 103.08(1m). This subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been placed. Where there is a legally authorized wetland fill, the protective area standard need not be met in that location. 
9.  For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130 acres, ten feet. 
10.  Notwithstanding subsection (4)a.1 through 9 of this section the greatest protective area width shall apply where rivers, streams, lakes, and wetlands are contiguous. 
b.  This subsection applies to post-construction sites located within a protective area, except those areas exempted pursuant to subsection (4)d of this section. 
c.  The following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area to the maximum extent practicable. The stormwater management plan shall contain a written site-specific explanation for any parts of the protective area that are disturbed during construction. 
2.  Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a protective area, and where no impervious surface is present, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70 percent or greater shall be established and maintained. The adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep slopes or where high velocity flows occur. 
3.  Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention basins that are designed to control pollutants from non-point sources may be located in the protective area. 
d.  This subsection does not apply to: 
1.  Redevelopment sites. 
2.  In-fill development areas less than five acres. 
3.  Structures that cross or access surface waters such as boat landings, bridges and culverts. 
4.  Structures constructed in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 59.692(1v). 
5.  Post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter the surface water, including wetlands, without first being treated by a BMP to meet the requirements of this article, except to the extent that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability. 
(5)  Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable, have BMPs designed, installed and maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, such that the runoff that enters water of the state contains no visible petroleum sheen. 
(6)  Timing. The BMPs that are required in this article shall be installed before the construction site has undergone final stabilization. 
(Prior Code, § 26.07(3)) 
Sec. 26-58. - General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater management measure. 
    The following considerations shall be observed in managing runoff: 
(1)  Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety. 
(Prior Code, § 26.07(4)) 
Sec. 26-59. - Location and regional treatment option. 
(a)  The BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional stormwater device, practice or system. 
(b)  Post-construction runoff within a non-navigable surface water that flows into a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, is not required to meet the performance standards of this article. Post-construction BMPs may be located in non-navigable surface waters. 
(c)  Except as allowed under subsection (d) of this section, post-construction runoff from new development shall meet the post-construction performance standards prior to entering a navigable surface water. 
(d)  Post-construction runoff from any development within a navigable surface water that flows into a BMP is not required to meet the performance standards of this article if: 
(1)  The BMP was constructed prior to the effective date of this article and the BMP either received a permit issued under Wis. Stats. ch. 30 or the BMP did not require a Wis. Stats. ch. 30 permit; and 
(2)  The BMP is designed to provide runoff treatment from future upland development. 
(e)  Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and in-fill areas shall meet the post-construction performance standards in accordance with this section. 
(f)  To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to treat runoff prior to discharge to navigable surface waters. 
(g)  Post-construction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a navigable surface water if allowable under all other applicable federal, state and local regulations such as Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 103 and Wis. Stats. ch. 30. 
(h)  The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, or after a series of the BMPs is subject to this division. 
(i)  The city engineer may approve off-site management measures provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The city engineer determines that the post-construction runoff is covered by a stormwater management system plan that is approved by the city and that contains management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this article. 
(2)  The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions: 
a.  The facility is in place. 
b.  The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the performance standards of this division. 
c.  The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance. 
(j)  Where a regional treatment option exists such that the city engineer exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site stormwater management requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with the city engineer. In determining the fee for post-construction runoff, the city engineer shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment option. 
(Prior Code, § 26.07(5)) 
Sec. 26-60. - Alternate requirements. 
    The city engineer may establish stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if the city engineer determines that an added level of protection is needed to protect sensitive resources. 
(Prior Code, § 26.07(6)) 
Secs. 26-61-26-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 26-79. - Permit required. 
    Unless specifically excluded by this article, no land occupier or land user may undertake a land disturbing activity subject to this article without receiving a permit from the city engineer prior to commencing the proposed activity. The building inspector shall determine whether a permit is required under this article, and if necessary, shall not issue a building permit or construction site permit until the stormwater permit is issued. The developer shall submit a permit application with the appropriate fee as adopted by the common council of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 26.08(1)) 
Sec. 26-80. - Control plan required. 
    Unless specifically exempted by this article, every applicant for a stormwater permit shall develop and submit a plan to control runoff that would result from the proposed activity. If the development is required to receive coverage from the department under the statewide WPDES permitting program and has received the coverage, the submitted control plan and evidence of DNR approval shall accompany the permit application. 
(Prior Code, § 26.08(2)) 
Sec. 26-81. - Review of application. 
    The city engineer shall receive and review all permit applications that are accompanied by the appropriate fee and control plan if required. The city engineer shall determine whether measures included in the plan to control erosion, sedimentation and runoff during and after the land disturbing activities are adequate to meet all applicable standards. The city engineer shall, within 30 calendar days from the receipt of the permit application, control plan and appropriate fee, inform the applicant in writing whether the plan is approved, disapproved, or approved conditionally. Should the applicant modify a conditionally approved plan, there shall be no additional permit fee. The city engineer has 30 days to review the modified plan and issue a decision. Failure to render a written decision within 30 days shall be deemed to mean approval of the plan as submitted, and the applicant may proceed as if a permit has been issued. If a plan is disapproved, the applicant may resubmit a new control plan or may appeal the city engineer's decision to the public works board. 
(Prior Code, § 26.08(3)) 
Sec. 26-82. - Consultant services. 
    If the city retains the services of professional consultants to assist the city in its review of a proposed permit application or control plan, the applicant may be required to reimburse the city for the costs incurred by the city to retain such services. Such reimbursement shall be in addition to the permit fees and other fees paid by the applicant. Such consultants may include, but are not limited to, planners, engineers, architects, attorneys, or environmental specialists. The city may require the applicant to enter into an agreement providing for the reimbursement to the city of the costs, which may be required to include an irrevocable letter of credit or other appropriate sureties equal to the cost of the services. 
(Prior Code, § 26.08(4)) 
Sec. 26-83. - Permit conditions. 
    All permits issued under this article shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements. Any permittee shall be deemed to accept all of these conditions. 
(1)  That all disturbances, construction, and development shall be done pursuant to the control plan as approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  That the permittee shall give at least two working days' notice to the city engineer in advance of the start of any land disturbing activity. 
(3)  That the permittee shall file a notice of completion of all land disturbing activities or the completion of installation of all on-site detention facilities within ten days after completion. 
(4)  That approval in writing must be obtained prior to any modifications to the approved control plan. 
(5)  That the permittee shall be responsible for maintaining all roads, rights-of-way, runoff and drainage facilities and drainageways as specified in the approved plan until they are accepted and become the responsibility of the city. 
(6)  That the permittee will be responsible for repairing any damage at his expense to all adjoining surfaces and drainageways caused by runoff or sedimentation resulting from activities not in compliance with the permit. 
(7)  That the permittee must provide and install at his expense all drainage and runoff control improvements as required by this article and the approved control plan. The permittee must also bear his proportionate cost of off-site improvements to drainageways based upon the existing developed drainage area or planned development of the drainage area. 
(8)  That no portion of the land which undergoes the land disturbing activity will be allowed to remain uncovered for more than two weeks after notice is given to the city engineer that the land disturbing activity is completed. 
(9)  That the permittee agrees to allow the city engineer to enter onto the land regulated under this article for the purposes of inspecting for compliance with the approved control plan and permit. 
(10)  That the permittee authorizes the city engineer to perform any work or operations necessary to bring the condition of the lands into conformity with the approved control plan and further consents to the city billing the permittee the total costs and expenses of the work and operations. 
(Prior Code, § 26.08(5)) 
Sec. 26-84. - Permit duration. 
    Permits issued under this article shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance, and all work must be completed prior to the expiration date. However, the city engineer is authorized to extend the expiration date of the permit if the extension is justified by the large scope of the project or situations beyond the permittee's control, and if he finds that such an extension will not cause an increase in runoff. The city engineer is further authorized to modify the plans if necessary to prevent any increase in runoff resulting from any extension. 
(Prior Code, § 26.08(6)) 
Sec. 26-85. - Permit fee. 
    All permit applications filed under this article shall be accompanied by a $50.00 payment for any development listed under section 26-5(a)(1). This fee may be waived at the discretion of the city engineer for: 
(1)  Projects for which the permittee has received DNR coverage under the WPDES permit program. 
(2)  Projects on public lands or by public entities. 
(3)  Other projects in the opinion of the city engineer which require only minimal review. 
(Prior Code, § 26.08(7)) 
Secs. 26-86-26-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN 

Sec. 26-114. - Plan requirements. 
    The stormwater management plan required under this article shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification; persons responsible for installation of stormwater management practices; and persons responsible for maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party. 
(2)  A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat. 
(3)  Pre-development site conditions, including: 
a.  One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site location and legal property description; predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition; topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed 100 feet; topography and drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used in hydrology determinations to show compliance with performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the 100 year floodplain; location of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project area and delineated pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.16. 
b.  Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required maps. 
(4)  Post-development site conditions, including: 
a.  Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and wetlands. 
b.  Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management measures in the development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and ordinances. 
c.  One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet showing the following: post-construction pervious areas including vegetative cover type and condition; impervious surfaces including all buildings, structures, and pavement; post-construction one foot topographic contours of the site; post-construction drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of maintenance easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; location and type of all stormwater management conveyance and treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainage way; watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant loading calculations and any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site. 
d.  Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. The computations shall be made for each discharge point in the development, and the geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required maps. 
e.  Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the placement and design of stormwater management measures. Detailed drawings including cross-sections and profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and treatment practices. 
(5)  A description and installation schedule for the stormwater management practices needed to meet the performance standards of this article. 
(6)  A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater management practice including the required maintenance activities and maintenance activity schedule. 
(7)  Other information requested in writing by the city engineer to determine compliance of the proposed stormwater management measures with the provisions of this article. 
(8)  All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer to be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and requirements of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 26.09(1)) 
Sec. 26-115. - Alternate requirements. 
    The city engineer may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site stormwater management performance standards under this article. 
(Prior Code, § 26.09(2)) 
Sec. 26-116. - Erosion control elements of plan. 
    The following general principles shall be incorporated during the construction phase of the development: 
(1)  The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time. 
(2)  Such minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time as possible. 
(3)  If at all practicable, temporary vegetation, mulching, or other cover shall be used to protect areas during development. 
(4)  Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development according to the standards contained in this article. 
(5)  Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as soon as possible. 
(6)  Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected and shall be deemed a dominating factor in developing the site. 
(7)  Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary sedimentation basins or other appropriate control measures. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion of the site, a neighboring site, or the bed or banks of the receiving water. 
(8)  Dewatering or other pumping activities shall not discharge directly into a storm sewer system. 
(9)  All waste and unused building materials and construction debris shall be properly disposed of and not allowed to be carried off-site by wind or runoff into a receiving channel or storm sewer system. 
(10)  Each site shall have a graveled entrance pad of sufficient width and length to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by street cleaning (not hydraulic flushing) before the end of each workday. 
(11)  Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if determined practical by the city engineer. 
(12)  All activities on the site shall be conducted in such a sequence as to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one time and the amount of soil leaving the site. 
(13)  All disturbed ground and soil or dirt storage piles shall be contained on the site by filter barriers or other suitable means. The containment measures shall be installed as soon as the disturbance takes place. The containment measures shall remain in place until the site is adequately stabilized as determined by the city engineer. 
(14)  Filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures shall be placed continuously along all side slope and downslope sides of the site. If a channel or area of concentrated runoff passes through the site, filter barriers shall be placed continuously along the channel edges to reduce sediment reaching the channel. 
(15)  Affected storm drain inlets shall be protected with a straw bale, filter fabric, or equivalent barrier as approved by the city engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 26.12) 
Secs. 26-117-26-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT 

Sec. 26-146. - Maintenance agreement required. 
    The maintenance agreement required under this article for stormwater management practices shall be an agreement between the city engineer and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of stormwater practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the county register of deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the stormwater management practices. 
(Prior Code, § 26.10(1)) 
Sec. 26-147. - Agreement provision. 
    The maintenance agreement shall contain the following information and provisions and be consistent with the maintenance plan required under this article: 
(1)  Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the drainage area served by the facilities. 
(2)  A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater management plan required under this article. 
(3)  Identification of the responsible parties, organization or city, county, town or village responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater management practices identified in the stormwater management plan required under this article. 
(4)  Requirement that the responsible parties, organization, or city, county, town or village shall maintain stormwater management practices in accordance with the schedule included in subsection (2) of this section. 
(5)  Authorization for the city engineer to access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater management practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement. 
(6)  A requirement on the city engineer to maintain public records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the party responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater management practice into proper working condition. 
(7)  Agreement that the party designated under subsection (3) of this section, as responsible for long term maintenance of the stormwater management practices, shall be notified by the city engineer of maintenance problems which require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set by the city engineer. 
(8)  Authorization of the city engineer to perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the responsible party designated under subsection (3) of this section does not make the required corrections in the specified time period. The city engineer shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the property pursuant to subchapter VII of Wis. Stats. ch. 66. 
(Prior Code, § 26.10(2)) 
Secs. 26-148-26-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL GUARANTEE 

Sec. 26-178. - Establishment of the guarantee. 
    The city engineer may require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to the city engineer. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the city engineer to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of the stormwater management practices during the period which the designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the city engineer the authorization to use the funds to complete the stormwater management practices if the responsible party defaults or does not properly implement the approved stormwater management plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the administering authority that the requirements of this article have not been met. 
(Prior Code, § 26.11(1)) 
Sec. 26-179. - Conditions for release. 
    Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as follows: 
(1)  The city engineer shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by the city engineer to complete installation of practices, upon submission of as built plans by a licensed professional engineer. The city engineer may make provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various development stages. 
(2)  The city engineer shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section to ensure maintenance of stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by the city engineer, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement. 
(Prior Code, § 26.11(2)) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - PRIOR CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the prior code, as supplemented, included herein. Sections of the prior code, not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances subsequently adopted, see the table immediately following this table. 
Prior Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1.01 1-1 1.02 1-21 1.03 1-22 1.035 1-62 1.04 1-23 1.05 1-24 1.06 1-25 1.07 1-26 1.08 1-27 1.09 1-28 1.10(1) 1-156 1.10(2) 1-157 1.10(3) 1-158 1.10(4) 1-159 1.10(5) 1-160 1.10(6) 1-161 1.10(9) 1-128 - 1-129 - 1-130 - 1-131 - 1-132 - 1-133 - 1-135 - 1-136 1.15 1-60 1.16 1-61 1.19 1-63 1.20 1-64 1.21(a) 1-225 1.21(b) 1-226 1.21(c) 1-227 1.22 1-65 1.24 1-66 1.25 1-67 1.26 1-68 1.31 1-69 1.325 1-70 1.40 1-99 1.41 1-100 1.42 1-101 1.43 1-102 1.44 1-103 1.45 1-104 1.48 1-105 1.53 1-106 1.54 1-107 1.56 1-28 1.60 1-191 1.61 1-192 1.71 1-193 2.01(1) 2-21 2.01(2) 2-22 2.01(3) 2-23 2.01(4) 2-24 2.01(5) 2-25 2.01(6) 2-26 2.01(7) 2-27 2.01(8) 2-28 2.02 2-29 2.03(1) 2-47 2.03(2) 2-48 2.03(3) 2-49 2.03(4) 2-50 2.03(5) 2-51 2.03(6) 2-52 2.04(1) 2-78 2.04(2) 2-79 2.04(3) 2-80 2.04(4) 2-81 2.04(5) 2-82 2.04(6) 2-83 2.04(7) 2-84 2.04(8) 2-85 2.04(9) 2-86 2.05 2-87 2.06 2-1 3.01 3-64 3.02 3-19 3.03 3-42 3.04 3-43 3.05 3-44 3.06 3-65 3.07(1) 3-122 3.07(2) 3-123 3.07(3) 3-124 3.07(4) 3-125 3.07(5) 3-126 3.07(6) 3-127 3.07(7) 3-128 3.07(8) 3-129 3.07(9) 3-130 3.07(10) 3-131 3.08 3-63 3.09 3-67 3.11 3-68 3.115 3-69 3.12(A) 3-97 3.12(B) 3-98 3.12(C) 3-99 3.12(D) 3-100 3.12(E) 3-101 3.12(F) 3-102 3.12(G) 3-103 3.12(H) 3-104 3.13 3-62 3.14 3-66 4.01 4-1 4.02 4-2 4.03 4-3 4.04 4-4 4.05 4-5 4.06 4-6 4.07 4-7 4.08 4-8 5.01 5-1 5.02 5-2 5.03 5-3 5.15 5-4 6.01 1-162 6.02 1-162 7.01 7-1 7.02(1) 7-35 7.02(2) 7-35 7.02(3) 7-35 7.02(4) 7-36 7.03 7-61 7.035 7-62 7.04 7-63 7.045 7-64 7.05 7-87 7.06(1) 7-88 7.06(2) 7-89 7.06(3) 7-89 7.06(5) 7-91 7.06(6) 7-92 7.06(7) 7-93 7.06(8) 7-94 7.06(9) 7-95 7.06(10) 7-96 7.06(11) 7-97 7.06(12) 7-98 7.06(13) 7-99 7.06(14) 7-100 7.06(15) 7-101 7.07(1) 7-131 7.07(2) 7-132 7.07(3) 7-133 7.07(4) 7-134 7.08 7-3 7.09 7-4 7.10(1) 7-152 7.10(2) 7-152 7.10(3) 7-153 7.10(4)(a) 7-154 7.10(4)(b) 7-155 7.10(4)(c) 7-156 7.10(4)(d) 7-157 7.10(4)(e) 7-158 7.10(4)(f) 7-159 7.10(5) 7-160 7.11 7-7 7.12 7-6 7.13 7-2 7.15(2) 7-189 7.15(3) 7-190 7.15(4) 7-191 7.15(5) 7-192 7.16 7-8 7.17 7-5 7.20 7-224 7.21 7-223 8.01 8-25 8.02 8-51 8.025 8-52 8.03 8-53 8.04 8-54 8.05 8-55 8.055 8-84 8.06 8-85 8.06(1) 8-86 8.06(2) 8-87 8.06(3) 8-30 8.07 8-31 8.08(1) 8-230 8.08(2) 8-231 8.08(3) 8-232 8.08(4) 8-233 8.08(5) 8-234 8.08(6) 8-235 8.08(7) 8-236 8.08(8) 8-203 8.09(1) 8-266 8.09(2) 8-202 8.09(3) 8-201 8.09(4) 8-267 8.09(5) 8-268 8.09(6) 8-269 8.09(7) 8-270 8.09(8) 8-271 8.10(1) 8-118 8.10(2) 8-119 8.10(3) 8-120 8.10(4) 8-121 8.10(5) 8-122 8.10(6) 8-123 8.10(7) 8-124 8.10(8) 8-125 8.10(9) 8-126 8.11 8-2 8.13 8-27 8.14 8-26 8.15 8-29 8.16 8-28 8.17(1) 8-173 8.17(2) 8-174 8.17(3) 8-175 8.17(4)(a) 8-180 8.17(4)(b) 8-181 8.17(4) 8-176 8.17(5) 8-177 8.17(6) 8-178 8.17(7) 8-179 8.17(8) 8-173 8.18 8-151 8.19 8-152 8.20 8-1 8.25 8-3 9.01 9-1 9.015 9-2 9.02 9-38 9.03 9-39 9.04 9-3 9.05 9-4 9.06 9-5 9.07 9-6 9.08 9-7 9.085 9-145 9.086 9-146 9.087 9-147 9.088 9-148 9.089(1) 9-180 9.089(2) 9-181 9.089(3) 9-182 9.089(4) 9-183 9.09(1) 9-238 9.09(2) 9-239 9.09(3) 9-240 9.09(4) 9-241 9.09(5) 9-242 9.09(6) 9-243 9.09(7) 9-244 9.09(8) 9-245 9.095(1) 9-205 9.095(2) 9-206 9.096 9-207 9.10 9-8 9.11 9-9 9.12 9-10 9.13 9-11 9.14 9-12 9.15 9-13 9.155 9-14 9.16 9-15 9.17 9-16 9.18 9-67 9.19 9-68 9.195 9-69 9.20 9-70 9.21 9-17 9.22(1) 9-99 9.22(2) 9-100 9.22(3) 9-101 9.22(4) 9-102 9.22(5) 9-103 9.22(6) 9-104 9.22(7) 9-105 10.01 10-1 10.02 10-2 10.03 10-3 10.03(6) 10-6 10.04 10-4 10.05 10-5 10.05(15)(a) 10-61 10.05(15)(b) 10-62 10.05(15)(c) 10-63 10.05(15)(d) 10-64 10.05(15)(e) 10-65 10.05(15)(f) 10-66 10.05(15)(g) 10-67 10.05(15)(h) 10-68 10.05(15)(i) 10-69 10.05(15)(j) 10-70 10.06(1) 10-99 10.06(2) 10-100 10.06(3) 10-101 10.06(4) 10-102 10.06(5) 10-103 10.06(6) 10-104 10.07(1) 10-31 10.07(2) 10-32 10.07(3) 10-33 10.07(4) 10-34 10.07(5) 10-35 10.08 10-36 10.65 10-105 11.07 11-1 11.07(3) 11-2 11.09(1) 11-29 11.09(2) 11-30 11.09(3) 11-31 11.09(4) 11-32 11.09(5) 11-33 11.11 11-3 11.13 11-4 11.15 11-5 12.01 12-1 12.02 12-2 12.03(1) 12-23 12.03(2) 12-24 12.03(3) 12-25 12.03(4) 12-26 12.03(5) 12-27 12.03(6) 12-28 12.03(7) 12-29 12.03(8) 12-30 12.03(9) 12-31 12.03(10) 12-32 12.03(11) 12-33 12.03(12) 12-34 12.03(13) 12-35 12.03(14) 12-36 12.06(1) 12-61 12.06(2) 12-62 12.06(3) 12-63 12.06(4) 12-64 12.06(5) 12-65 12.06(6) 12-66 12.065(1) 12-91 12.065(2) 12-92 12.065(3) 12-93 12.065(4) 12-94 12.08(1) 12-117 12.08(2) 12-118 12.08(3) 12-119 12.08(5) 12-120 12.08(6) 12-121 12.08(7) 12-122 12.08(8) 12-123 12.08(9) 12-124 12.08(10) 12-125 12.08(11) 12-126 12.08(12) 12-127 12.08(13) 12-128 12.08(14) 12-129 12.09(1) 12-157 12.09(2) 12-158 12.09(4) 12-159 12.09(5) 12-160 12.09(6) 12-161 12.09(7) 12-162 12.09(9) 12-164 12.09(10) 12-165 12.09(108) 12-163 12.11(1) 12-184 12.11(2) 12-185 12.11(3) 12-186 12.11(4) 12-187 12.11(5) 12-188 12.11(6) 12-189 12.11(7) 12-190 12.11(8) 12-191 12.11(9) 12-192 12.11(10) 12-193 12.11(11) 12-194 12.11(12) 12-195 12.12(1) 12-214 12.12(2) 12-215 12.12(3) 12-216 12.12(4) 12-217 12.12(5) 12-218 12.12(6) 12-219 12.13(1) 12-247 12.13(2) 12-248 12.13(3) 12-249 12.14(1) 12-277 12.14(2) 12-278 12.14(3) 12-279 12.15(1) 12-280 12.15(2) 12-281 12.15(3) 12-282 12.15(4) 12-283 12.15(5) 12-284 12.15(6) 12-285 12.15(7) 12-286 12.15(8) 12-287 12.15(9) 12-288 12.15(10) 12-289 12.15(11) 12-290 12.18(1) 12-314 12.18(2) 12-315 12.18(3) 12-316 12.18(4) 12-317 12.18(5) 12-318 12.18(6) 12-319 12.18(7) 12-320 12.18(8) 12-321 13.01(1) 13-40 13.01(2) 13-41 13.02 13-42 13.06 13-43 13.10 13-86 13.11 13-87 13.12 13-88 13.13 13-89 13.14 13-93 13.15 13-94 13.16 13-90 13.17 13-91 13.18 13-92 13.20 13-119 13.21 13-120 13.22 13-122 13.23 13-123 13.24 13-125 13.25 13-126 13.26 13-127 13.27 13-128 13.28 13-129 13.29 13-130 13.30 13-131 13.31 13-132 13.32 13-95 13.35 13-152 13.36 13-153 13.37 13-154 13.38 13-155 13.40 13-156 13.41 13-133 13.42 13-134 13.45(1) 13-181 - 13-195 13.45(1)(a) 13-183 13.45(1)(b) 13-184 13.45(1)(c) 13-185 13.45(1)(d) 13-186 13.45(1)(e) 13-187 13.45(1)(f) 13-188 13.45(1)(g) 13-189 13.45(1)(h) 13-190 13.45(1)(i) 13-191 13.45(1)(j) 13-192 - 13-193 13.45(1)(k) 13-194 13.46 13-197 13.47 13-196 13.48 13-199 13.49 13-200 13.50 13-201 13.51 13-202 13.52(1) 13-203 13.52(2) 13-203 13.52(3) 13-203 13.52(4) 13-203 13.52(5) 13-203 13.52(6) 13-203 13.52(7) 13-204 13.52(8) 13-205 13.52(9) 13-206 13.53(1) 13-238 13.53(2) 13-241 13.53(3) 13-242 13.53(4) 13-240 13.53(5) 13-239 13.53(6) 13-239 13.53(7) 13-239 13.54 13-207 13.55 13-208 13.60 13-121 13.61 13-182 13.62 13-182 13.65 13-198 13.70 13-44 13.71 13-45 13.72 13-46 13.73 13-47 13.74 13-48 13.75 13-49 13.76 13-50 13.77 13-51 13.78 13-52 13.79 13-53 13.80 13-54 13.81 13-55 13.82 13-56 13.83(1) 13-264 13.83(2) 13-263 13.83(3) 13-265 13.83(4) 13-266 13.83(5) 13-267 13.84(1) 13-298 13.84(2) 13-299 13.84(3) 13-300 13.84(4) 13-301 13.84(5) 13-302 13.84(6) 13-303 13.84(7) 13-304 13.845 13-124 13.85 13-304 13.86(2) 13-327 13.86(3) 13-328 13.86(4) 13-329 13.86(5) 13-330 13.86(6) 13-331 13.86(7) 13-332 14.01 14-1 14.01(1) 14-3 14.01(2) 14-4 14.01(3) 14-5 14.01(4) 14-6 14.01(5) 14-7 14.01(6) 14-8 14.01(7) 14-9 14.02 14-10 14.025 14-12 14.03(1) 14-32 14.03(2) 14-33 14.03(3) 14-34 14.03(4) 14-35 14.03(5) 14-36 14.03(6) 14-37 14.03(7) 14-38 14.03(8) 14-39 14.03(9) 14-40 14.04 14-41 14.05 14-42 14.06 14-13 14.07 14-14 14.08 14-15 14.10 14-2 - 14-136 14.15 14-73 14.15(c) 14-74 14.16 14-75 14.17 14-76 14.18 14-77 14.19 14-78 14.20 14-79 14.21 14-80 14.22 14-81 14.23 14-82 14.24 14-83 14.30 14-108 14.31 14-108 14.34 14-109 14.36 14-110 14.38 14-111 14.41 14-136 14.42 14-137 14.43 14-138 14.44 14-139 14.45 14-140 14.46 14-141 - 14-142 15.01 15-1 15.02 15-2 15.03 15-3 15.04 15-4 15.05 15-5 15.06 15-6 15.07 15-7 15.08 15-8 15.09 15-9 15.10 15-10 15.11 15-11 15.21 15-1 15.22 15-41 Prior Code 
Section Section 

this Code 15.23 15-42 15.24 15-43 15.25 15-44 15.26 15-45 16.01 16-2 16.02(1) 16-3 16.02(2) 16-4 16.02(3) 16-5 16.02(4) 16-6 16.03 16-1 16.04 16-8 16.05 16-9 16.06 16-10 16.07 16-11 16.08(1) 16-43 16.08(2) 16-44 16.09 16-62 16.10 16-63 16.11 16-64 16.12 16-65 16.13 16-66 16.14 16-67 16.15 16-68 16.16 16-7 16.17 16-69 17.01(2) 17-1 17.01(3) 17-2 17.01(5) 17-3 17.01(6) 17-4 17.01(7) 17-5 17.01(8) 17-7 17.02(1) 17-35 17.02(2) 17-36 17.02(3) 17-37 17.02(4) 17-38 17.02(5) 17-39 17.02(6)(a) 17-67 17.02(6)(b) 17-68 17.02(6)(c) 17-69 17.02(6)(d) 17-70 17.02(6)(e) 17-71 17.02(6)(f) 17-72 17.02(6)(g) 17-73 17.02(6)(h) 17-74 17.02(6)(i) 17-75 17.02(6)(j) 17-76 17.02(6)(k) 17-77 17.02(6)(l) 17-78 17.02(7) 17-79 17.02(8) 17-80 17.02(9) 17-81 17.03 17-5 17.04 17-109 17.05(10) 17-113 17.05(11) 17-114 17.05(1) 17-110 17.05(2) 17-111 17.05(3) 17-112 17.05(4)(a) 17-141 17.05(4)(b) 17-142 17.05(5) 17-143 17.05(6) 17-144 17.05(7) 17-145 17.05(8) 17-146 17.05(9) 17-147 17.05(12) 17-115 17.05(13) 17-116 17.05(14) 17-117 17.05(15) 17-118 17.05(16) 17-119 17.05(17) 17-120 17.05(18) 17-121 17.06(1) 17-106 17.06(2) 17-107 17.06(3) 17-107 17.06(4) 17-108 17.07(1) 17-178 17.07(2) 17-179 17.07(3) 17-180 17.07(4) 17-181 17.07(5) 17-182 17.07(6) 17-183 17.07(7) 17-184 17.7(2)(f) 17-482 17.08(1) 17-207 17.08(2) 17-208 17.08(3) 17-209 17.08(4) 17-210 17.08(5) 17-211 17.09(1) 17-231 17.09(2) 17-232 17.09(3) 17-233 17.09(4) 17-234 17.09(5) 17-235 17.10(1) 17-264 17.10(2) 17-265 17.10(3) 17-266 17.10(4) 17-267 17.10(5) 17-268 17.10(6) 17-269 17.10(7) 17-270 17.11(1) 17-289 17.11(2) 17-290 17.11(3) 17-291 17.11(4) 17-292 17.11(5) 17-293 17.11(6) 17-294 17.11(7) 17-295 17.11(8) 17-296 17.12(1) 17-360 17.12(2) 17-361 17.12(3) 17-362 17.12(4) 17-363 17.13(1) 17-385 17.13(2) 17-386 17.13(3) 17-387 17.13(4) 17-388 17.13(5) 17-389 17.13(6) 17-390 17.14(1) 17-326 17.14(2) 17-327 17.14(3) 17-328 17.15(1) 17-409 17.15(2) 17-410 17.15(3) 17-411 17.15(4) 17-412 17.15(5) 17-413 17.15(6) 17-414 17.15(7) 17-415 17.15(8) 17-416 17.16(1) 17-446 17.16(2) 17-447 17.16(3) 17-448 17.16(4) 17-449 17.16(5) 17-450 17.16(6) 17-451 17.16(7) 17-452 17.16(8) 17-453 17.16(9) 17-454 17.16(10) 17-455 - 17-493 17.17(1) 17-479 17.17(2)(a) 17-480 17.17(2)(b) 17-480 17.17(2)(c) 17-480 17.17(2)(d) 17-480 17.17(2)(e) 17-481 17.17(2)(g) 17-483 17.17(2)(h) 17-484 17.17(3) 17-485 17.17(4) 17-486 17.17(5) 17-487 17.17(6) 17-488 17.17(7)(a) 17-489 17.17(7)(b) 17-490 17.17(8) 17-491 17.17(9) 17-492 17.17(11) 17-494 17.17(12) 17-495 17.17(13) 17-496 17.17(14) 17-497 17.17(15) 17-498 17.18(1) 17-520 17.18(2)(a) 17-521 17.18(2)(b) 17-522 17.18(2)(c) 17-523 17.18(2)(d) 17-524 17.18(2)(e) 17-525 17.18(2)(f) 17-526 17.18(2)(g) 17-527 17.18(2)(h) 17-528 17.18(2)(i) 17-529 17.18(3) 17-530 17.18(4) 17-531 17.19 17-8 17.32(1) 17-556 17.32(2) 17-556 17.32(3) 17-557 17.32(4) 17-558 17.32(5)(a) 17-608 17.32(5)(b) 17-609 17.32(5)(c) 17-610 17.32(5)(d) 17-611 17.32(5)(e) 17-612 17.32(5)(f) 17-613 17.32(6) 17-559 17.32(7)(a) 17-582 - 17-585 17.32(7)(b) 17-583 17.32(7)(c) 17-584 17.32(7)(e) 17-586 17.32(7)(f) 17-587 17.35 17-9 18.01 18-1 18.01(1) 18-3 18.01(2) 18-4 18.01(3) 18-5 18.01(4) 18-6 18.01(5) 18-7 18.01(6) 18-8 18.01(7) 18-9 18.03 18-2 18.04 18-10 18.05(1) 18-34 18.05(2) 18-35 18.05(3) 18-36 18.05(4) 18-37 18.05(5) 18-38 18.06(10) 18-74 18.06(11) 18-75 18.06(12) 18-76 18.06(13) 18-77 18.06(14) 18-78 18.06(1) 18-65 18.06(2) 18-66 18.06(3) 18-67 18.06(4) 18-68 18.06(5) 18-69 18.06(6) 18-70 18.06(7) 18-71 18.06(8) 18-72 18.06(9) 18-73 18.07(1) 18-100 18.07(2) 18-101 18.07(3) 18-102 18.07(4) 18-103 18.07(5) 18-104 18.07(6) 18-105 18.07(7) 18-106 18.07(8) 18-107 18.07(9) 18-108 18.07(10) 18-109 18.07(11) 18-110 18.07(12) 18-111 18.07(13) 18-112 18.07(14) 18-113 18.07(15) 18-114 18.07(16) 18-115 18.07(17) 18-116 18.07(18) 18-117 18.07(19) 18-118 18.07(20) 18-119 18.08 18-11 18.09 18-12 18.10(1) 18-13 18.10(2) 18-14 18.10(3) 18-15 19.01 19-1 19.02 19-2 19.03 19-25 19.04(1) 19-26 19.04(2) 19-27 19.04(3) 19-28 19.04(4) 19-29 19.04(5) 19-30 19.05 19-100 19.05(1) 19-101 19.05(2) 19-102 19.05(3) 19-103 19.05(4) 19-104 19.05(5) 19-105 19.05(6) 19-106 19.06 19-126 19.06(1) 19-127 19.06(2) 19-128 19.06(3) 19-129 19.06(4) 19-131 19.06(5) 19-132 19.06(6) 19-130 19.07 19-275 19.07(1) 19-276 19.07(2) 19-277 19.07(3) 19-278 19.07(4) 19-279 19.07(5) 19-278 - 19-280 19.07(6) 19-281 19.07(7) 19-282 19.07(8) 19-283 19.09(7) 19-280 19.07(9) 19-284 19.08 19-163 19.08(10) 19-173 19.08(1) 19-164 19.08(2) 19-165 19.08(3) 19-166 19.08(4) 19-167 19.08(5) 19-168 19.08(6) 19-169 19.08(7) 19-170 19.08(8) 19-171 19.08(9) 19-172 19.09(1) 19-286 19.09(2) 19-284 19.09(3) 19-284 19.09(4) 19-285 19.09(6) 19-285 19.10 19-230 19.10(1) 19-231 19.10(2) 19-232 19.10(3) 19-233 19.10(4) 19-234 19.10(5) 19-235 19.10(6) 19-236 19.10(7) 19-237 19.10(8) 19-238 19.10(9) 19-239 19.10(10) 19-240 19.10(11) 19-241 19.10(12) 19-242 19.10(13) 19-243 19.10(14) 19-244 19.10(15) 19-245 19.10(16) 19-246 19.10(17) 19-247 19.10(18) 19-248 19.11 19-53 19.11(1) 19-54 19.11(2) 19-55 19.11(3) 19-56 19.11(4) 19-57 19.11(5) 19-58 19.11(6) 19-59 19.11(7) 19-60 19.12 19-31 19.13 19-3 19.14(1) 19-201 19.14(2) 19-201 19.14(3) 19-201 19.14(4) 19-202 19.14(5) 19-203 19.20 19-32 20.01 20-2 - 20-23 20.02 20-1 20.03 20-24 20.04(A) 20-26 20.04(B)(1) 20-89 20.04(B)(3) 20-92 20.04(B)(4) 20-93 20.04(B)(5) 20-93 20.04(B)(2)(a) 20-90 20.04(B)(2)(b) 20-91 20.04(D) 20-94 20.04(E) 20-25 20.05 20-56 20.06(A) 20-57 20.06(B) 20-58 20.06(C) 20-59 20.06(D)(1) 20-85 20.06(D)(2) 20-86 20.06(D)(3) 20-87 20.06(D)(4) 20-88 20.07 20-60 - 20-61 20.08 20-61 - 20-62 20.09 20-63 22.01 22-1 22.02(1) 22-23 22.02(2) 22-24 22.02(3) 22-25 22.02(4) 22-26 22.03 22-27 22.04 22-28 22.041 22-29 22.042 22-30 22.043 22-31 22.044 22-32 22.045 22-33 22.05 22-55 22.06 22-56 22.07 22-57 22.08 22-58 22.09 22-59 22.10 22-60 22.11 22-61 22.12 22-62 22.13 22-63 22.14 22-64 22.15 22-65 22.16 22-66 22.20 22-2 23.01 23-1 23.02 23-2 23.03 23-3 23.05 23-5 23.06 23-6 23.07 23-7 23.08 23-8 23.09 23-9 23.10 23-10 23.11 23-11 23.12 23-12 23.13 23-13 23.14 23-14 23.16 23-15 23.17 23-16 23.20 23-17 23.21 23-18 23.22 23-19 23.23 23-20 23.25 23-44 23.26 23-45 23.27 23-46 23.28 23-47 23.30 23-68 23.31 23-69 23.32 23-97 23.32(1) 23-98 23.32(2) 23-99 23.32(3) 23-100 23.32(4) 23-101 23.32(5) 23-102 23.32(6) 23-103 23.32(7) 23-104 23.32(8) 23-105 23.32(9) 23-106 23.32(10) 23-107 23.32(11) 23-108 23.32(12) 23-109 23.35 23-132 23.36 23-133 23.37 23-134 23.38 23-135 23.40 23-154 23.41 23-155 23.42 23-156 23.45(1) 23-181 23.46 23-182 23.47 23-183 23.48 23-184 23.49 23-185 23.50 23-186 23.55 23-187 23.56 23-4 - 23-191 23.56(2) 23-188 23.56(3) 23-189 23.56(4) 23-190 24.04 24-1 24.10 24-2 25.01 25-2 25.02 25-5 25.03 25-6 25.04 25-11 25.05 25-7 25.06 25-8 25.07 25-1 25.08 25-9 26.01 26-1 26.02 26-2 26.03 26-3 26.04 26-5 26.05 26-4 26.06 26-33 26.07(1) 26-55 26.07(2) 26-56 26.07(3) 26-57 26.07(4) 26-58 26.07(5) 26-59 26.07(6) 26-60 26.08(1) 26-79 26.08(2) 26-80 26.08(3) 26-81 26.08(4) 26-82 26.08(5) 26-83 26.08(6) 26-84 26.08(7) 26-85 26.09(1) 26-114 26.09(2) 26-115 26.10(1) 26-146 26.10(2) 26-147 26.11(1) 26-178 26.11(2) 26-179 26.12 26-116 26.13 26-6 26.14 26-7  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of ordinances included. Ordinances not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 921  6-15-2016 1 12-277-12-279 Ord. No. 922  6-15-2016 1 12-1 Ord. No. 923 10-19-2016 1 7-87 Ord. No. 924 11-16-2016 1 8-231 Ord. No. 925 12-21-2016 1 7-87 Ord. No. 926  3-15-2017 2 17-490 Ord. No. 932  6-21-2017 2 12-2 Ord. No. 933  7-19-2017 1 8-2 Ord. No. 934  7-19-2017 1 7-62 Ord. No. 935(1)  7-19-2017 1 8-2 Ord. No. 936  7-19-2017 1 8-2 Ord. No. 933(amended)  8-16-2017 1 8-2 Ord. No. 935(2) 10-18-2017 1 7-87 Ord. No. 937  9-20-2017 1       Rpld 7-92(10) Ord. No. 938 10-18-2017 1 7-87(26) Ord. No. 939 11-15-2017 2 12-27(a)(3)a. Ord. No. 941  3-21-2018 1-7 Adopting Ord., p. x Ord. No. 942  4-18-2018 1       Added 7-92(14) Ord. No. 943  4-18-2018 1       Added 7-62(87) Ord. No. 946  4-18-2018 2 13-328, 13-329 Amd. No. 33  5-16-2018 13-181  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Wisconsin state statutes. 
Wis. Stats. 
Section Section 

this Code 5.15 1-193 7.30 1-191 9.10 1-25 13.48(13) 16-4 - 23-11 17.03 1-26 17.12 1-25 17.16 1-25 17.23 1-26 19.01 7-224 - 22-1 19.21(4)(a) 3-126 19.21(4)(c) 3-128 19.32(2) 3-123 19.33 3-123 19.35 3-129 19.35(1) 3-62 19.35(3) 3-130 19.35(5) 3-127 19.37 3-127 19.59 Ch. 1, Art. IV 19.81-19.98 2-24 ch. 23 1-227 23.10(1) 9-145 23.66-23.99 1-226 23.67 1-227 ch. 27 8-202 27.08 22-1 27.09 22-1 27.10 22-1 ch. 30 16-10 - 23-19 - 23-45, 23-46 - 26-59 30.01(1d) 16-1 30.11 23-4 30.12 22-56 30.12(4)(a) 16-4 30.121 16-43 30.2022 23-11 30.50 22-56 30.51 22-56 30.52 22-56 30.523 22-56 30.53 22-56 30.531 22-56 30.533 22-56 30.54 22-56 30.541 22-56 30.543 22-56 30.544 22-56 30.547 22-56 30.549 22-56 30.55 22-56 30.60 22-56 30.61 22-56 30.62 22-56 30.64 22-56 30.65 22-56 - 22-59 30.66 22-56 30.67 22-56 30.68 22-56 - 22-60 30.681 22-56 30.682 22-56 30.683 22-56 30.684 22-56 30.686 22-56 30.687 22-56 30.69 22-56 30.70 22-56 30.71 22-56 30.77 1-227 ch. 31 16-10 - 23-19 - 23-45 43.54 et seq. 1-104 ch. 48 9-245 49.26(1)(h) 9-207 59.69 17-270 59.692(1v) 26-57 59.694 17-270 60.80 25-1 61.351 16-1 61.351(6) 16-7 61.351 16-43 ch. 62 1-1 62.09 1-23, 1-24 - 1-27 - 1-60 - 1-63, 1-64 - 1-66 62.09(1)(b) 1-21 62.11 1-61 62.13 1-103 62.14 13-43 62.14(6) 1-105 62.15 13-43 62.15(1) 8-1 62.221 16-1 62.23 1-101, 1-102 - 16-2 - 16-5 - 17-1 - 18-3 - 23-1 - 23-12 - 23-187 - 26-1 62.23(1) 16-1 62.23(2) 17-8 62.23(3) 17-8 62.23(7) 17-556 62.23(7)(c) 13-327 62.23(7)(d)2 16-7 62.23(7)(e) 23-183 62.23(7)(h) 16-43 - 23-154 62.23(7a) 17-2 62.231 16-2 62.231(6) 16-7 62.231(5) 16-43 62.234 26-1 ch. 66 26-147 66.0114 7-223 66.0119 13-265 66.0404 17-141 66.0407 10-6 66.0413 14-77 66.0435 12-1 - 12-117-12-119 - 12-128 66.0505 1-27 66.0517 10-6 66.0607 13-43 66.0615 3-102 66.0703 3-67 - 10-6 - 13-94 66.0805 1-67 66.0809 13-194 66.0821 15-1 - 15-43 66.1001 17-9 66.1001(1)(a) 17-8 66.1001(2) 17-8 66.1001(4)(a) 17-8 66.1001(4)(c) 17-8 66.1001(4)(d) 17-8 66.60(16) 10-6 66.75 3-98 ch. 68 13-266 68.07-68.16 12-161 70.43 3-64 70.44 3-64 70.46 et seq. 1-100 70.47 3-62 70.65(2) 3-64 74.12 3-65 74.77 3-63 77.51(11)(b) 3-97 77.52(2)(a)1 3-98 77.61(11) 12-27 79.10(7m) 3-64 85.13 7-100 87.30 16-2 - 16-5 - 17-1 - 23-191 87.30(2) 16-69 91.01(2) 17-268 - 17-613 106.50 9-17 110.075(5) 7-191 114.136 17-270 118.08(1) 7-4 118.105 7-2 118.16(1)(c) 9-207 118.163(1)(b) 9-206 118.163(1)(d) 9-205 120.12(20) 9-146 ch. 125 12-23 - 12-36 125.02(8m) 9-180 125.04(5)(a)5 12-27 125.07(3)(a)8 12-32 125.12 12-31 125.17 12-26 125.25 12-26 125.26 12-26 125.28 12-26 125.32(3) 12-36 125.51(4) 12-28 125.51(4)(br) 12-26 125.57 12-26 125.68(5) 12-27 134.65 9-145 134.66(4) 9-147 134.71 12-1 139.30(1) 9-145 139.75(12) 9-145 ch. 145 14-137 ch. 161 9-67 165.85(2)(c) 9-145 167.10 9-3 ch. 174 12-283 196.491 17-268 - 17-613 196.58 13-93 202.11 12-158 227.01(1) 26-5 227.45 12-33 ch. 236 1-101 - 18-14 - 18-38 - 18-100 236.02(3) 23-188 236.02(12) 23-4 236.30 18-15 236.31 18-15 236.32 18-15 236.335 18-15 236.34 18-2 - 18-37, 18-38 236.35 18-15 236.45 18-3 254.61(5) 12-24 254.92(2m) 9-148 281.16 26-1 - 26-3 281.16(1) 26-4 281.31 16-1, 16-2 - 16-7 - 18-3 281.33(2) 26-5 281.45 11-1 283.01(20) 26-4 283.33 26-1 323.50 et seq. Ch. 1, Art. V 323.54 Ch. 1, Art. V chs. 340-348 7-1 340.01 7-1 - 7-8 340.01(40) 9-67 341.01 7-1 342.01 7-1 ch. 343 9-67 343.01 7-1 343.27 7-224 343.28 7-224 344.01 7-1 ch. 345 1-227 345.11 7-224 345.20-345.53 1-226 - 7-223 345.26(1)(a) 7-224 345.26(3)(b) 7-223 345.27 1-227 - 7-223 345.27(2) 7-224 345.28(4) 7-100 345.37 7-223 346.01 7-1 346.04 7-152 346.06 7-152 346.11 7-152 346.14(1) 7-152 346.18 7-152 346.19 7-152 346.20 7-152 346.21 7-152 346.26 7-152 346.27 7-152 346.33 7-152 346.35 7-152 346.37 7-152 346.39 7-152 346.40 7-152 346.41 7-6 346.44 7-152 346.46 7-152 346.47 7-152 346.48 7-152 346.50(1)(b) 7-152 346.503 7-92 346.51 7-152 346.52 7-152 346.53 7-152 346.54 7-152 346.55 7-152 346.57(4)(f) 7-35 346.87 7-152 346.88 7-152 346.89 7-152 346.90 7-152 346.91 7-152 346.92(1) 7-152 346.94(1) 7-152 347.01 7-1 347.04 7-190 348.01 7-1 348.15 7-132 348.16 7-131 348.16(3) 7-132 349.07 7-61 349.07(7) 7-63 349.07(8) 7-62 349.10 7-64 349.11 7-35 349.13 7-89 349.21(2) 7-4 ch. 350 7-152 350.02 7-153 350.04 7-153 350.045 7-153 423.201(1)(b) 12-162 423.203 12-162 ch. 449 16-1 - 17-5 ch. 755 1-226 755.01 1-225 755.03 1-225 755.045 1-225 757.03 1-225 757.05 1-226 778.14 1-226 778.15 1-226 778.18 1-226 ch. 800 1-226 - 7-223 800.035 1-227 800.037 1-227 800.09 1-227 ch. 801 12-33 887.01 12-27 895.035 9-70 ch. 938 9-2 938.17 1-225 938.34(5)(g) 9-67 943.01(1) 9-70 946.72 25-10 961.14 9-68 961.14(4)(tb) 9-69 961.573(2) 9-67 ch. 985 12-249 - 16-1 - 16-68 - 23-4 985.01 et seq. 25-10  
