Village of Suamico
Chapter 1
1-Chapter Ordinance Page 1 of 5 Adopted 1-21-08
CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF SUAMICO
1.01 The Village Board .............................................................................................................. 1
1.02 Appointed Officials ............................................................................................................ 2
1.03 Boards, Commissions and Committees ............................................................................ 2
1.04 Interpretation ..................................................................................................................... 3
1.05 Prior Town Ordinances ..................................................................................................... 3
1.01 THE VILLAGE BOARD.
(1) Constituted. The Village Board
shall consist of the Village President and six
(6) Trustees, all of whom shall be elected
from the Village at large.
(2) Term of Office.
(a) Current Officers. Six (6) Trustees
were elected at the first election, and their
terms are as follows:
1. The three (3) Trustees that received
the highest number of votes in the Fall 2003
Election will serve approximately two (2)
year terms, with the term ending with
elections for those officers to be held in the
Spring 2005 Election.
2. The three (3) Trustees receiving the
third, fourth and fifth highest number of
votes in the first election held in the fall
2003 shall serve an approximate one (1)
year term, which term shall end with the
Spring 2004 Election.
(b) Spring Election 2004. The three (3)
Trustees receiving the highest number of
votes in the Spring 2004 Election shall serve
two (2) year terms with the terms ending
with the election for these officers to be held
in the Spring 2006 Election.
(c) Term of Office for Trustees Elected
in year 2005 and Thereafter.
1. 2005 Elections. For the election in
the year 2005, the Trustee receiving the
highest number of votes shall serve a three
(3) year term with the term ending with the
election for said Trustee to be held in the
Spring 2008 Election. The two (2) Trustees
receiving the second and third highest
number of votes in the Spring 2005 Election
shall serve two (2) year terms with the term
ending for these officers to be held in the
Spring 2007 Election.
2. 2006 Elections. For the Spring 2006
Election, the two (2) Trustees receiving the
highest number of votes shall serve three (3)
year terms, with the terms ending with the
election for these offices to be held in the
Spring 2009 Election. The Trustee
receiving the third highest number of votes
in the Spring 2006 Election shall serve a two
(2) year term which term shall end with the
Spring 2008 Election.
3. 2007 Elections. The two (2) Trustees
receiving the highest number of votes in the
Spring 2007 Election shall serve three (3)
year terms which terms shall end with the
Spring 2010 Election.
4. 2008 Elections. The two (2) Trustees
receiving the highest number of votes in the
Spring 2008 Election shall serve three (3)
year terms which terms shall end with the
Spring 2011 Election.
5. 2009 Elections. The two (2) Trustees
receiving the highest number of votes in the
Spring 2009 Election shall serve three (3)
years terms which terms shall end with the
Spring 2012 Election.
6. Thereafter. Thereafter, all Trustees
shall serve three (3) year terms.
Village of Suamico
1-Charter Ordinance Page 2 of 5 Adopted 1-21-08
(d) Village President. The Village
President elected at the 2003 Election was
elected for an approximate two (2) year term
of office, which term shall end with the
Spring 2005 Election. Commencing with
the Spring 2005 Election, the Village
President shall be elected for a three (3) year
term of office.
(3) Compensation. The compensation
for all Trustees and the President shall be as
determined by the Village Board provided
salaries and compensation rates of elected
officials shall not be increased or reduced
during the terms of office. At the adoption
of this Ordinance, the salary for Trustees is
Five Thousand Five Hundred Dollars
($5,500) per year. The salary for the Village
President is Seven Thousand Five Hundred
Dollars ($7,500) per year.
1.02 APPOINTED OFFICIALS.
(1) Appointed officials of the Village
shall be the following who shall not be
elected but shall be appointed in accordance
with General Government Ordinances of the
Village of Suamico.
(a) Village Clerk.
(b) Village Treasurer.
(c) Village Administrator.
(d) Village Attorney.
(e) Village Assessor.
(f) Police Chief.
(g) Fire Chief.
(h) Marshal/Constable Discontinued.
The office of Marshal and Constable shall
be discontinued in accordance with Wis.
Stats. §61.195.
1.03 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND
COMMITTEES.
(1) General. The following Boards,
Commissions and Committees are created to
perform such duties as required by the
Wisconsin Statutes, rules and regulations,
the Village Ordinances, and as determined
by the Board from time to time:
(a) Zoning Board of Appeals
(b) Board of Review
(c) Fire Commission
(d) Board of Election Officials
(e) Harbor Commission
(f) Any other board, commission, or
committee created by the Village from time
to time, pursuant to the General Government
Ordinances of the Village of Suamico.
(2) Boards and Commissions.
(a) Zoning Board of Appeals. The
Zoning Board of Appeals (formally referred
to as the Town Board of Adjustment within
the Town of Suamico Zoning Code) shall
consist of five (5) members appointed by the
President subject to confirmation of the
Board of Trustees for terms of three (3)
years, except that of those first appointed,
one shall serve for one (1) year, two (2) shall
serve for two (2) years, and two (2) shall
serve for three (3) years.
1. The members shall serve at such
compensation to be fixed by ordinance.
2. The President shall designate one of
the members as Chairperson.
3. Said Board may employ a secretary
and other employees.
4. The Board shall adopt rules in
accordance with the provisions of any
ordinance adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§62.23(7)(e).
5. No more than one (1) member of the
Village Board of Trustees shall be a member
of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
6. All members shall reside within the
Village.
7. In all other respects, the Village
incorporates the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§62.23(7)(e) as amended, together with
those adopted rules in accordance with the
provisions of any ordinance or zoning
ordinance adopted pursuant to said Section.
(b) Board of Review. The Board of
Review shall consist of seven (7) regular
members and the Clerk who shall be a nonVillage
of Suamico
1-Charter Ordinance Page 3 of 5 Adopted 1-21-08
voting member and act as Secretary to the
Board.
1. The Board of Trustees shall fix, by
ordinance, the salaries of the members of the
Board of Review.
2. The Board of Trustees shall constitute
the Village Board of Review.
3. One (1) of the Board Trustees and
members of the Board of Review must, at all
times, hold state certification.
In all other respects, the Village adopts
the provisions of Wis. Stats. §70.46 as
amended, together with those adopted rules
in accordance with the provisions of any
ordinance or zoning ordinance adopted
pursuant to said Section.
(c) Fire Commission. The Fire
Commission shall be constituted in
accordance with Wisconsin Statutes,
including Wis. Stats. §62.13, but none of the
specified "optional powers of Board" are
extended to the Fire Commission.
1. The Fire Commission shall consist of
five (5) members, four (4) of whom are
residents of the Village of Suamico and
none of whom shall hold any other public
office of Village of Suamico.
2. Appointments of members shall be to
five (5) year terms; except that initial
appointments shall be for one (1) four (4)
year term, one (1) three (3) year term, one
(1) two (2) year term and one (1) one (l)
year term.
(d) Board of Election Officials. The
Board of Election Officials shall consist of
seven (7) members appointed by the Village
President subject to confirmation of the
Board of Trustees for terms of two (2) years,
except that of those first appointed three (3)
shall serve for one (1) year and four (4) shall
serve for two (2) years. In all other respects,
the Board of Election Officials shall be
governed by Wis. Stats. §7.30 as amended.
(e) Harbor Commission. The Harbor
Commission shall be consisted in
accordance with Wisconsin Statutes,
including Wis. Stats. §30.37 through §30.38.
1. The Harbor Commission shall consist
of five (5) members, at least three (3) of
whom are residents of the Village of
Suamico and none of whom shall hold any
other public office in the Village of Suamico
or in any other municipality.
2. The length of term of each member
shall be three (3) years except that initial
appointments shall be for one (1) one (1)
year term, two (2) two (2) year terms, and
two (2) three (3) year terms.
3. In all other respects, the Village
incorporates the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§30.37 through §30.38 as amended, together
with those adopted rules in accordance with
the provisions of any ordinance or zoning
ordinance adopted pursuant to said Section.
1.04 INTERPRETATION. The wording
of this ordinance has been chosen because of
brevity and to promote clarity. As to all
references in this Chapter, and as may be
applicable:
(a) The masculine gender shall be
deemed to include the feminine gender and
vice versa;
(b) The singular shall be deemed to
include the plural and vice versa;
(c) The term "Village", used either as a
noun or as an adjective, means the Village
of Suamico;
(d) Designation by title of any elected or
appointed official or employee means such
official or employee of the Village of
Suamico;
(e) The terms "State" and "Wisconsin"
mean the State of Wisconsin; and
(f) The term "County" means Brown
County, Wisconsin.
1.05 PRIOR TOWN ORDINANCES.
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0213(2)(a)
(2001-2002), ordinances in force in the
former Town of Suamico not inconsistent
Village of Suamico
1-Charter Ordinance Page 4 of 5 Adopted 1-21-08
with the foregoing Ordinances Section 1.01
through 1.05 continue in force in the Village
of Suamico until altered or repealed by the
Board.
Village of Suamico
1-Charter Ordinance Page 5 of 5 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 1
Ordinance 2008-26 Amending Chapter 1.03(2)(c) (Charter Ordinance) of the Code
Regarding the Appointment of Fire Commissioners.
Village of Suamico
Chapter 2
2-General Government Page 1 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
2.01 Meetings ......................................................................................................................... 1
2.02 Presiding Officer ............................................................................................................ 2
2.03 Roll Call: Quorum and Participation via Telecommunications.................................. 2
2.04 Clerk Pro Tem ............................................................................................................... 3
2.05 Enforcement Authority ................................................................................................. 4
2.06 Appointed Officials ........................................................................................................ 4
2.07 Boards and Committees ................................................................................................ 5
2.08 Public Records ............................................................................................................... 8
2.09 Code of Ethics .............................................................................................................. 13
2.10 Municipal Court .......................................................................................................... 19
2.10.5 Joint Municipal Court .............................................................................................. 21
2.11 Elections ....................................................................................................................... 22
2.01 MEETINGS.
(1) Regular Meetings. Regular
meetings of the Board shall be held at least
twice (2x) during each calendar month, on
such day and at such hour as the Board shall
designate. All meetings of the Board,
including special and adjourned meetings,
shall be held in the Municipal Services
Center, or as otherwise designated by the
Board. Any meeting which the Board
designates to be held shall be a regular
meeting.
(2) Special Meetings.
(a) Special meetings of the Board may
be called by two (2) members of the Board,
in writing, filed with the Clerk at least fortyeight
(48) hours prior to the time specified
for such meeting; the Clerk shall immediately
notify the President and each Trustee of the
time and purpose of such meeting by causing
a written notice thereof to be personally
delivered to each Board Member, if he or she
can be found, or, if he or she cannot be
found, then by leaving a copy of such notice
at the home of such person in the presence of
an adult member of his or her family or, if
notice cannot be given in such manner, by
affixing a copy of the notice in a conspicuous
place at the premises of the Board Member
where it can be conveniently read and by
mailing a copy by regular or other mail. If
the period between the time the meeting is
called and the time fixed for such meeting
makes it not practicable to give forty-eight
(48) hours’ notice, the longest possible
notice of such meeting shall be given each
member by the Clerk, and the notice shall be
signed by at least two (2) members of the
Board. The Clerk shall cause an affidavit
showing service of such notice as herein
provided to the file in his or her office prior
to the time fixed for such special meeting.
(b) Appropriate public notice of any
such meeting shall be given according to
Wisconsin Statutes.
(c) Any special meeting attended by the
Quorum of the Board shall be a regular
meeting for the transaction of any business
that may come before such meeting.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if for
good cause such that twenty-four (24) hours
notice is impossible or impracticable due to
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 2 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
the calling of a special meeting for
emergency purposes, notice shall be
provided not less than two (2) hours in
advance of the meeting in accordance with
Wis. Stats. §19.84(3) (most current edition).
(3) Adjournments. The Board may, by
a majority vote of those present but by not
less than three (3) affirmative votes, adjourn
from time to time to a specific date and hour.
(4) Open Meetings. All meetings shall
comply with the notice and other
requirements of the Wisconsin Open Meeting
Law.
(5) Setting the Board Agenda.
(a) Public Notice. In accordance with
Wisconsin Open Meeting Laws, written
notice of the subject, time and place of any
board meeting in the form of an agenda shall
be given to the public at least twenty-four
(24) hours prior to the commencement of
such meeting unless for good cause such
notice is impossible or impractical, in which
case shorter notice may be given, but in no
case shall the notice be provided less than
two (2) hours in advance of the meeting.
(b) Preparation and Approval of Board
Agendas. The Clerk shall prepare the board
agenda and the board agenda shall be
approved and signed by the President, or in
his absence, the Administrator, prior to
publication and posting.
(c) Placement of Agenda
Items/Removal. The President or any two
(2) Board Trustees may, prior to agenda
approval by the President, request the Clerk
to place an item or items on the agenda. In
addition, the Board may, at any meeting,
direct that certain items be placed on the
agenda for the following meeting or a later
meeting. Once placed on the agenda, neither
the Clerk nor the President shall have
authority to remove the item from the
agenda without the Board’s approval.
(d) Consent Agenda. The Clerk is
authorized to create a section on any agenda
entitled Consent Agenda and then place
matters that the Clerk deems routine and non
controversial and which do not require a
special vote or specific action by the Board.
The President or any two (2) Board Trustees
may, prior to approval by the President,
remove any consent agenda items that the
President or any two (2) Board Trustees
deem controversial or not appropriate for the
consent agenda.
2.02 PRESIDING OFFICER.
(1) The President shall preside. In the
absence of the President, the Clerk shall call
the meeting to order and the Trustees
present shall elect one (1) of their members
as the Temporary Presiding Officer. If the
President appears while the meeting is in
session, the Temporary Presiding Officer
shall vacate the chair.
(2) Duties. The Presiding Officer shall
preserve order and decorum, decide all
questions of order and conduct the
proceedings of the meeting in accordance
with the parliamentary rules contained in the
latest revision of Robert’s Rules of Order,
unless otherwise provided by statute or by
these rules. For purposes of these Village
Ordinances, any references to Robert’s Rules
of Order shall refer to the parliamentary rules
contained in the latest addition, newly
revised, of Robert’s Rules of Order in
possession of the Clerk unless otherwise
provided by statute or Village Ordinance.
(3) Decisions Challenging the Chair.
Any member may appeal from a decision of
the Presiding Officer. An appeal shall be
sustained by a majority vote of the members
present, excluding the Presiding Officer.
2.03 ROLL CALL: QUORUM AND
PARTICIPATION VIA
TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
(1) Taking the Roll; Procedure When
Quorum Not in Attendance. As soon as
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 3 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
the Board is called to order, the Clerk shall
proceed to note who is present and who is
absent, and record the same in the
proceedings of the Board. If there is not a
quorum present, the fact shall be entered on
the journal and the Board may adjourn; or
the President, or in his or her absence, the
Clerk, when requested by three (3) or more
members, may issue a process to a policeman
commanding him or her to summon all of the
absentees to the meeting.
(2) Quorum. A majority of the
members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum. The President shall be counted in
computing a quorum. A majority vote of all
members of the Board in favor of any
proposed ordinance, resolution, or
appointment shall be necessary for passage
or approval, unless a larger number is
required by statute or contract. The
President, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §61.24
(2004), shall have a vote as Trustee on all
matters to come before the Board.
(3) Participation via
Telecommunications. In the event that a
special meeting of the Village Board is
scheduled and a Trustee cannot be physically
present at the meeting due to prior out-oftown
commitments (remote trustee), the
Trustee may participate via
telecommunications under the following
conditions:
(a) There is a quorum of other Trustees
physically present in the Board Room at the
time that the special meeting is called.
Under no circumstances shall attendance via
telecommunications be used to constitute a
quorum.
(b) The Trustee who desires to attend a
meeting via telecommunications shall contact
the President or the Administrator as soon as
practically possible to advise the President
that his or her presence at a meeting will be
physically impossible.
(c) The Clerk will make arrangements to
have the telephone handset available for use
in the Board Room.
(d) The handset or other communication
device must be placed in the Board Room so
that the member not physically present can
hear and be heard by all who are physically
present including the members of the public.
(e) Trustees attending via
telecommunications shall attend the entire
meeting and may not attend for certain
selected items of interest and then
disconnect.
(f) Trustees attending via
telecommunications may participate in
debate the same as any other Trustee and
vote at the appropriate time via roll call. To
avoid confusion, the President as chair will
ask the remote Trustee, prior to any votes
taken, for his or her comments on a
particular issue.
(g) The Trustees attending the meeting
via telecommunications shall initiate the
contact with the Clerk from wherever their
physical presence may be at least ten (10)
minutes prior to the meeting to ensure a
timely start of the special board meeting.
Failure to establish the connection at that
time shall result in the remote Trustee not
being able to attend the meeting. Any fees
associated with this contact shall be at the
Trustee’s expense.
(4) Special Circumstances. During any
attack, quarantine, absence due to travel
restrictions imposed by federal order, or in
the event of Village declared emergencies,
the Village Board shall have at its own
discretion the ability to carry on a voice vote
via telecommunications during a regularly
scheduled or special Village Board meeting.
This includes but is not limited to telephone,
secured e-mail, video conference and video
phone. Under this section attendance via
telecommunications may be used to
constitute a quorum.
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 4 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
2.04 CLERK PRO TEM. In the absence
of the Clerk, a designee appointed by the
Administrator shall act as the Clerk Pro Tem.
2.05 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
The Presiding Officer shall maintain order
and decorum, and may order any person,
other than a Trustee, to leave a Village
meeting if the person has conducted himself
or herself in a disorderly manner and
persisted in such conduct after being directed
by the Presiding Officer to cease the
conduct. If the person refuses the Presiding
Officer's order to withdraw, the Presiding
Officer may order a Law Enforcement
Officer to take the person into custody until
the meeting is adjourned.
2.06 APPOINTED OFFICIALS.
(1) Appointed Officials Generally.
Appointed officials of the Village shall be
those listed below. All appointive officials
shall be appointed by the Board with due
regard to training, experience, and abilities
and general fitness for the office as shall be
determined by the Board. Each such officer
shall serve at the pleasure of the Board
unless otherwise provided by an employment
contract.
(a) Village Clerk
(b) Finance Director/Treasurer
(c) Village Administrator
(d) Village Attorney
(e) Village Zoning Administrator/
Assessor
(f) Chief Building Inspector
(g) Director of Public Works
(h) Village Engineer
(i) Community Development Director
(j) Recreation Director
(2) Employment Contracts. The
Board may, at its sole discretion, enter into
employment contracts with appointed
officials which modify the provisions of this
ordinance.
(3) Protective Service Employees. The
Fire Chief and any other employee who is
subject to Wis. Stats. §62.13 shall be subject
to appointment or removal as provided
therein.
(4) Duties. Appointed officials shall
perform the duties of their appointed offices
as provided by state statute, rule or these
ordinances and the job descriptions created
in accordance with such statutes, rules and
ordinances. The duties of the appointed
officials may be modified by the Board at any
time by adopting modifications of the
applicable job description, by employment
contract or by adoption of an ordinance or
resolution providing for such change or by
modifying the job description pertaining to
that position.
(5) Procedure for Removal from
Office. If the Board determines to
discontinue the employment of an appointed
official, it may do so by a two-thirds (2/3rd)
vote in open or closed session subject to the
provisions of the Wisconsin Open Meetings
law. There shall be no requirement for
hearing or any other process or procedure
unless specifically provided for in an
employment agreement or other written
agreement that has been specifically
authorized by action of the Board.
(6) Terms of Office Abolished. Unless
otherwise specifically provided in an
employment agreement or other written
agreement that has been specifically
authorized by action of the Board, all terms
of office for appointed officials shall be
indefinite.
(7) Village Administrator. The Village
Administrator shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Village,
responsible to the Board for the proper
administration of the business affairs of the
Village, pursuant and subject to the case and
statutory law of the State of Wisconsin and
the resolutions and ordinances of the Village,
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 5 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
and the directives of the Board with such
powers and duties as are delegated.
2.07 BOARDS AND COMMITTEES.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Board/Commission: a permanent
body of the Village whose members are
officially appointed and empowered to
exercise designated governmental functions.
When used in this Section 2.07, the term
Board shall not include the Board.
(b) Committee: an official body of the
Village to which has been delegated
particular duties which are to be performed
in the expectation that such acts will be
confirmed by the Board, or that its
recommendations and advice will be of aid
and assistance to the Board in determining
what acts and functions the Village should
perform.
(2) Creation. The following boards,
commissions and committees are created to
perform such duties as required by the
Wisconsin statutes, rules and regulations, the
Village codes, and as determined by the
Board from time to time.
(a) Ethics Board
(b) Planning & Zoning Commission
(c) Public Works & Utility Commission
(d) Commercial Development
Commission
(e) Historic Preservation Commission
(f) Recreation, Park, Forestry & Trails
Committee
(g) Public Health & Safety Committee
(h) Design Review Committee
(i) Municipal Board of Absentee
Canvassers
(j) Cemetery Committee
(3) Appointments. Members of such
boards, commissions and committees shall be
appointed to regular terms by the President
subject to confirmation by the Board at the
first meeting in May in which the term is to
begin.
(a) Regular terms shall commence on
the day following the approval of the
appointments and shall be for terms as
hereinafter provided.
(b) In the event of a vacancy during a
term, an appointment for the remainder of
the term shall be made by the President
subject to confirmation by the Board.
(c) Members may be reappointed, except
that no person shall serve or be appointed to
a term for which he would become ineligible
to serve.
(d) All appointments shall take into
consideration the qua1ification for members
of the specific board, commission or
committee as established by the Village
Board from time to time.
(e) All members of boards, commissions
and committees shall serve on boards,
commissions and committees at the pleasure
of the Board. Trustee members shall serve
for one (1) year terms while in office and be
subject to annual reappointment by the
President and confirmed by the Board.
(4) Boards and Commissions.
(a) Ethics Board. The Ethics Board
shall consist of five (5) regular members all
of which shall be residents of the Village and
none of which shall hold any public office in
the Village or in any other municipality.
Each member shall be appointed for three (3)
year staggered terms except that the initial
appointment shall be for two (2) three (3)
year terms, two (2) two (2) year terms, and
one (1) one (1) year term. The Ethics Board
shall have those powers as set forth at
Section 2.09 as amended and shall further
have the powers as set forth in Wis. Stats.
§19.59(3)(d).
(b) Planning & Zoning Commission.
The Planning & Zoning Commission shall be
constituted in accordance with Wisconsin
Statutes including Wis. Stats. §62.23. The
Planning & Zoning Commission shall consist
of seven (7) members, one (1) of which shall
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 6 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
be a Trustee and at least five (5) of which are
citizen members who are not Village
officials. Members shall be appointed for
three (3) year terms in accordance with
Section 2.07(3) except for Trustee members
whose appointment shall be made annually
and whose term shall coincide with their
term of office. In all other respects, the
Village adopts the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§62.23 with respect to said Commission.
(c) Public Works & Utility Commission.
The Public Works & Utility Commission
shall be constituted in accordance with Wis.
Stats. §66.0805, but its jurisdiction and
authority shall be limited to providing
recommendations and advice to the Board in
determining what acts and functions the
Board should perform with respect to
management, supervision and operation of
the Village utilities and public works. The
Public Works & Utility Commission shall
consist of seven (7) members, one (1) of
which shall be a Trustee and five (5) of
which shall be residents of the Village. The
term for the appointments shall be three (3)
years except that the initial appointments
shall be for two (2) three (3) year terms, two
(2) two (2) year terms and one (1) one (1)
year term.
(d) Economic Development Committee.
The Economic Development Committee,
will be constituted. The Committee shall
consist of seven (7) members, one (1) of
which shall be a Trustee. Appointments of
members shall be three (3) year terms except
that initial appointments shall be for two (2)
three (3) year terms, three (3) two (2) year
terms, and two (2) one (1) year term.
(e) Historic Preservation Commission.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall
consist of seven (7) members. Of the
membership, if available in the community,
one (1) shall be a registered architect; one
(1) shall be a historian; one (1) shall be a
licensed real estate broker; one (1) shall be a
Board member, and three (3) shall be citizen
members. Each member shall have, to the
highest extent practicable, a known interest
in historic preservation. The President shall
appoint the Commissioners subject to
confirmation by the Board. Of the initial
members so appointed, two (2) shall serve a
term of one (1) year, two (2) shall serve a
term of two (2) years, and three (3) shall
serve a term of three (3) years. Thereafter,
the term for each member shall be three (3)
years.
(f) Municipal Board of Absentee
Canvassers. Boards and Commissions.
Municipal Board of Absentee Ballot
Canvassers shall be composed of the
Municipal Clerk, or a qualified elector of the
municipality designated by the Clerk, and 2
other qualified electors of the municipality
appointed by the Clerk for a term of 2 years
commencing on January 1 of each oddnumbered
year. The municipality may
appoint additional inspectors under
§7.30(2)(a) to assist the absentee ballot
board of canvassers in canvassing absentee
ballots under this section.
1. The Village of Suamico declares in
lieu of canvassing absentee ballots at polling
places under §6.88, the Municipal Board of
Absentee Ballot Canvassers shall canvass all
absentee ballots at all elections held in the
municipality pursuant to procedures
established by the State division governing
elections.
2. The Municipal Clerk shall give at least
48 hours’ notice of any meeting under this
subsection.
3. The Municipal Clerk, no later than the
closing hour of the polls, shall post at his or
her office and on the Internet at a site
announced by the Municipal Clerk before the
poll opens, and shall make available to any
person upon request, a statement of the
number of absentee ballots that the Clerk has
mailed or transmitted to electors and that
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 7 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
have been returned by the closing hour on
election day.
(5) Committees.
(a) Recreation, Parks, Forestry & Trails
Committee. The Recreation Parks, Forestry
& Trails Committee shall consist of seven (7)
members, one of which shall be a Trustee.
Appointments shall be for three (3) year
terms, except that the initial appointment
shall be for two (2) three (3) years terms,
three (3) two (2) year terms, and two (2) one
(1) year terms.
(b) Public Health & Safety Committee.
The Public Health & Safety Committee shall
consist of five (5) regular members, one (1)
of which shall be a Trustee. Appointments
shall be for three (3) year staggered terms,
except that the initial appointment shall be
for two (2) three (3) years terms, two (2)
two (2) year terms, and one (1) one (1) year
term.
(c) Design Review Committee. The
Design Review Committee shall consist of
three regular members, one of which shall be
a Trustee, one of which shall be the Village
Zoning Administrator and one of which shall
be an appointed Village citizen.
Appointments shall be for 3-year terms. The
Committee is to meet on an as needed basis.
All decisions shall be by unanimous (3-0)
approval. Any 2-1 vote in favor of, shall go
to the Village Board for final approval.
Anything less will be considered denied.
(d) Other Committees. The Board may
create such other advisory or ad hoc
committees for such period of time, for such
purposes, and of such size as it shall
determine from time to time. Any
appointments to such committees shall be
made by the President subject to
confirmation of the Board in accordance
with Section 2.07(3).
(e) The Cemetery Committee shall
consist of five (5) members. One member
shall be a Trustee. Three members shall be
appointed by the Village President, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board for terms
of three (3) years. The Cemetery Sexton
shall be the fifth member. The terms shall be
staggered, so one member is appointed each
year. The term of each member shall
commence February 1, following
appointment. All members must be Village
residents (see 2.07(6)(e) of the Village
Code) with the exception of the appointment
of the Sexton and, at the commencement of
the Committee, non-resident Robert Vickery
shall be an initial member of the Committee
due to his immediate prior service as
Suamico Cemetery Association President.
The Cemetery Committee, subject to
approval of the Village Board, will adopt
rules and regulations for the operation and
maintenance of any municipal cemetery,
including the cemetery grounds previously
maintained by the now dissolved Suamico
Cemetery Association.
(6) Miscellaneous. Each committee,
board and commission shall elect its
President annually at its first regular meeting
held after May 1. No person shall be elected
or act as President for more than two (2)
consecutive years, but such person may act
as President for more than two (2) years
during his or her tenure of all terms he or she
may serve on such committee, board or
commission.
(a) Compensation.
1. Trustees attending meetings under
Section 2.07 shall not count said meetings
toward their attendance compensation
package of attending thirty (30) meetings for
pay.
2. Compensation for citizen and Trustee
members of boards, commissions and
committees shall be as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board.
(b) Notice. Notice of all meetings shall
comply with the notice and other
requirements of the Wisconsin Open
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 8 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
Meetings Law.
(c) Information Request. Any board,
commission or committee may request any
Village officer to confer with it and supply
information needed in connection with any
matter pending before it. Every such request
shall be in writing furnished to the
appropriate officer with a copy to the Clerk,
at least seventy-two (72) hours before the
expected return or meeting date.
(d) Quorum. A majority of the members
of any board, commission or committee shall
constitute a quorum. If there is not a
quorum present at a meeting, the fact shall
be entered in the minutes and the board,
commission or committee may adjourn.
However, there shall be no adjournment until
such time as fifteen (15) minutes has elapsed
after the scheduled commencement of a
meeting. If a quorum is present, a majority
vote of all members present shall be
necessary for passage or approval of any
matter coming before the board, commission
or committee unless otherwise set forth in
state statute or Village ordinance.
(e) Residency. With respect to any
appointment herein, unless required
otherwise by state statute or Village
ordinance, all appointed members of any
Village board, commission or committee
shall be residents of the Village.
(f) Brown County Plan Commission.
The Village shall make its appointment in
accordance with Section 2.07(c) to the
Brown County Plan Commission.
(g) Advance Green Bay. The Village
shall make its appointment in accordance
with Section 2.07(3) to the Advance Board
of Directors.
(h) Compensation for the Zoning Board
of Appeals and the Board of Review. As
required to be set by ordinance in section
1.03(2)(a.1) and 1.03(2)(b.1) respectively,
shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board.
(i) Absence from Meetings. Board,
commission and committee members who
miss more than three (3) consecutive
meetings shall be considered by the President
for recommendation for removal from office.
This removal shall be subject to
confirmation by the Board.
(j) Compensation for Village Board
Members. The compensation for all
Trustees and the President shall be as
determined by the Board in accordance with
Village Code Section 1.01 (3). Effective
with the April 2008 Election, the salary of
the President shall be eight thousand five
hundred dollars ($8,500) per year beginning
with the next term of office at which the
President is elected.
2.08 PUBLIC RECORDS.
(1) Declaration of Policy. In
recognition of the fact that a representative
government is dependent upon an informed
electorate, it is declared to be the public
policy of this Village that all persons are
entitled to the greatest possible information
regarding the affairs of government and the
official acts of those officers and employees
who represent them. Further, providing
persons with such information is declared to
be an essential function of a representative
government and an integral part of the
routine duties of officers and employees
whose responsibility it is to provide such
information.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Authority. Any of the following
Village entities having custody of a Village
record: an office, elected or appointed
official, agency, board, commission,
committee, council, department or public
body corporate and politic created by
constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or
a formally constituted subunit of the
forgoing.
(b) Custodian. That officer, department
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 9 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
head, division head or employee of the
Village designated under Section 2.08 (4) or
otherwise responsible by law to keep such
records in his or her office, who is lawfully in
possession or entitled to possession of such
public records and is required by this section
to respond to requests for access to such
records.
(c) Record. Any material on which
written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or
electromagnetic information is recorded or
preserved, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, which has been created or is
being kept by an authority. Record includes,
but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or
printed pages, maps, charts, photographs,
films, recordings, tapes (including computer
tapes), and computer printouts. Record does
not include drafts, notes, preliminary
computations and like materials prepared for
the originator's personal use or prepared by
the originator in the name of a person for
whom the originator is working; materials
which are purely the personal property of the
custodian and have no relation to his or her
office; materials to which access is limited by
copyright, patent or bequest; and published
materials in the possession of an authority
other than a public library which are available
for sale, or which are available for inspection
at a public library.
(3) Duty to Maintain Records.
(a) Except as provided under Section
2.08 (3), each officer and employee of the
Village shall safely keep and preserve all
records received from his or her predecessor
or other persons and required by law to be
filed, deposited or kept in his or her office or
which are in the lawful possession or control
of the officer or employee or his or her
deputies, or to the possession or control of
which he or she may be lawfully entitled as
such officer or employee.
(b) Upon the expiration of an officer's
term of office or an employee's term of
employment, or whenever the office or
position of employment becomes vacant,
each such officer or employee shall deliver to
his successor all records then in his or her
custody and the successor shall receipt to the
officer or employee who shall file such
receipt with the Clerk. If a vacancy occurs
before a successor is selected or qualifies,
such records shall be delivered to and
receipted for by the Clerk, on behalf of the
successor, to be delivered to such successor
upon the latter's receipt.
(4) Legal Custodians.
(a) Each elected or appointed official is
the legal custodian of his or her records and
the records of his or her office, but the
official may designate an employee of his or
her staff to act as the legal custodian.
(b) Unless otherwise prohibited by law,
the Clerk or his or her designee shall act as
legal custodian for the Board and for any
committees, commissions, boards or other
authorities created by ordinance or
resolution of the Board.
(c) For every authority not specified in
Section 2.08 (4) (a) and (b), the authority's
chief administrative officer is the legal
custodian for the authority, but the officer
may designate an employee of his or her staff
to act as the legal custodian.
(d) Each legal custodian shall name a
person to act as legal custodian in his or her
absence or the absence of his or her
designee.
(e) The legal custodian shall have full
legal power to render decisions and to carry
out the duties of an authority under Wis.
Stats. Ch. 19, Sub. Ch. II and this section.
The designation of a legal custodian does not
affect the powers and duties of an authority
under this section.
(5) Public Access to Records.
(a) Except as provided in Section 2.08
(2) of this chapter, any person has a right to
inspect a record and to make or receive a
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 10 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
copy of the record in the presence of the
custodian or receive a copy of any record as
provided in Wis. Stats. §19.35(1).
(b) Records will be available for
inspection and copying during all regular
business hours.
(c) If regular office hours are not
maintained at the location where records are
kept, the records will be available for
inspection and copying upon at least fortyeight
(48) hours’ advance notice of intent to
inspect or copy.
(d) A requester shall be permitted to use
facilities comparable to those available to
Village employees to inspect, copy or
abstract a record.
(e) The legal custodian may require
supervision during inspection or may impose
other reasonable restrictions on the manner
of access to an original record if the record is
irreplaceable or easily damaged.
(f) A requester shall be charged a fee to
defray the cost of locating and copying
records as follows:
1. The cost of photocopying shall be
calculated not to exceed the actual,
necessary and direct cost of reproduction.
2. If the form of a written record does
not permit copying, the actual and necessary
cost of photographing and photographic
processing shall be charged.
3. The actual full cost of providing a
copy of other records not in printed form on
paper, such as films, computer printouts and
audiotapes or videotapes, shall be charged.
4. If mailing or shipping is necessary, the
actual cost thereof shall also be charged.
5. There shall be no charge for locating
a record unless the actual cost therefor
exceeds fifty dollars ($50), in which case the
actual cost shall be determined by the legal
custodian and billed to the requester.
6. The legal custodian shall estimate the
cost of all applicable fees and may require a
cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if
such estimate exceeds five dollars ($5).
7. Elected and appointed officials of the
Village shall not be required to pay for public
records they may reasonably require for the
proper performance of their official duties.
8. The legal custodian may provide
copies of a record without charge or at a
reduced charge where he or she determines
that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the
public interest.
(g) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §19.34 and
the guidelines therein listed, each authority
shall adopt, prominently display and make
available for inspection and copying at its
offices, for the guidance of the public, a
notice containing a description of its
organization and the established times and
places which, the legal custodian from
whom, and the methods whereby, the public
may obtain information and access to records
in its custody, make requests for records, or
obtain copies of records, and the costs
thereof. Each authority shall also
prominently display at its offices, for the
guidance of the public, a copy of Sections
2.08 (5), (6), and (7). This section does not
apply to members of the Board.
(6) Access Procedures.
(a) A request to inspect or copy a record
shall be made to the legal custodian. A
request shall be deemed sufficient if it
reasonably describes the requested record or
the information requested. However, a
request for a record without a reasonable
limitation as to subject matter or length of
time represented by the record does not
constitute a sufficient request. A request
may be made orally, but a request must be in
writing before an action to enforce the
request is commenced under Wis. Stats.
§19.37. Except as provided below, no
request may be refused because the person
making the request is unwilling to be
identified or to state the purpose of the
request. No request may be refused because
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 11 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
the request is received by mail, unless
prepayment of a fee is required under
Section 2.08 (5) (f) 5. A requester may be
required to show acceptable identification
whenever the requested record is kept at a
private residence or whenever security
reasons or federal law or regulations so
require.
(b) Each custodian, upon request for any
record, shall, as soon as practicable and
without delay, either fill the request or notify
the requester of the authority's determination
to deny the request in whole or in part and
the reasons therefore. If the legal custodian,
after conferring with the Village Attorney,
determines that a written request is so
general as to be unduly time consuming, the
party making the request may first be
required to itemize his or her request in a
manner which would permit reasonable
compliance.
(c) A request for a record may be denied
as provided in Section 2.08 (7). If a request
is made orally, the request may be denied
orally unless a demand for a written
statement of the reasons denying the request
is made by the requester within five (5)
business days of the oral denial. If a written
request is denied in whole or in part, the
requester shall receive a written statement of
the reasons for denying the request. Every
written denial of a request shall inform the
requester that if the request for the record
was made in writing, then the determination
is subject to review upon petition for a writ
of mandamus under Wis. Stats. §19.37(1), or
upon application to the Attorney General or
a district attorney.
(7) Limitations on Right to Access.
(a) The Village hereby adopts Wis.
Stats. §19.36. The following records are
exempt from inspection under this section:
1. Records specifically exempted from
disclosure by state or federal law or
authorized to be exempted from disclosure
by state law.
2. Any record relating to investigative
information for law enforcement purposes if
federal law or regulations require exemption
from disclosure or if exemption from
disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by
the state.
3. Computer programs, although the
material used as input for a computer
program or the material produced as a
product of the computer program is subject
to inspection.
4. A record or any portion of a record
containing information qualifying as a
common law trade secret.
(b) As provided by Wis. Stats. §43.30,
public library circulation records are exempt
from inspection under this section.
(c) In responding to a request for
inspection or copying of a record which is
not specifically exempt from disclosure, the
legal custodian, after conferring with the
Village Attorney, may deny the request, in
whole or in part, only if he or she determines
that the harm to the public interest resulting
from disclosure would outweigh the public
interest in full access to the requested record.
Examples of matters for which disclosure
may be refused include, but are not limited
to, the following:
1. Records obtained under official
pledges of confidentiality which were
necessary and given in order to obtain the
information contained in them.
2. Records of current deliberations after
a quasi-judicial hearing.
3. Records of current deliberations
regarding any Village officer or employee
concerning employment, dismissal,
demotion, compensation, performance or
discipline, or the investigation of charges
against a Village officer or employee, unless
such officer or employee consents to such
disclosure.
4. Records concerning current strategy
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 12 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
for crime detection or prevention.
5. Records of current deliberations or
negotiations on the purchase of Village
property, investing of Village funds or other
Village business whenever competitive or
bargaining reasons require nondisclosure.
6. Financial, medical, social or personal
histories or disciplinary data of specific
persons which, if disclosed, would be likely
to have a substantial adverse effect upon the
reputation of any person referred to in such
history or data.
7. Communications between legal
counsel for the Village and any officer, agent
or employee of the Village, when advice is
being rendered concerning strategy with
respect to current litigation in which the
Village or any of its officers, agents or
employees is or is likely to become involved,
or communications which are privileged
under Wis. Stats. §905.03.
(d) If a record contains information that
may be made public and information that
may not be made public, the custodian of the
record shall provide the information that may
be made public and delete the information
that may not be made public from the record
before release. The custodian shall confer
with the Village Attorney prior to releasing
any such record and shall follow guidance of
the Village Attorney when separating out the
exempt material. If, in the judgment of the
custodian and the Village Attorney, there is
no feasible way to separate the exempt
material from the nonexempt material
without unreasonably jeopardizing
nondisclosure of exempt material, the entire
record shall be withheld from disclosure.
(e) Confidentiality of income and
expenses provided to assessor for assessment
purposes.
1. Adoption. This ordinance adopts by
reference Wis. Statutes §70.47 (7)(af).
Income and expense information provided by
a property owner to an assessor for the
purposes of establishing the valuation for
assessment purposes by the income method
of valuation shall be confidential and not a
public record open to inspection or copying
under §19.35 (1) of Wis. Statutes.
2. Exceptions. An officer may make
disclosure of such information under the
following circumstances:
a. The assessor has access to such
information in the performance of his/her
duties;
b. The board of review may review such
information when needed, in its’ opinion, to
decide upon a contested assessment;
c. Another person or body has the right
to review such information due to the
intimate relationship to the duties of an office
or as set by law;
d. The officer is complying with a court
order;
e. The person providing the income and
expense information has contested the
assessment level at either the board of review
or by filing a claim for excessive assessment
under §74.37, in which case the base records
are open and public.
3. Severability. The several sections of
this ordinance are declared to be severable.
If any section or portion thereof shall be
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the decision, and shall not affect the
validity of any other provisions, sections, or
portions thereof of the ordinance. The
remainder of the ordinance shall remain in
full force and effect. Any other ordinances
whose terms are in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby
repealed as to those terms that conflict.
(8) Destruction of Records.
(a) Village officers may destroy the
following non-utility financial records of
which they are the legal custodians and
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 13 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
which are considered obsolete, after
completion of any required audit by the
Bureau of Municipal Audit or an auditor
licensed under Wis. Stats. Ch. 442, but not
less than seven (7) years after payment or
receipt of any sum involved in the particular
transaction, unless a shorter period has been
fixed by the State Public Records Board
pursuant to Wis. Stats. §16.61(3)(e), and
then after such shorter period.
1. Bank statements, deposit books, slips
and stubs.
2. Bonds and coupons after maturity.
3. Cancelled checks, duplicates and
check stubs.
4. License and permit applications, stubs
and duplicates.
5. Official bonds.
6. Payrolls and other time and
employment records of personnel included
under the Wisconsin Retirement Plan.
7. Receipt forms.
8. Special assessment records.
9. Vouchers, requisitions, purchase
orders and all other supporting documents
pertaining thereto.
(b) Village officers may destroy the
following records of which they are the legal
custodian and which are considered obsolete,
but not less than seven (7) years after the
record was effective unless another period
has been set by statute, and then after such
period, or unless a shorter period has been
fixed by the State Public Records Board
pursuant to Wis. Stats. §16.61(3)(e), and
then after such a shorter period:
1. Assessment rolls and related records,
including Board of Review minutes.
2. Contracts and papers relating thereto.
3. Correspondence and communications.
4. Financial reports other than annual
financial reports.
5. Insurance policies.
6. Oaths of office.
7. Reports of boards, commissions,
committees and officials duplicated in
council minutes.
8. Petitions.
9. Election notices.
10. Cancelled registration cards.
(c) Unless notice is waived by the State
Historical Society, at least sixty (60) days’
notice shall be given the State Historical
Society prior to the destruction of any record
as provided by Wis. Stats. §19.21(4)(a).
(d) Any tape recording of a
governmental meeting of the Village may be
destroyed, erased or reused no sooner than
ninety (90) days after the minutes of the
meeting have been approved and published,
if the purpose of the recording was to make
minutes of the meeting. (Note: Only Board
minutes are required to be published or
posted.)
(9) Preservation through Microfilm.
Any Village officer or the director of any
department or division of Village
government may, subject to the approval of
the Board, keep and preserve public records
in his or her possession by means of
microfilm or other photographic
reproduction method. Such records shall
meet the standards for photographic
reproduction set forth in Wis. Stats.
§16.61(7)(a) and (b), and shall be considered
original records for all purposes. Such
records shall be preserved along with the
other files of the department or division and
shall be open to public inspection and
copying according to the provisions of state
law and of this chapter.
2.09 CODE OF ETHICS. The Village
adopts and incorporates Wis. Stats. §19.59.
The Village reserves its right to adopt further
ordinances including the following policies in
accordance with Wis. Stats. §19.59 and,
further, amends the prior Village ethic
ordinance as follows:
(1) Declaration of Policy.
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 14 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) High moral and ethical standards
are essential to the operation of free
government. A code of ethics is established
for all Village officials, whether elected or
appointed, paid or unpaid, all Village
employees and agents of the Village, all
members of Village boards and committees
and persons furnishing contracted services to
the Village and its boards and committees.
This code establishes guidelines for ethical
standards of conduct for all such officials,
employees, agents, committee and board
members and persons furnishing contracted
services. It directs disclosure by officials,
board and committee members, employees,
agents and candidates for Village office of
private financial or other interests in matters
affecting the Village.
(b) This code of ethics does not prohibit
Village officials from having other
employment and financial interests. Village
officials, however, need to distinguish
between inconsequential conflicts which are
unavoidable and those conflicts which are
substantial. The purpose of this code is to
help Village officials in avoiding serious
conflicts of interest and promote confidence
in our local government.
(2) Responsibility of Public Officials
and Standards of Conduct.
(a) Elected and appointed officials,
committee and board members and
employees of the Village should work for the
benefit of the public and are bound to uphold
the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Wisconsin and to
carry out independently and impartially the
laws of the Nation, State and Village;
observe in their official acts the highest
standards of morality; and to discharge
faithfully the duties of their office/position
regardless of personal consideration,
recognizing that public interests must be
their prime concern. The conduct of Village
officials, board and committee members,
employees, agents and those furnishing
contracted services to the Village should
foster respect for government.
(b) The provisions of the following
sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are made
part of this section and shall apply to elected
and appointed officials whenever applicable,
namely: Wis. Stats. §19.81-§19.98 Open
Meetings of Government Bodies;
Wis. Stats. §946.10 Bribery of Public
Officers and Employees;
Wis. Stats. §946.11 Special Privileges from
Public Utilities;
Wis. Stats. §946.12 Misconduct in Public
Office;
Wis. Stats. §946.13 Private Interest in Public
Contract Prohibited;
(3) Dedicated Service.
(a) A Village official, board or
committee member or employee should not
use his or her position or office to obtain
financial gain or anything of substantial value
for his or her own personal benefit other than
salary and benefits which he or she is due.
These individuals should avoid promoting
the special interests of any persons or group
other than the best interests of the Village.
(b) A Village official, board or
committee member, employee, agent or
person furnishing contracted services should
not exceed his or her authority and should
work in full cooperation with public officials,
board and committee members and Village
employees. Employees, agents and those
furnishing contracted services should adhere
to the rules of work and performance
established as the standard for their positions
by the appropriate authority.
(4) Definitions.
(a) Agent. Any representative, including
only those Village employees specifically
designated by the Board, whose function is
to bring about, modify, affect, accept
performance of or terminate contractual
obligations between the Village and third
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 15 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
persons. All other non-designated full or
part-time Village employees are specifically
excluded from this definition.
(b) Confidential Information:
Confidential information means written
material or oral information related to city
government, which is not otherwise subject
to release under the public records law and
which is expressly designated or marked as
confidential.
(c) Financial Interest. Any interest
which shall yield directly a monetary or other
material benefit to the official, employee or
agent or to any person employing or
retaining the services of the official,
employee or agent.
(d) Immediate Family. The official's or
employee's spouse and any relative by
marriage, lineal descent or adoption who
receives, directly or indirectly, more than one
half (½) of his support from the official or
employee.
(e) Improper Conduct. Any violations
of this section.
(f) Official. Any elected or appointed
office holder of the Village. These include,
but are not limited to, President, Trustees,
Clerk, and Assessor.
(g) Person. Any natural person,
corporation, partnership or joint venture.
(h) Relative. A person related by blood
as a first cousin or closer in kinship; a person
related by blood to one's spouse as a first
cousin or closer in kinship; or a person who
through adoption is related to one's self or
one's spouse as a first cousin or closer in
kinship.
(5) Fair and Equal Treatment.
Obligation to Citizens. No official,
employee or agent shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any
citizen beyond that which is available to
every other citizen.
(6) Conflict Of Interest.
(a) Financial or Personal Interests
Prohibited. No official, employee or agent,
whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any
business or transaction or shall act in regard
to financial or other personal interest, direct
or indirect, which is incompatible with the
proper discharge of his or her official duties
in the public interest contrary to the
provisions of this section or would be
reasonably expected to impair his
independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his official duties.
(b) Specific Conflicts Enumerated.
1. Incompatible Employment. No
official, employee or agent shall engage in or
accept private employment or render service
for private interest when such employment
or service is incompatible with the proper
discharge of his or her official duties or
would tend to impair such official's,
employee's or agent's independence,
judgment or action in the performance of his
or her official duties, unless otherwise
permitted by law and unless disclosure is
made herein provided.
2. Disclosure of Confidential
Information. No official, employee, board or
committee member or agent shall, without
proper legal authorization, disclose
confidential information concerning the
property, government or affairs of the
Village, nor shall such official, employee or
agent use such information to advance the
financial or other private interest of their self
or others.
3. Gifts and Favors.
a. No elected or appointed official,
employee or agent of the Village shall accept
anything of value, whether in the form of a
gift, service, loan, thing or promise, from any
person which may be reasonably expected to
impair his or her independence of judgment
or action in the performance of his or her
duties. No elected or appointed official or
agent shall grant in the discharge of his or
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 16 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
her duties any improper favor, service or
thing of value. Any elected or appointed
official or agent who receives, directly or
indirectly, any gift or gifts having an
aggregate value of more than fifty dollars
($50) within any calendar year from any
person who is known by such official to be
interested directly or indirectly in any manner
whatever in business dealings with the
Village upon which the official or agent has
any influence or input or over which the
official or agent has any jurisdiction,
discretion or control, shall disclose the
nature and value of such gifts to the Ethics
Board by January 20 of the next year in
which the gift or gifts are received. A gift or
favor made or granted to a member of any
official's or agent's immediate family shall be
deemed made or granted to the official.
b. No elected or appointed official,
employee or agent of the Village may solicit
or accept, either directly or indirectly, from
any person or organization money or
anything of value if it could reasonably be
expected to influence the official's actions or
judgments or be considered a reward for any
action or inaction on the part of the official.
Campaign contributions are an exception and
should be carefully documented and handled
in accordance with the provisions of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
c. An elected or appointed official,
employee or agent is not to accept
hospitality if after consideration of the
surrounding circumstances it could
reasonably be concluded that such hospitality
would not be extended were it not for the
fact that the guest or a member of the guest's
immediate family was a Village official.
Participation in celebrations, grand openings,
open houses, informational meetings and
similar events are excluded from this
prohibition. This paragraph further shall not
be construed to prevent candidates for
elective office from accepting hospitality
from citizens for the purpose of supporting
the candidate's campaign.
d. Gifts received by an elected or
appointed official, employee or agent under
unusual circumstances may be referred to the
Ethics Board within ten (10) days of receipt
for recommended disposition.
4. Contracts with the Village. Except to
the extent allowed by Wis. Stat. 946.13, no
official, employee or agent of the Village
who, in his or her capacity as such official, in
which such official, employee or agent has a
private pecuniary interest, direct or indirect,
or performs in regard to that contract some
function requiring the exercise of discretion
on the part of such official, employee or
agent shall enter into any contract with the
Village.
5. Employment of Relatives. No
official, employee or agent, except as
designated by the Board, shall participate in
a discussion or proceeding which is held for
the purpose of interviewing and/or hiring a
job applicant; setting the salary, duties and/or
conditions of employment of a job applicant
or any employee; or firing of an employee,
who is a relative of such official. No official
shall head a department which employs a
relative. No employee shall work in a
department which is headed by a relative.
(7) Disclosure of Interest in Matters
before the Village Board. To the extent
known, all elected and appointed officials of
the Village, members of its boards and
committees or employees of the Village who
have a financial interest in any proposed
action shall disclose on the records of the
Village promptly the nature and extent of
such interest. To the extent known, all
persons furnishing contracted services to the
Village, its boards or committees who have a
financial interest in any proposed action
shall, to the extent the proposed action
relates to the contracted services provided or
to be provided, disclose on the records of the
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 17 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
Village promptly the nature and extent of
such interest.
Any other official, employee or agent who
has a financial interest in any proposed action
and who participates in discussion with or
gives an official opinion or recommendation
to the Board or any board or committee shall
disclose on the records of the Village
promptly the nature and extent of such
interest.
(8) Campaign Contributions.
Campaign contributions shall be reported by
all candidates for official and employee
positions in the Village in strict conformity
with the provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(9) Ethics Board. There is hereby
created an Ethics Board for the Village.
(a) Structure and Method of
Appointment. The Ethics Board shall be
appointed according to Section 2.07(4)(a).
Upon prior request of the Board, the Village
Attorney shall furnish the Board whatever
legal assistance is necessary to carry out its
functions.
(b) Membership. The members of the
Ethics Board shall be appointed by the
President and confirmed by the Board.
Terms of office shall be three (3) years,
except that when initial appointments are
made, one shall be appointed for one (1)
year, two (2) for two (2) years and two (2)
for three (3) years. If any member of the
Ethics Board petitions the Board for an
advisory opinion regarding his or her
conduct, such member shall be mandatorily
excluded from sitting in his or her own case.
(c) Leadership and Procedures. The
Ethics Board shall elect its own chairperson
and vice-chairperson and shall develop
written rules of procedure which shall be
submitted to the Board for approval.
(d) Amendment to Code of Ethics. The
Ethics Board may make recommendations to
the Board with respect to amendments to
this section.
(11) Filing of a Verified Complaint.
(a) Any person may initiate a review
before the Ethics Board of the conduct of
any Village officer or employee alleged to be
in violation of the Village ethics code by
filing a verified complaint, with the Village
Clerk together with a processing fee in the
amount of two hundred dollars ($200). Such
verified complaint shall specify the activities
of such officer or employee which are
alleged to be in violation of the code of
ethics. The Clerk shall provide a form,
created by the Ethics Board that may be used
for such complaint.
(b) Determination of Probable Cause.
The Village Attorney or in the event of
conflict special counsel appointed by the
Ethics Board, shall act as counsel to the
Ethics Board. Upon receipt the Clerk shall
forward such complaint to the Chair of the
Ethics Board who will see to it that the
officer or employee accused in the complaint
is notified of fact that a complaint has been
filed and served (in person or by certified
mail) a copy of the complaint within ten (10)
days of its filing. The Chair also shall
convene the Ethics Board within thirty (30)
days of the date of filing of the complaint
with the clerk for the purposes of
determining whether, when viewing the
complaint in the light most favorable to the
complaining party there is probable cause to
believe the employee or officer has acted in
violation of the Ethics Code. Such review
shall be in closed session. The Ethics Board
shall give the complaining party and the
officer or employee named in the complaint
notice of the meeting and may request
clarification of the complaint from either
party.
1. If the Ethics Board determines that no
probable cause exists, it shall dismiss the
complaint and notify the accused officer or
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 18 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
employee, the complainant and such other
persons as the board determines to have an
interest.
2. If the Ethics Board finds probable
cause to believe a violation exists, it shall
then proceed to hold a hearing as provided
by this code.
3. The Ethics Board may also, upon
agreement of the complaining party and the
officer or employee named in the complaint
proceed to issue an advisory opinion on the
facts alleged in the complaint in lieu of a
hearing.
4. The Ethics Board may direct the
Village Attorney or special counsel to further
investigate the facts stated in the verified
complaint and report back to the board.
5. The complaining party may withdraw
the complaint prior to a finding of probable
cause. If probable cause is found by the
Ethics Board, the complaint may not be
withdrawn without the consent of the Ethics
Board which may, at its complete discretion,
require the matter to continue to hearing
with or without the complaining parties
consent and voluntary participation.
(c) Hearing Process.
1. Notice of the finding of probable
cause and notice of hearing and a copy of the
complaint shall be sent to the accused officer
or employee by certified mail at his last
known post office address within 5 days of
the determination of probable cause.
2. Such hearing shall be scheduled more
than twenty (20) days but less than thirty
(30) days from the postmarked date of the
notice of hearing. The hearing may however
be adjourned at the request of either party
for good cause shown or the Ethics Board.
3. Prior to the hearing date, the Chair or
the designated representative shall contact
the parties for the purpose of a pre-hearing
conference. At the pre-hearing conference,
the parties shall disclose the witnesses they
intend to call request any subpoenas and
discuss any other evidentiary or procedural
issues related to the hearing.
4. The hearing shall be held before a
quorum of the Ethics Board, presided over
by the Chair or designated representative.
At the hearing each party may be represented
by counsel at their own expense, the parties
may present evidence, call and examine
witnesses and cross-examine witnesses of the
other party. Such witnesses shall be sworn
by the person presiding over the hearing.
The chairman of the board is empowered to
issue subpoenas to compel attendance of
witnesses at such hearing. Statutory due
process procedures and admissibility of
evidence will be subject to the guidelines of
Wis. Stats. §227-45(1).
5. The hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the Wisconsin Rules of
Criminal Evidence, and the Secretary of the
Ethics Board or designee shall take notes of
testimony and shall mark and preserve all
exhibits. The burden shall be on the
complaining party to show to by clear,
satisfactory and convincing evidence that an
ethics code violation has occurred by the
officer or employee accused.
6. The hearing shall be noticed to be and
conducted in closed session unless the
accused officer or employee requests, in
writing, that it be open to the public.
7. Within twenty (20) days of the
completion of the hearing and the filing of
briefs, if any, the board shall make a written
determination as to the existence of a
violation of the code of ethics by the accused
officer or employee. Such determination
shall be mailed by certified mail to such
officer or employee within the twenty (20)
day period. Copies shall also be delivered to
the Village Board in the same manner as a
report of a standing committee for such
action as the Village Board may deem
proper.
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 19 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
8. The Ethics Board may compromise or
settle any potential action or violation of this
chapter. Whenever the board enters into a
settlement agreement with an individual who
is accused of a violation of this chapter, the
board shall reduce the agreement to writing,
together with a statement of the board’s
findings and reasons for entering into the
agreement and shall retain the statement and
agreement in its records for inspection.
(10) Advisory Opinions.
(a) Request for Advisory Opinion. Any
individual, either personally or on behalf of
an organization or governmental body, may,
in writing, request the ethics board, to issue
an advisory opinion regarding the propriety
of any matter to which the person is or may
become a party. It is prima facie evidence of
intent to comply with the Ethics Code when
a person requests an advisory opinion abides
by the advisory opinion, if the material facts
are as stated in the opinion request. The
Ethics Board may authorize the Village
Attorney to act in its stead in instances
where delay is of substantial inconvenience
or detriment to the requesting party.
(b) Confidentiality. Except as provided
in par. (c), neither the Village Attorney, a
member of the Ethics Board, nor anyone else
who becomes privy to the request or opinion
may make public the identity of an individual
requesting an advisory opinion or of
individuals or organizations mentioned in the
opinion.
(c) Exception to Confidentiality. The
Ethics Board or Village Attorney replying to
a request for an advisory opinion may make
the opinion public with the consent of the
individual requesting the advisory opinion or
the organization or governmental body on
whose behalf it is requested and may make
public a summary of an advisory opinion
issued under this subsection after making
sufficient alterations in the summary to
prevent disclosing the identities of
individuals involved in the opinion. A person
who makes or purports to make public the
substance of or any portion of an advisory
opinion requested by or on behalf of the
person waives the confidentiality of the
request for an advisory opinion and of any
records obtained or prepared by the Ethics
Board or the Village Attorney for the local
governmental unit in connection with the
request for an advisory opinion.
(11) Distribution of Code. The Clerk
shall provide copies of this section annually
to elected and appointed officials, candidates
for political office and the designated
employees of the Village who are required to
file disclosure statements annually and shall
keep at least one copy permanently on file
for the use of the public. All employees shall
receive a copy when they are hired.
2.10 MUNICIPAL COURT.
(1) Municipal Judge.
(a) Office Created. Pursuant to Wis.
Stats. §755.01, there is created the office of
Municipal Judge for the Village.
(b) Election Term. The Municipal Judge
shall be elected at large at the spring election
in odd-numbered years for a term of four
years, or until a successor is elected and
qualifies, commencing on May 1 next
succeeding his/her election. Mid-term
vacancies in the office of Municipal Judge
shall be filled by appointment by the Board.
(c) Inception. The Municipal Judge
shall be appointed by the Village and shall
take office September 18, 1996. Thereafter,
the position of Municipal Judge shall be filled
pursuant to Wis. Stats. §8.50(4)(fm) and this
Code.
(d) Salary. The Municipal Judge shall
receive a salary as determined from time to
time by the Board, which shall be in lieu of
fees and costs. No salary shall be paid to the
Judge for any time during his term for which
he/she has not executed and filed his/her
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 20 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
official bond and oath as required by
paragraph (e) of this section.
(e) Bond; Oath. The Municipal Judge
shall execute and file with the Clerk of
Courts for Brown County the oath
prescribed by Wis. Stats. §757.02 and a bond
in the penal sum of two thousand dollars
($2,000). The Municipal Judge shall not be
qualified to act until a certified copy of the
bond is filed with the Clerk and a certified
copy of the oath is filed with the office of the
State Administrator of Courts as required by
Wis. Stats. §755.03.
(f) Residency. The Municipal Judge shall
be a resident of the Village.
(g) Qualifications. The Municipal
Judge shall be licensed to practice law in the
State of Wisconsin. He shall also be a
member in good standing with the State Bar
of the State of Wisconsin.
(2) Municipal Court Established. The
Municipal Court for the Village is established
pursuant to Wis. Stats. §55.02 and Ch. 755.
The first court session held is on November
20, 1996.
(a) Hours. The Municipal Court shall be
open as determined by order of the
Municipal Judge.
(b) Location. The Municipal Judge shall
keep his or her office and hold court in the
Municipal Services Center.
(c) Procedure. The procedure in
Municipal Court for the Village shall be as
provided by this section and state law
including, without limitation because of
enumeration, Wis. Stats. Chs. 755, 778 and
800.
(d) Collection and Return of
Forfeitures. The Municipal Judge shall
collect all forfeitures, penalty assessments,
fees and taxable costs in any action or
proceeding before him or her and shall pay
over such monies to the Treasurer within
seven (7) days of collection. At such time
the Municipal Judge shall also report to the
Treasurer the title, nature of offenses and
total amount of judgments imposed in
actions and proceedings in which such
monies were collected.
(e) Contempt of Court. The Municipal
Judge, after affording an opportunity to the
person accused to be heard in defense, may
punish for contempt of Municipal Court
persons guilty of either of the following acts
and no other:
1. Disorderly, contemptuous and
insolent behavior toward the Judge while
engaged in any judicial proceedings or to
impair the respect due the judge's authority.
2. Resistance of or disobedience to any
lawful order or process made or issued by
the Judge.
(f) Penalty for Contempt of Court. The
Municipal Judge may, upon finding any
person guilty of contempt, order such person
to forfeit not more than fifty dollars ($50)
plus the penalty assessment under Wis. Stats.
§165.87. Upon nonpayment of the forfeiture
and penalty, the person found guilty of
contempt may be sentenced to the County
Jail not to exceed seven (7) days.
(3) Stipulation and Deposits in
Municipal Court.
(a) Deposit Schedule to be Established.
The Municipal Judge shall establish and
submit to the Board for approval in
accordance with Wis. Stats. §800.03(3), a
schedule of deposits for violation of Village
ordinances, resolutions, and by-laws except
traffic violations governed by Wis. Stats.
§23.67.
(b) Stipulation and Deposit in Lieu of
Court Appearance. Persons cited for
violations of Village ordinances, resolutions
or by-laws for which a deposit has been
established under this section shall be
permitted to make a stipulation of no contest
and a deposit in lieu of court appearance as
provided in Wis. Stats. §800.03, §800.04,
and §800.09.
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 21 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
(c) Traffic and Boating Deposits. The
deposit schedule established by the
Wisconsin Judicial Conference and the
procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. Ch. 23
and 345 shall apply to stipulation and
deposits for violations of traffic regulations
enacted in accordance with Wis. Stat.
§345.27 and boating regulations enacted in
accordance with Wis. Stat. §30.77.
(d) When Not Permitted. Stipulations
and deposits shall not be permitted after
initial appearance or in cases of contempt.
(4) Dispositions and Sanctions for
Juveniles.
(a) For a juvenile adjudged to have
violated an ordinance, a court is authorized
to impose any of the dispositions listed in
Wis. Stat. §938.343 and §938.44 in
accordance with the provisions of those
statutes.
(b) For a juvenile adjudged to have
violated an ordinance who violates a
condition of a dispositional order of the
court under Wis. Stat. §938.343 or §938.44,
the Municipal Court is authorized to impose
any of the sanctions listed in Wis. Stat.
§938.355(6)(d) in accordance with the
provisions of those statutes.
(c) This section is enacted under the
authority of Wis. Stat. §938.17(2)(cm).
2.10.5 JOINT MUNICIPAL COURT.
(1) Municipal Court Created.
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 755 there is
hereby created and established a municipal
court designated “municipal court for the
Village of Suamico, the Town of Chase, and
the Town on Little Suamico” and identified
as “Suamico Area Joint Municipal Court”
and will be presided over by a municipal
judge. This court shall become an operating
court on January 1, 2020.
(2) Municipal Judge. Pursuant to Wis.
Stats. Ch. 755 the office of municipal judge
is hereby created. The eligibility for office of
municipal judge shall be as follows “to be
eligible for the office of municipal judge a
person must be a qualified elector in one of
the municipalities.” The judge must be a
licensed attorney, and in good standing, with
the Wisconsin State Bar Association. The
current municipal judge for the Village of
Suamico Municipal Court will remain as
judge through the end of his current term
which expires on April 30, 2023 or unless he
resigns his position prior to the end of his
term.
(3) Election and Term of Judge. The
judge appointed must run for election at
large in the spring election in odd numbered
years for a term of four years commencing
on May 1. Electors of the municipalities shall
be eligible to vote for the municipal judge.
All candidates for the position of municipal
judge shall be nominated by nomination
papers as provided in Wis. Stats. §8.10, and
selection in a primary election if such is held
is provided in Wis. Stats. §8.11. The clerk of
Brown County shall serve as filing officer for
the candidates. The municipal judge shall
receive a fixed salary and municipal judges
training pursuant to Wis. Stats. §755.18. The
salary shall be determined by the Village of
Suamico Board.
(4) Bond and Oath of Municipal
Judge. The municipal judge shall, after
election or appointment to fill a vacancy,
take and file the official oath as prescribed in
Wis. Stats. §757.02(1) pursuant to Wis.
Stats. §755.03 and at the same time shall
execute and file an official bond. The
municipal judge shall have jurisdiction as
provided by the statutes and laws of the
State of Wisconsin and pursuant to Wis.
Stats. §755.045. Additionally, the municipal
judge shall have exclusive jurisdiction over
actions in the municipalities seeking to
impose forfeitures for violations of municipal
ordinances, resolutions, and bylaws. The
municipal judge may issues civil warrants to
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 22 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
enforce matters under the jurisdiction of the
municipal court under Wis. Stats.
§755.045(2) and §66.0119. The municipal
judge also has jurisdiction over juvenile
defenders pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§938.17(2)(cm).
(5) Procedures of Joint Municipal
Court.
(a) The joint municipal court shall be
open as determined by order of the municipal
judge.
(b) The joint municipal court shall be
held in the courtroom which is located in the
Village of Suamico municipal building.
(c) The procedure in joint municipal
court shall be as provided in the statutes and
laws of Wisconsin.
(6) Municipal Clerk. Pursuant to Wis.
Stats. Ch. 755, the office of clerk of the
municipal court is hereby created. Said clerk
shall take the position upon appointment of
the municipal judge. Training and
compensation of said clerk shall be as
determined by the municipal court and/or the
Village of Suamico.
(7) Collection of Forfeitures and
Costs. The municipal judge may impose
punishment and sentences as provided by
Wis. Stats. Ch. 800 and 938 as provided in
the ordinances of the municipalities. All
forfeitures, fees, assessments, surcharges,
and costs shall be paid to the treasurer of the
municipality within which the case arose
within thirty (30) of receipt of the money by
the municipal court. At the time of the
payment, the municipal court shall report to
the treasurer the title of the action, the nature
of the offenses, and the total amount of
judgments imposed in actions and
proceedings in which such monies were
collected.
(8) Contempt of Court. The municipal
judge may impose a sanction as authorized
under Wis. Stats. §800.12(2)., for contempt
of court as defined in Wis. Stats. §785.01(1).
In accordance with the procedures under
Wis. Stats. §785.03.
(9) Termination. Any municipality may
withdraw from this agreement by giving
notice in writing to the judge no later than
August 31, of any year. Upon giving such
notice, that municipality’s participation in the
municipal court shall terminate at the end of
the said year. No member, pursuant to Wis.
Stats. §755.01(2), may abolish municipal
court while this agreement is in effect.
2.11 ELECTIONS.
(1) Pollworkers.
(a) Appointment of alternative election
officials. The Village Clerk shall have the
discretion to hire election officials to work
less than a full day on the day of the election.
Village of Suamico
2-General Government Page 23 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 2
Ordinance 2008-05 Repealing and Recreating Section 2.06
Adopted 4-7-08
Ordinance 2008-24 Creating Section 2.07(4)(e) Historic Preservation Commission
Adopted 8-4-08
Ordinance 2011-08 Amending Chapter 2 Board and Committees of the Village Code
Adopted 8-1-11
Ordinance 2012-08 Amending Chapter 2, General Government
Adopted 6-18-12
Ordinance 2015-04 Amending Chapter 2 Board and Committees of the Village Code
Adopted 4-20-15
Ordinance 2015-08 Amending Chapter 2 Board and Committees of the Village Code
Adopted 5-3-15
Ordinance 2016-05 Allowing the Village Clerk Discretion in Election Official Work Hours
Adopted 4-4-16
Ordinance 2016-07 Confidentiality of Income and Expenses Provided to Assessor for Assessment
Purposes
Adopted 5-2-16
Ordinance 2016-09 Creating Section 2.07 Creating a Municipal Board of Absentee Ballot
Canvassers and Providing for the Canvassing of all Absentee Ballots at a Place Other
than the Polling Location
Adopted 6-6-16
Ordinance 2018-01 Amending Chapter 2: General Government
Adopted 2-5-18
Ordinance 2019-10 Creating a Joint Municipal Court
Adopted 11-4-19
Ordinance 2020-08 Amending Chapter 2, Creating Section 2.03(4) Special Circumstances
Adopted 4-20-20
Village of Suamico
Chapter 3
3-Finance & Taxation Page 1 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
FINANCE & TAXATION
3.01 Room Tax Regulations .................................................................................................. 1
3.02 Special Assessment Procedures ..................................................................................... 4
3.03 Impact Fees .................................................................................................................. 13
3.04 Budget .......................................................................................................................... 16
3.05 Claims, Invoices, or Other Assertions ........................................................................ 17
3.06 Deposits; Receipting .................................................................................................... 18
3.07 Financial Reporting ..................................................................................................... 18
3.08 Treasurer’s Bond Eliminated...................................................................................... 19
3.09 Debt Management ....................................................................................................... 19
3.99 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement ..................................................................... 20
3.01 ROOM TAX REGULATIONS.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Hotel or Motel. Hotel or motel
means a building or a group of buildings in
which the public may obtain
accommodations for a consideration,
including, without limitation, such
establishments as inns, motels, hotels, tourist
rooms, tourist houses or courts, lodging
houses, rooming houses, summer camps,
apartment hotels, resort lodges, and cabins,
and any other building in which
accommodations are available to the public,
except accommodations rendered for a
continuous period of more than one (1)
month and accommodations furnished by
hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes, or
by corporations or associations organized
and operated exclusively for religious,
charitable, or educational purposes provided
no part of the net earnings of such
corporations inure to the benefit of any
private shareholder or individual.
(b) Gross Receipts. Gross receipts has
the meaning, insofar as applicable, as
defined in Wis. Stats. §77.51(4).
(c) Customer. Customer, as used in this
section, means any person residing for a
continuous period of time less than one (1)
month in a hotel, motel, or furnished
accommodation available to the public.
(d) Person Responsible. Person
responsible means the sole owner of the
business subject to this section, the partners,
if a partnership owns the business subject to
this chapter, the corporate president, or
designated general manager or agent, if a
corporation owns the business subject to this
chapter.
(2) Room Tax Imposed. Pursuant to
Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, a tax is imposed on
the privilege of furnishing at retail rooms or
lodging to customers by hotelkeepers, motel
operators, and other persons furnishing
accommodations that are available to the
public, irrespective of whether membership
is required for the use of the
accommodation. Such tax shall be at the
rate of ten percent (10%) of the gross
receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms
or lodging. Such tax shall be collected from
the customer when the customer's bill is
paid, and shall be paid by the person
responsible to the Village Treasurer on a
monthly basis. Such tax shall not be subject
to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis.
Stats. §77.52(2). The proceeds of such tax
shall be remitted to and received by the
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 2 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
Treasurer monthly on or before the twentieth
(20th) day of the following month.
(1) Such tax shall be distributed as
provided by resolution of the Board.
(3) Permit. Every person furnishing
rooms or lodging under Section 3.01 (2),
above shall file with the Treasurer an
application for a room tax identification
number for each place of business. Every
application shall be made upon a form
prescribed by the Treasurer and shall set
forth the name under which the applicant
intends to transact business, location of the
place of business, and such other
information as the Treasurer requires. The
application shall be signed by the owner if a
sole proprietor and if not a sole proprietor,
by the person responsible who is authorized
to act on behalf of the business.
(4) Tax Number. The Treasurer shall
issue to each applicant a separate number for
each place of business within the Village.
Such number is not assignable and is valid
only for the person in whose name it is
issued and for the collection of the room tax
at the place designated therein.
(5) Records to be Kept. Every person
liable for the tax imposed by this section
shall keep, or cause to be kept, such records,
receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers
in such form as the Treasurer requires.
(6) Filing of Returns.
(a) Returns to be filed. A return shall be
filed with the Treasurer by each person
responsible, subject to Section 3.01 (2),
above on or before the day on which such
tax is due and payable. Such return shall
show the gross receipts of the preceding
calendar month from such retail furnishing
of rooms or lodging, the amount of tax
imposed for such period, and such other
information as the Treasurer deems
necessary to administer this section. An
annual return shall be filed within ninety
(90) days of the close of each calendar or
fiscal year and shall contain certain such
information as the Treasurer requires to
administer this section. Each return shall be
signed by the person required to file a
return, or an authorized agent, but need not
be verified by oath. The Treasurer may, for
good cause, extend the time of filing any
return, but not longer than thirty (30) days
from the filing date.
(b) Failure to File. If any person
required to make a return fails, neglects or
refuses to do so for the amount and in the
manner, form, and time prescribed herein,
the Treasurer, according to his or her best
judgment, shall determine the amount of the
tax due the Village and make a doomage
assessment upon the person who fails to file
and pay on a timely basis. Each person
whose tax is determined by the Treasurer
shall pay the amount determined plus
interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per
month on the unpaid balance. No refund or
modification of the payment as determined
by the Treasurer may be granted until the
person files a correct room tax return and
permits the Treasurer or an authorized agent
to inspect and audit the records of the
business required to be kept in Section 3.01
(5) above.
(c) Late Filing Fee. In addition of any
other forfeiture provided herein, whether
imposed or not, a forfeiture of one hundred
dollars ($100) shall be imposed upon, and
collected from, any person each time such
person fails to file the return required in
Section 3.01 (6) (a) above on a timely basis.
(7) Treasurer's Right of Inspection
and Audit.
(a) Whenever the Treasurer has
probable cause to believe that the correct
amount of room tax return is not correct, the
Treasurer may cause an inspection and audit
of the financial records of any such person
subject to Section 3.01(2) above to
determine whether or not the correct amount
of room tax is assessed, collected, and paid
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 3 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
according to Section 3.01 (2) and Section
3.01 (6) above.
(b) In the event any person subject to
Section 3.01 (2) above fails to comply with
a request by the Treasurer or an authorized
agent to inspect and audit the person's
financial records as in Section 3.01 (7) (a)
above, such person shall be subject to a
forfeiture in the amount of five percent (5%)
of the tax due at the time of the audit.
(8) Confidentiality. Information
obtained under this section shall be
confidential, except the Treasurer may
provide information to persons using the
information in the discharge of duties
imposed by law, the duties of their office,
such as the duties of the office of room tax
commissioner, or by order of a court. The
Treasurer may publish statistics classified so
as not to disclose the identity of particular
returns. Any person who violates any
provision of this subsection shall forfeit not
less than one hundred dollars ($100) and not
more than three hundred dollars ($300) in
addition to the costs of prosecution.
(9) Administration and Payment of
Taxes. This chapter shall be administered
by the Treasurer and the Clerk. The tax
imposed for the month is due and payable on
the twentieth (20th) day of the month
following the collection of the tax from the
customer under Section 3.01 (2) above.
(10) Failure to Pay Tax When Due.
(a) Forfeitures. In addition to the
forfeitures provided in this chapter, and the
tax due under this chapter, a forfeiture of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the room tax
due for the previous year under Section 3.01
(2) above or five thousand dollars ($5,000),
whichever is less, shall be imposed upon any
person or business that allows the monthly
tax imposed to be delinquent under this
chapter.
(b) Delinquent Taxes. The tax imposed
by this section shall become delinquent if
not paid within thirty (30) days after the due
date of the return, or within thirty (30) days
after the expiration of an extension period if
one has been granted. If a return is filed
late, or there is no return filed, the due date
for the taxes imposed is the due date of the
return.
(c) Security May Be Required. In order
to protect the revenue of the Village, the
Treasurer shall require any person liable for
the tax imposed by this section who fails to
pay the tax as herein required to file with the
Treasurer, before of after the permit is
issued, such security, not in excess of five
thousand dollars ($5,000) cash or a surety
bond equal to the prior month's tax as the
Treasurer determines. If any taxpayer fails
or refuses to place such security, the
Treasurer may refuse or revoke its permit.
(d) If any taxpayer is delinquent in the
payment of the taxes imposed by this
section, the Treasurer may, upon ten (10)
days’ notice after giving the taxpayer an
opportunity to confer, recover the taxes,
interest, and penalties from the security or
surety placed with the Treasurer by such
taxpayer. No interest shall be paid or
allowed by the Village to any person for the
deposit of such security.
(11) Disbursement of Tax Proceeds.
Pursuant to Wis. Stats., §66.0615, the
Village obligates itself to enter into an
intergovernmental agreement, with all other
municipalities participating in the Room Tax
Commission created there under. Not
withstanding the rights and obligations of
the Village to retain or disburse the proceeds
of the room tax herein imposed, whether by
contract or otherwise, the Village shall
disburse and pay to the Room Tax
Commission the total amount collected by
the Village as and for room tax hereunder,
less an amount the Village may retain for
purposes of administering said room tax in
the amount of four percent (4%) of the
proceeds so disbursed to the Commission.
Said amount shall be used by the Room Tax
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 4 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
Commission as provided in Wis. Stats.
§66.0615.
(12) Tax Not To Be Repealed. The
room tax imposed by this chapter shall not
be repealed, nor shall said tax be amended
or reduced below the level of eight percent
(8%) of the gross receipts from the retail
furnishing of rooms or lodging while there
remains outstanding any indebtedness owing
for construction of the new arena and
expanded Convention Center.
3.02 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
PROCEDURES.
(1) In addition to other methods
provided by law, special assessments for any
public work or improvement or any current
service may be levied in accordance with the
provisions of this section and the current
special assessment policy.
(2) Whenever the Board shall determine
that any public work or improvement or any
current service shall be financed in whole or
in part by special assessments levied under
this section, it shall adopt a resolution
specifying this intention and the time, either
before or after completion of the work or
improvement, when the amount of the
assessments will be determined and levied,
the number of annual installments, if any, in
which assessments may be paid, the rate of
interest to be charged on the unpaid balance
and the terms on which any of the
assessments may be deferred while no use of
the improvement is made in connection with
the property.
(3) The provisions of Wis. Stats.
§66.0701 and §66.0703 shall apply to
special assessments levied under this section
except that, when the governing body
determines by resolution that the hearing on
the assessments be held subsequent to the
completion of the work or improvement or
the rendering of the service, the report
required by Wis. Stats. §66.0703(4) shall
contain a statement of the final cost of the
work, service, or improvement in lieu of an
estimate of the cost.
(4) Notice of the time and place of the
public hearing on any special assessment
proposed to be levied and notice of the final
assessment and terms of payment thereof
shall be given in the manner prescribed by
Wis. Stats. §66.0703(7) and (8)(d).
(5) Any special assessment levied under
this section shall be a lien against the
property assessed from the date of the final
resolution of the governing body
determining the amount of the levy.
(6) Any person against whose property
a special assessment is levied under this
section may appeal therefrom in the manner
prescribed by Wis. Stats. §66.0703(12)
within forty (40) days of the date of the
final determination of the governing body
in accordance with Wis. Stats.
§66.0701(2).
(7) Special assessments shall be levied
upon any parcel of land within the Village
whenever special benefits are conferred
upon such parcel of land by any municipal
work or improvement. Special assessments
will be levied as provided for in Wis. Stats.
§66.0703 and the provisions of this policy.
(a) The Board shall use this policy and
criteria identified for calculating special
assessments. For cases or issues not covered
in this policy the Board may determine a
more appropriate procedure should be used.
Special assessments shall be assessed on
property in the Village for the following
local improvements:
1. Sanitary Sewer Projects.
2. Water Main Projects.
3. Storm Sewer Projects.
4. Sidewalks.
5. Street Improvements.
6. Curb and Gutter.
(8) Definitions. The following terms
shall have the following meanings for
purposes of this policy:
(a) Assessment Types and Areas.
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 5 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
1. Assessment District. Any
geographical area designated by a resolution
of the Board in which public works or
improvements are to be installed, the costs
of which are to be recovered through the
levy of special assessments against
benefiting properties within such district.
2. Per Foot Assessments. The amount
to be levied and charged against a parcel of
land which shall be determined by
multiplying the assessable footage of the
parcel by the sum of the assessable project
costs divided by the total assessable
frontage.
3. Per Lot Assessments. When the
Board determines that the scope of public
improvements to be made is equally
beneficial to all lots, and that the properties
are reasonably homogeneous with respect to
size, street frontage, and use, the amount to
be levied and charged against a parcel of
land shall be determined by dividing the
sum of the assessable project costs by the
total number of lots. Corner lots shall be
counted as one (1) lot for assessment
purposes, except that when only one (1) of
the two (2) abutting streets is being
resurfaced, the corner lot shall be counted
as, and receive a one-half (½) lot
assessment. If in the judgment of the Board
a parcel of land has the potential to be
subdivided to create additional buildable
lots, the Board may assess that parcel of
land additional “per lot” charges as
appropriate.
4. Minimum Frontage. The assessable
frontage will be calculated as the actual
frontage of the property at the right-of-way
or the minimum lot width required by
zoning, whichever is greater.
(b) Lot Definitions.
1. Corner Lot. A lot located at the
intersection of two (2) public streets where
the interior angle of such intersection does
not exceed one hundred thirty-five degrees
(135°).
2. Double-Sided Lot. A lot having a
pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more
or less parallel public streets and which is
not a corner lot.
3. Standard Lot. A lot having only one
(1) lot line along a public street.
4. Triple-Sided Lot. A lot having three
(3) lot lines along a public street.
(c) Other Definitions.
1. Administrative Costs. A reasonable
charge for services of the administrative,
engineering, preparation of bid documents,
and legal staff of the Village.
2. Assessable Costs. Costs to be
included in the assessment can include any
of the following: administrative costs,
construction, inspection, right-of-way or
easement acquisition, landscaping, and
restoration.
3. Assessable Footage. The front
developable footage of all parcels served
and/or potentially benefiting from an
improvement or minimum frontage,
whichever is greater, less corner deductions.
4. Developer. Any person, partnership,
corporation, or other similar entity who
requests that the Village extend or install
public works or improvements for the
purpose of developing one (1) or more
parcels of land under their control or
ownership.
5. Intersection. Where two (2) public
streets connect, each having unique names.
6. Village. The Village of Suamico
and/or its appropriate utility.
(9) Sanitary Sewer Projects. The
Village will use the following criteria for
calculating special assessments levied for
sanitary sewer projects.
(a) General Application. All sewer
main extensions shall be constructed by the
Village in accordance with the most current
version of construction specifications
established by the Village. All sewer
extensions shall be specially assessed by the
Village under the following policies.
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 6 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
1. When sanitary sewer pipe larger than
twelve inches (12”) in diameter is installed,
benefiting parcels shall only be assessed for
twelve inches (12”) pipe at a cost
determined by the Engineer. The additional
expense for the larger pipe shall be paid by
the Sewer Utility.
2. Repair or replacement of sanitary
sewer mains shall be paid by the Sewer
Utility.
(b) Basis of Assessments. The main line
sanitary sewer will be assessed on a front
footage basis unless a per lot assessment
policy is adopted for a project.
(c) Deferrals.
1. The assessment for sanitary sewer
will be deferred for all properties outside the
approved Village Sewer Service Area
(SSA).
2. The deferral will terminate and the
assessment will become due and payable as
soon as the property is added to the Village
SSA.
3. Properties that can demonstrate the
installation of onsite systems within the five
(5) years previous to the project being
assessed may be eligible for a credit based
on a five (5) year depreciation schedule.
Proof of installation shall be a receipt for the
work performed or an affidavit of
construction from the builder.
4. The Sewer Utility will pay the cost of
all deferrals until the assessment becomes
due and payable.
(d) Service Laterals. The cost of
laterals for sanitary sewer service shall not
be added to the assessable front footage
project costs. The total cost of all laterals
installed shall be divided by the total
number of laterals to produce an average
cost for each type of lateral. Separate costs
shall be established for each size of sanitary
sewer lateral if more than one (1) size is to
be installed within the assessment district.
The resultant lateral cost(s) shall be charged
directly to each parcel within the assessment
district for each type and size of lateral
installed to that parcel.
(10) Water Main Projects. The
Village will use the following criteria for
calculating special assessments levied for
water main projects.
(a) General Application. All water
main extensions shall be constructed by the
Village in accordance with the most current
version of construction specifications
established by the Village. All water
extensions shall be specially assessed by the
Village under the following policies:
1. When water mains larger than eight
inches (8”) in diameter are installed,
benefiting parcels shall only be assessed for
an eight inch (8”) main at a cost determined
by the Engineer. The additional expense for
the larger main shall be paid by the Water
Utility.
2. Repair or replacement of water main
shall be paid by the Water Utility.
(b) Basis of Assessments. The main
water line will be assessed on a front footage
basis unless a per lot assessment policy is
adopted for a project.
(c) Deferrals.
1. The Water Utility will pay the cost of
all deferrals until the assessment becomes
due and payable.
2. In the event that a previously exempt
property becomes developable, all costs
associated with the exemption, including
interest, shall become due and payable in
accordance with Section 8 of this policy.
(d) Service Laterals. The cost of
laterals for water service shall not be added
to the assessable front footage project costs.
The total cost of all laterals installed shall be
divided by the total number of laterals to
produce an average cost for each type of
lateral. Separate costs shall be established
for each size of water service lateral if more
than one (1) size is to be installed within the
assessment district. The resultant lateral
cost(s) shall be charged directly to each
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 7 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
parcel within the assessment district for each
type and size of lateral installed to that
parcel.
(11) Storm Sewer Improvements.
The Village will use the following criteria
for calculating special assessments levied
for storm sewer projects.
(a) General Application. All storm
sewer facilities shall be constructed by the
Village in accordance with the most current
version of construction specifications
established by the Village. All storm sewer
improvements shall be specially assessed by
the Village under the following policies:
1. When storm sewer pipe larger than
eighteen inches (18”) in diameter is installed
within a residential area, all benefiting
parcels shall be assessed for the actual pipe
size installed, or eighteen inch (18”) pipe,
whichever is smaller at a cost determined by
the Engineer. A property assessed need not
have pipe installed directly in front of their
properties to be eligible for an assessment
based on benefit.
2. The additional expense for the larger
pipe shall be paid by the Village or by an
area wide assessment to future benefiting
properties.
3. Properties within business, industrial,
and institutional districts will be assessed for
the full diameter of any installed storm
sewer pipes less any incremental size of pipe
which is needed to accommodate drainage
from properties located outside the
assessment district as determined by the
Engineer.
4. Stormwater improvements benefiting
the entire development or a drainage basin
shall be assessed on an area-wide basis.
5. Replacement or repair of storm
sewers shall be paid by the Village.
6. The Village shall own and maintain
all stormwater improvements constructed for
the public benefit unless other agreements
prevail.
(b) Basis of Assessments. The storm
sewer line will be assessed on a front
footage basis unless a per lot assessment
policy is adopted for a project.
(c) Service Laterals. The cost of
laterals for storm sewer (should it apply)
shall not be added to the assessable front
footage project costs. The total cost of all
laterals installed shall be divided by the total
number of laterals to produce an average
cost for each type of lateral. Separate costs
shall be established for each size of lateral if
more than one (1) size is to be installed
within the assessment district. The resultant
lateral cost(s) shall be charged directly to
each parcel within the assessment district for
each type and size of lateral installed to that
parcel.
(12) Sidewalks. At this time the
Village chooses not to require that sidewalks
be installed in retrofitting existing
neighborhoods. The Village will use the
following criteria for calculating special
assessments levied for sidewalk construction
projects.
(a) General Application. All sidewalks
shall be constructed by the Village in
accordance with the most current version of
construction specifications established by
the Village. All sidewalk improvements
shall be specially assessed by the Village
under the following policies.
(b) Sidewalks as ordered by the Village
are deemed to be a public improvement and
the cost of installation, construction,
maintaining, reconstructing, removing,
replacement, and repairing the same shall be
charged to the properties benefited at one
hundred percent (100%) of the cost incurred.
(c) Requirements as detailed under Wis.
Stats. §66.0907 for sidewalks are adopted
and will be utilized by the Village.
(d) Furthermore the Village will require
that sidewalks be installed in all new
Residential Sewered subdivisions that meet
the fourteen thousand (14,000) square foot
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 8 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
per lot zoning designation and or as the
Planning Commission feels that the
installation of sidewalks is appropriate or in
the public’s best interest.
(e) The Village shall require
replacement of cracked or damaged
sidewalks. Where sidewalks or portions
thereof are in such state of disrepair as to
make it unsafe or impracticable in the
judgment of the Village to repair the same,
the Village may order such sidewalk or
portion thereof replaced with a new
sidewalk of the same or different width.
The following policies apply.
(f) Basis of Assessments. Sidewalk
construction or improvements will be
assessed on a front footage basis unless a per
lot assessment policy is adopted for a
project.
(13) Streets Improvements and
Reconstruction. The Village will use the
following criteria for calculating special
assessments levied for street projects.
(a) General Application. All street
improvements and reconstruction projects
undertaken by the Village shall be
constructed by the Village in accordance
with the most current version of construction
specifications established by the Village.
All projects shall be specially assessed by
the Village. The following policies apply:
1. Replacement, repair, and
maintenance of existing streets shall be paid
for by the Village.
2. When any street is upgraded from its
current design that portion of improvement
above and beyond the original cross section,
such as widening or addition of curb and
gutter shall be assessed to the benefiting
parcels.
3. When any street within a residential
area is constructed or reconstructed to reflect
an urban cross section, or to be wider than
twenty-eight feet (28’) as measured from the
back of curb to back of curb, benefiting
parcels shall only be assessed for a twentyeight
foot (28’) street at a cost determined
by the Engineer. The additional expense for
the wider street shall be paid by the Village.
4. When any street within a business,
industrial or institutional district is
constructed or reconstructed to be wider
than forty-four feet (44’) as measured from
the back of curb to back of curb, benefiting
parcels shall only be assessed for a fortyfour
foot (44’) street at a cost determined by
the Engineer. The additional expense for the
wider street shall be paid by the Village.
(b) Basis of Assessments.
Improvements will be assessed on a front
footage basis unless a per lot assessment
policy is adopted for a project.
(14) Curb and Gutter. At this time the
Village chooses not to require that curb and
gutter sidewalks be installed in retrofitting
existing neighborhoods.
(15) Special Assessment Payments.
(a) Annual Installments. Whenever any
special assessments shall be levied to defray
the cost of any public improvement such
special assessments may be paid in annual
installments of not more than ten (10) in
number as determined by the Board.
1. If an assessment for a particular
property exceeds seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), the owner may elect to pay the
assessment in installments.
2. Interest shall be charged at the rate
the Village is charged plus two and a half
percent (2.5%) if funds are borrowed for the
work involved. If no funds are borrowed,
interest shall be charged at the rate that
would have been charged if funds had been
borrowed as determined by the ten (10) year
treasury note effective on the date of the
final resolution to assess.
3. The use of a tiered plan may be used
by the Village. For example, assessments
from zero dollars ($0) to seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750) are due up front, assessments
from seven hundred fifty-one dollars ($751)
to two thousand five hundred dollars
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 9 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
($2,500) may be paid with up to three (3)
installments in two (2) years, assessments
from two thousand five hundred one dollars
($2,501) to ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
may be paid with up to five (5) installments;
assessments exceeding ten thousand dollars
($10,000) may be made over ten (10) years.
(b) Delinquent Installment. If any
installment was not paid to the Treasurer
with the other taxes, it shall be returned to
the County as delinquent and accepted and
collected by the County in the same manner
as delinquent general taxes on real estate.
(c) Payment Procedures. All publicly
owned and tax exempt properties, including
lands owned or controlled by the Village,
County, State, and School District, will be
assessed at one hundred percent (100%) of
the assessment rate.
(d) When county, state, or federal aids
are available for a specific project, they will
be applied first to reduce the Village’s share
of the cost of the project (if any). Any
remaining funds will be applied to reduce
assessments.
(e) Method of payment. Interest rates
shall be compounded annually. Interest
rates and installment payments shall be
determined by the final assessment
resolution of the Board.
(f) Separate current year special
assessment bills on an individual property
may be combined to establish eligibility for
the installment payment options. To avoid
having the entire amount placed on the tax
roll, the Treasurer must be notified in
writing prior to November 1 if an owner is
going to elect an installment option. The
total amount of all outstanding special
assessments will become due and payable
upon sale or transfer of the property.
(16) Calculating Assessable Footage.
Assessable footage is equal to the total
number of developable feet that a parcel of
land fronts upon the right-of-way or
easement in which the public work or
improvement is to be installed and property
benefited or minimum frontage, whichever
is greater. For assessment purposes,
assessable footage shall be determined as
follows:
1. Platted lands. If the parcel of land to
be assessed has been platted under Wis.
Stats. Ch. 236, the lot line dimensions
shown on the certified survey map or
subdivision plat shall be used to determine
assessable footage.
2. Unplatted lands. If the parcel of land
to be assessed is not platted, and if no
accurate plat of survey or other record is
available which indicates the dimensions of
the parcel, assessable footage shall be
determined by scaling or field measurement
or best available information.
3. Corner lots. Corner lots when both
sides are to be improved. The assessable
footage of a corner lot is equal to the sum of
the dimensions of the two (2) lot lines
fronting on the right(s)-of-way or
easement(s) in which the public work or
improvement is to be installed plus the arc
of the intersection of the same two (2) lot
lines and subtracting the minimum lot width
required by zoning from the length of the
longest side being assessed.
4. Corner lots when only one (1) side is
to be improved. The assessable footage
shall be calculated in the manner described
above except that only the dimension of the
lot line which fronts on the right-of-way or
easement in which the public work or
improvement is to be installed shall be used
plus one-half (½) of the arc of the
intersection of said lot line with the lot line
fronting on the second (2nd) right-of-way.
5. Where the dimension of the arc on a
corner lot is not available or cannot be
determined, the tangent, radius, or a field
measurement may be substituted.
6. Double-sided lots. The assessable
frontage for double-sided lots shall be
calculated the same as platted lands but will
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 10 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
only be assessed for the frontage on the side
which utilities are first installed to service
said lot.
7. Triple-sided lots. The assessable
frontage for triple-sided lots will be
calculated by subtracting the minimum lot
width required by zoning from the length of
the two (2) longest sides being assessed.
8. Odd-shaped or irregular lots. The
assessable frontage will be calculated as the
actual frontage of the property at the rightof-
way or the minimum lot width required
by zoning, whichever is greater.
9. Minimum frontage. The assessable
frontage will be calculated as the actual
frontage of the property at the right-of-way
or the minimum lot width required by
zoning, whichever is greater.
10. Full assessment. Anytime storm
sewer, sanitary sewer, or water services are
extended in such a manner so as to allow a
parcel of land to connect to or benefit from
such services, that parcel’s assessable
footage shall be calculated in the manner
specified in this policy regardless of whether
the storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or water
service mains are physically installed along
the entire length of that parcel of land. Any
parcel of land so assessed shall be deemed
fully served and shall not be subject to any
further assessment for storm sewer, sanitary
sewer or water service mains.
11. Partial assessment. An assessment
shall be considered partial when any public
work or improvement is installed which is
intended to serve only a portion of a parcel
of land, given that such parcel may be
further subdivided, and such subdivision
would then require further extension of
services at that time in order to serve said
parcel.
12. A partial assessment shall be
calculated by subtracting one (1) from the
potential number of lots that could be
created for the property and multiplying that
number by the minimum lot width will
calculate the length of the deferred frontage.
If two (2) or more services are to be
provided, the number of services to be
provided will be subtracted from the
potential number of lots that could be
created for the property. Dividing the total
length of assessable frontage by the
minimum lot width for the property and
rounding the number down to the next
whole number will calculate the potential
number of lots that could be created for the
property. Any parcel of land assessed in
accordance with this policy shall be
considered partially served and shall be fully
subject to future assessments for additional
extensions of public works or
improvements.
13. Adjacent municipalities. Property in
an adjacent municipality which abuts and
benefits from an improvement may be
specially assessed if the adjacent
municipality adopts a resolution approving
the levy. If adopted, the Treasurer of the
adjacent municipality must collect the
assessment as a tax and pay it over to the
Treasurer of the Village.
14. Improvements which are not
directly assessable to abutting property
owners or elsewhere covered in this policy
will be averaged into the unit costs over the
project limits and apportioned to all affected
properties in accordance with the applicable
assessment formula.
15. Utility infrastructure oversize policy
for special assessment districts. To promote
efficient design, to provide needed capacity
for system expansion, and protect the longterm
interest of the community, the Village
may require that water or sewer mains be
larger than necessary within a particular
neighborhood when constructed. The
Village recognizes the burden that these
requirements may place on a landowner, and
the following policy shall apply to those
conditions where the Village will pay for
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 11 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
costs required to invest in additional
capacity.
16. Should a landowner connect into a
water or sewer main that was built oversized
by a developer for a project not within the
assessment district, the Village may require
a partial refund to the developer upon use by
the benefited property. Regulations shall be
followed as indicated in the Wis. Adm.
Code PSC 187.
17. Administrative costs.
Administrative costs are defined as a
reasonable charge for services of the
administrative, engineering, and legal staffs
of the Village. To cover administrativerelated
costs for a project, the Village will
add ten percent (10%) to total project costs.
(17) Exemptions. The Board may grant
an exemption from the requirements of this
policy in any specific case where the Board
considers that there is an emergency,
hardship, or urgent need for granting such
exemption. The Village and/or the
appropriate utility will carry the cost of
exempting the assessment until the
assessment becomes due and payable. Other
exemptions are as follows:
(a) Farmland. Eligible farmland is
exempt from special assessments as
described in Wis. Stat. §91.15. Land zoned
“exclusive agriculture” or for which a
farmland preservation agreement under Wis.
Stat. Ch. 91 is in existence, is exempt from
special assessments, unless according to
Wis. Stat. §91.15 the assessments were
imposed prior to filing for Exclusive
Agriculture (EA) status or the owner of the
land chooses to use the improvements
created by the assessment. At such time, the
assessments, together with all interest
accrued, shall be charged to the owner for
use of the improvements.
(b) Wetlands. All wetland areas shall be
deferred. Brown County published wetland
mapping shall be utilized to determine
wetland areas. Any property owner
contesting this determination may complete
or present an official wetland delineation by
a qualified expert (as determined by the
Board) subsequent to the preliminary
resolution to assess but prior to passage of
the final assessment resolution. Assessable
footage for this parcel shall be adjusted
according to this determination, but
consistent with other sections of this
ordinance.
(c) Non-Benefited Properties. Those
properties, which are undevelopable as
determined by the Board and thus nonbenefited
due to building setback restriction,
easements, or other zoning restrictions, shall
be deferred.
(18) TID #1 Assessment Policy.
Special assessments shall be levied upon
property within the original boundaries of
TID #1 as it was created for January 1,
2004, based on the policies outlined in
Section 3.02 (1-4 and 8-12) of this policy.
In addition, the following policies are
hereby adopted whenever streets are
required to be constructed in TID #1.
(a ) Definitions.
1. TID means Tax Increment District
created under Wis. Stats. §66.1105 and
defined under Wis. Stats. §66.1105(2)(k).
2. TIF means Tax Incremental
Financing, a method of financing
improvements in the TID.
3. Base TID #1 means the parcels of
land included in the Village TID #1 on
January 1, 2004.
(b) Street, Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter
Construction.
1. Sidewalks - General Application.
The Board shall prescribe the location and
width of new sidewalks. The following
policies apply. The Board may order
sidewalks to be constructed where none
previously existed along any street,
irrespective of whether the abutting lands
have been improved, whenever in the
judgment of the Board the safety and
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 12 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
welfare of the public requires it. Sidewalks
as ordered by the Board are deemed to be a
public improvement and the cost of
installation, construction, maintaining,
reconstructing, removing, replacement, and
repairing the same shall be charged to the
properties benefited at one hundred percent
(100%) of the cost incurred. Requirements
as detailed under Wis. Stats. §66.0907 for
sidewalks are adopted and will be utilized
by the Village.
2. Streets – General Application. All
street improvements and reconstruction
projects undertaken by the Village shall be
constructed by the Village in accordance
with specifications established by the
current edition of the State of Wisconsin
Standard Specifications for highway and
structure construction. All projects shall be
specially assessed by the Village to the
benefiting property. When any street within
a business, industrial or institutional district
is constructed or improved to be wider than
forty-four feet (44’) as measured from the
back of curb to back of curb, benefiting
parcels shall only be assessed for a fortyfour
foot (44’) street at a cost determined by
the Engineer. The additional expense for the
wider street shall be paid by the Village.
3. Curb & Gutter – General Application.
No street in the Village shall be considered
permanently improved unless curb and
gutter is installed on each side in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by
the Board and the Engineer. Basis of
assessments for street, sidewalk, curb, and
gutter construction – Improvements will be
assessed on a front footage basis unless a per
lot assessment policy is adopted for a
project.
(c) TID Increment Credits. The value
of TIF lies in its ability to finance
infrastructure improvements within its
boundaries to stimulate economic
development, bringing tax base into the
community. Because TID revenue is based
on the increment value between the base
valuation and new construction within the
district from the date of the creation of the
district, a credit will be granted to land
owners located within the Base TID based
on the value of construction occurring after
the creation date of TID #1, January 1, 2004
through the close of the TID.
1. The amount of the special
assessments to be levied on each parcel
included in the Base TID #1 (hereinafter
defined as the net cost of the public
improvements) shall be determined by the
following formula:
A = P - (I -Ø), where
“A” is the amount of the special
assessment and is also the net cost of the
public improvements;
“P” is the total cost of the public
improvements including a reasonable charge
for the services of the administrative staff of
the Village and the cost of engineering,
planning, and legal services, and any other
item of direct or indirect cost, including
accrued interest attributable to the public
improvements, but excluding interest on
borrowed funds accruing after the time of
the special assessment levy;
“Ø” is other project costs (not included
in “P” above) incurred by the Village in
connection with the Base TID whether or
not funds were borrowed therefore (for
example, consultant and professional fees
and staff costs, including interest on
borrowed funds accruing until, but not after,
the time of the special assessment levy); and
“I” is the tax increment revenues
collected to date of calculation plus the
present value of the projected tax increment
revenues to be derived from the individual
parcels and collected after the calculation
through TID #1 closeout. The present value
shall be calculated using the interest rate or
rates on amounts borrowed by the Village
for the public improvement project costs. In
calculating the present value of the projected
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 13 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
local tax increments, the Village shall apply
the gross equalized mill rate then in effect
times the then current equalized valuation of
the individual parcels.
(d) The Village shall levy special
assessments as soon as practical upon
completion of the project. The Village shall
defer the collection of the special
assessments for a period of five (5) years
after the passage of the final resolution to
assess. At such time the Village shall
determine if there will be a positive net cost
of the public improvements (A>Ø) as
determined by the formula set forth above.
(e) Regardless of when they are levied,
the special assessments shall be payable in
ten (10) equal annual principal installments,
the last of which shall be due in 2024,
extended from 2023, allowing for the 2013
tax roll installments payable in 2014 be
delayed to the 2014 tax roll payable in 2015,
plus interest as provided in Section 3.02(15)
of the Village Code.
(f) The special assessments shall accrue
interest according to Section 3.02(15) of the
Village Code. If any special assessment
installment is placed on the tax rolls, it shall
from that point forward accrue interest in the
manner and at the rate of other real property
taxes. A developer’s agreement may be
reached with current or future property
owners in TID #1 - Base Area, under which
the assessments on the property or properties
affected may be reduced or satisfied by
increment generated on the parcels covered
by the agreement.
(g) Assessments shall be levied on all
properties benefited by the installation of
infrastructure. In cases where a property
owner receives only water services, the
assessments will be deferred until sewer is
installed or 2017, ten (10) years prior to the
mandatory close of the TID.
(h) Property owners within the TID
District who do not have sewer available but
who have water available to their properties
may hook-up to water at any time by
requesting service of the water utility. At
such time that hook-up is complete, the five
(5) year deferred assessment billing begins.
Property owners who are not hooked up to
water service are subject to all rules and
regulations of the PSC for non-connected
customers.
3.03 IMPACT FEES.
(1) Introduction and Purpose.
Pursuant to the authority of Wis. Stats.
§66.0617, the local impact fees enabling
legislation, the purpose of this ordinance is
to establish the mechanism for the
imposition of impact fees upon development
including, but not limited to, new users
connecting to water treatment and waste
water treatment facilities and systems for
which excess capacity has been built into
said systems, to finance the capital costs
necessary to accommodate said land
development. This chapter is intended to
assure that land development (as defined
herein) and new development bears a
proportionate share of the cost of capital
expenditures necessary to provide public
facilities within the Village and its service
areas as they are required to serve the needs
arising out of land development.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Capital Costs. As defined in Wis.
Stats. §66.0617(1)(a).
(b) Developer. As defined in Wis.
Stats. §66.0617(1)(b) which shall include,
but not be limited to, new users to water
treatment systems and waste water treatment
systems for which excess capacity has been
built into said systems.
(c) Impact Fees. As defined in Wis.
Stats. §66.0617(1)(c).
(d) Land Development. As defined in
Wis. Stats. §66.0617(1)(d) including, but not
limited to, existing residential equivalent
units added to water treatment systems and
waste water treatment systems for which
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 14 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
excess capacity has been built into the
system and/or additional capital
infrastructure acquired from the former
Town of Suamico Sanitary District.
(e) Public Facilities. As defined in Wis.
Stats. §66.0617(1)(f).
(f) Residential Equivalent Unit
(hereinafter referred to as “REU”). Means a
residential living space required to house
one (1) family regardless of family size. For
example, a duplex would consist of two (2)
residential equivalent units.
(g) Service Area. Means a geographic
area delineated by the Village within which
the Village provides public facilities.
(h) Service Standard. Means a certain
quantity or quality of public facilities
relative to a certain number of persons,
parcels of land or other appropriate measure
as specified by the Village of Suamico
Village Board.
(3) Public Facilities Needs
Assessment. New public facilities or
improvements for which impact fees will be
imposed are those which are identified in the
Public Facilities Needs Assessment for
water and wastewater impact fees reports
prepared prior to the adoption of this chapter
and any amendments hereto or additional
reports that may be amended or adopted in
the future. All public facilities needs
assessment reports that form the basis of any
impact fee imposed by the Village shall be
kept on file in the office of the Clerk at least
twenty (20) days prior to any public hearing
to be held on the creation of this chapter and
any amendments. A Class 1 notice under
Wis. Stats. Ch. 985 is required prior to any
required hearing. All public facilities needs
assessment reports shall remain on file in the
office of the Clerk for the entire period
during which impact fees arising out of a
specific report and this chapter are collected
prior to expenditure, and such report shall,
after expenditure of all impact fees, be
maintained as a public record for such time
period as required by law.
(4) Impact Fee Revenue
Administration.
(a) Revenues from impact fees shall be
placed in one (1) or more segregated,
interest-bearing accounts and shall be
accounted for separately from other Village
general and utility funds. Impact fee
revenues and interest earned thereon may be
expended only for capital costs for which
the impact fees were imposed.
(b) Impact fee revenues imposed and
collected but not used within seven (7) years
after collection to pay the capital costs for
which they were imposed shall be refunded
along with interest collected on a prorated
proportional basis, as determined by the
Board, to the current record owner or
owners of the property with respect to which
the impact fees were imposed. The Village
reserves the right to extend the time limit up
to three (3) years allowed for extenuating
circumstances by Wis. Stats. §66.0617(9)(b)
on a needs basis.
(5) Use of Impact Fees. Funds
collected from impact fees shall be used
solely for the purpose of paying the
proportionate costs of providing public
facilities that become necessary due to land
development. These costs may include the
costs of debt service on bonds or similar
debt instruments when the debt has been
incurred for the purpose of proceeding with
designated public facilities projects prior to
the collection of all anticipated impact fees
for that project.
(6) Payment of Impact Fee.
(a) New Construction.
1. All required impact fees shall be paid
one hundred percent (100%) by the
developer or property owner fourteen (14)
days prior to the issuance of the building
permit.
2. All required impact fees for lots or
development that does not occur within a
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 15 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
plat or a CSM shall be paid one hundred
percent (100%) prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
(b) Existing Structures.
1. Onsite Water Systems. Due to excess
capacity built into the water system in order
to allow for growth of said water system,
including acquisition cost of capital
infrastructure from the former Town of
Suamico Sanitary District, for current onsite
systems (outside of Harbor Lights Lake
Subdivision Phases I-VII), at the time that a
water extension is awarded to connect
property to the Village water system, an
impact fee per REU shall be paid in
accordance with Section 3.03 (9). For lots
or development within the Village that are
being constructed using onsite water
treatment systems because there is no access
to water services, no water impact fee will
be imposed until such time as the REU is
connected to the water system. At that time,
an impact fee will be charged in accordance
with Section 3.03 (9).
Notwithstanding the foregoing for onsite
systems within Harbor Lights Lake
Subdivision Phases I-VII, at the time that a
water extension is awarded to connect
property to the Village water system, an
impact fee equal to twenty-six and seven
hundred twelve thousandths percent
(26.712%) of the impact fee set forth at
Exhibit A shall be paid. For example, if the
existing water impact fee at Exhibit A is two
thousand dollars ($2,000) per REU for
onsite systems within Harbor Lights Lakes
Subdivision, the impact fee would be five
hundred thirty-four dollars and twenty-four
cents ($534.24) ($2,000 x 26.712%). This
fee may be reviewed and adjusted with
respect to Harbor Lights Lake Subdivision
Phases I-VII in accordance with the
recommendation of Village Engineers and
Foth & Van Dyke Engineers dated
February 3, 2006, the terms of which are
incorporated herein.
2. Onsite Wastewater Systems.
Notwithstanding any other article herein to
the contrary for lots or development within
the Village that are being constructed using
onsite wastewater treatment systems because
there is no access to wastewater services, no
wastewater impact fee will be imposed until
such time as the REU is connected to the
wastewater system. At that time an impact
fee will be charged in accordance with
Section 3.03 (8).
(7) Appeals.
(a) The developer or property owner
upon whom an impact fee is imposed may
contest the amount, collection, or use of an
impact fee as specified herein. An appeal to
contest either the amount or collection of an
impact fee imposed on a developer shall be
commenced at any time prior to
endorsement of the approval certificate on
any subdivision plat or certified survey map
by the Clerk, but no later than thirty (30)
days from the date of notification of final
action approving such plat or survey. An
appeal to contest the amount, collection or
use of an impact fee may be commenced
within thirty (30) days of application for a
building permit, if applicable to the
particular impact fee. An appeal to contest
the use of an impact fee shall be commenced
not later than thirty (30) days prior to the
award of any public contract for expenditure
of the collected fee revenues.
(b) An appeal is commenced by filing a
complaint with the Clerk, which complaint
shall specify the impact fee amount or
collection objected to and the basis for the
objection. The appeal shall be scheduled for
a public hearing before the Village Utility
Commission at it next regular meeting. The
Commission shall take additional evidence
and testimony on the matter, including
reports from Village staff and shall make its
recommendation to the Board based upon
the standards set forth in Wis. Stats.
§66.0617(6). The Board shall consider the
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 16 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
appeal, review the record made before the
Village Utility Commission and the
recommendation of the Commission, and
decide the appeal based upon the standards
for impact fees in Wis. Stats. §66.0617. The
decision of the Village Board is final.
(8) Wastewater Impact Fees.
(a) The wastewater impact fees to be
paid are set forth on the attached Exhibit A
which is fully incorporated herein and which
has been calculated and updated pursuant to
the public facilities needs assessment dated
August 30, 2004 previously set forth and
referenced.
(b) These fees shall be increased on
April 1 of each year by the percentage
increase in the Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index (ENR) from the
previous calendar year to the current
calendar year. In the event there is a
decrease in the ENR Construction Cost
Index, the previous year’s impact fee shall
remain unchanged.
(c) These impact fees shall be collected
until all capital costs associated with
specified projects in the Public Facilities
Needs Assessment for Water and
Wastewater Impact Fees report have been
addressed consistent with the requirements
of Section 3.03 (4) (b).
(9) Water Impact Fees.
(a) The water impact fees to be paid are
set forth on the attached Exhibit A which is
fully incorporated herein and which has
been calculated and updated pursuant to the
public facilities needs assessment dated
August 30, 2004 previously set forth and
referenced.
(b) These fees shall be increased on
April 1 of each year by the percentage
increase in the Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index (ENR) from the
previous calendar year to the current
calendar year. In the event there is a
decrease in the ENR Construction Cost
Index, the previous year’s impact fee shall
remain unchanged.
(c) These impact fees shall be collected
until all capital costs associated with
specified projects in the Public Facilities
Needs Assessment for Water and
Wastewater Impact Fees report have been
addressed consistent with the requirements
of Section 3.03 (4) (b).
(10) Penalties.
(a) All impact fees must be paid in a
timely manner in accordance with this
ordinance. If fees remain unpaid beyond the
time requirements as set forth herein, any
unpaid fees shall become a lien upon the real
estate parcel upon which the fee is imposed.
Unpaid fees shall accrue interest at the rate
of eighteen percent (18%) per annum as of
the fee due date. If for any reason a building
permit is issued to a subject parcel without
the payment of an impact fee as required
within this ordinance, the Village reserves
the right to withhold any additional permits
for the subject parcel including occupancy
permits or plumbing permits until such time
as the impact fees and accrued interest are
paid in full. This penalty provision may be
enforced through the Village Municipal
Court pursuant to Chapter 25 of the Village
Municipal Code. Enforcement penalties
through municipal or circuit court shall
include the costs of collection and/or
prosecution costs incurred by the Village.
3.04 BUDGET.
(1) Proposed Budget Due November
15. Annually on or before September 15,
the Village Administrator shall commence
preparation of the budget for the ensuing
calendar year. The Village Administrator
shall work with the various Village officials
to construct a proposed budget document to
be submitted to the Village Board on or
before November 15 of each year.
(2) Annual Expenditures and
Expenses. The budget document shall be
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 17 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
prepared in accordance with Wis. Stats.
§65.90 and shall include all funds expecting
to incur expenditures/expenses in the
ensuing calendar year. The budget
document shall also include the following
information:
(a) A summary by fund of all
revenues (by source) and
expenditures/expenses (categorized by
function), including debt service
requirements, for the ensuing calendar year
and corresponding items for the current year
(estimated or actual through at least the first
eight (8) months) and last preceding year.
(b) The formal budget shall be
adopted at the fund level with revenues and
expenditures adopted at their functional
level (not by line item) similar to the budget
summary required by Wis. Stats.
65.90(3)(b).
(c) An itemization of all accounts
rolled into each functional level adopted
shall be included in the final budget
document provided to the Village Board and
department heads after formal adoption of
the budget occurs.
(d) Such other information as may
be required by the Village Board.
(3) Budget Summary Contents. The
Village Administrator shall prepare a
summary of the budget and shall publish the
notice required under Wis. Stats.
65.90(3)(a). Pursuant to Wis. Stats.
65.90(3)(b), the budget summary shall
include the following:
(a) All revenues by major revenue
source.
(b) All expenditures by major
expenditure category.
(c) All financing sources and uses
not included under Subsections (a) and (b)
of this section.
(d) All beginning and year-end fund
balances.
(4) Notice: Public Hearing. A public
hearing shall be held after submission of the
proposed budget by the Village
Administrator to the Village Board subject
to a Class 1 notice being published at least
fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. The
hearing will allow any resident or taxpayer
of the Village to have an opportunity to be
heard on the proposed budget.
(5) Resolution Adopting
Appropriations and Tax Levies.
Following the public hearing, the Village
Board shall have the right to discuss,
modify, or alter in any way the budget
presented by the Village Administrator
before formal adoption of the budget
document. A formal resolution adopting the
budget appropriations and resulting tax
levies will be adopted by the Village Board.
(6) Transfer of an Appropriation to
Other Purpose; Notice. The Village Board
may, pursuant to Wis. Stats. 65.90(5)(a), by
a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire
membership, transfer any portion of an
unencumbered balance of an appropriation
to any other purpose or object. Notice of
such transfer shall be given by publication
within ten (10) days thereafter in the official
Village newspaper.
(7) Funds Drawn from Village
Treasury. No money shall be drawn from
the treasury of the Village, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be
incurred, except in pursuance of the annual
resolution, or of such resolution when
charged as authorized by Section 3.03(5).
Each fund that derives a surplus of revenues
over expenditures/expenses shall maintain
such surplus within the fund unless the
Village Board authorizes a transfer of funds.
3.05 CLAIMS, INVOICES, OR OTHER
ASSERTIONS.
(1) Payment Procedures. All financial
claims against the Village shall be approved
following Wis. Stats. 66.0609. Claims,
invoices, or other assertions made within the
annual approved budget by authorized
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 18 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
employees of the Village shall be reviewed
by the manager of the initiating department.
These purchases shall follow the purchasing
policy as outlined in the Village’s
operational policy manual. The manager
shall then assign the appropriate account
number based on the annual adopted budget,
sign and date the claim document indicating
the item or service has been actually
supplied or rendered and that the claim is
just and valid pursuant to law. The manager
must then forward the approved claim to the
Finance Department for payment. The
Finance Department shall review the
assigned account number for accuracy and
may make any necessary changes to
appropriately record the expenditure per the
adopted budget.
Department managers must review with
the Village Administrator any requests to
deviate from their approved budgets.
Village Board approval may be necessary
for such situations and will be determined
by the Village Administrator if this may be
the case.
All checks cut for the purpose of paying
such claims shall be countersigned by the
Clerk (or his or her deputy) and the
Treasurer (or his or her deputy) or the
Village Administrator. One of these
signatures may be made by electronic means
or signature stamp with permission of that
individual. This electronic signature or
signature stamp must be stored in a secure
environment under the responsibility of the
Village Clerk.
All disbursements of Village payroll
shall be issued by automated clearing house,
direct deposit, or similar method as
technologies change. All employees shall
be required to provide the necessary
information to the Village in order to be
credited into their designated bank, credit
union, or related organization account.
(2) Reporting Requirements for
Claims. A summary of the claims approved
for payment (excluding payroll claims) shall
be submitted by the Village Treasurer to the
Village Board for their approval not less
than monthly showing the date paid, name
of claimant, purpose for claim, and amount
paid. Payroll claims may be listed as a lump
sum distribution amount on said monthly
report with payroll taxes being reported as
lump sum amounts split by their
corresponding tax category.
(3) Annual Audit Required. A
detailed annual audit of the Village’s
financial transactions and accounts shall be
performed by a certified public accountant
from the firm chosen by the Village Board
as the Village’s auditor. The Village’s
auditor shall present the audit findings to the
Village Board once per year after
completion of the previous year’s audit.
3.06 DEPOSITS; RECEIPTING.
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. 61.26(3), the Village
Treasurer shall deposit all funds received
into the public depositories designated by
the Village Board. Cash receipting and
deposit procedures shall be maintained in
the Village’s operational policy manual.
The Treasurer may utilize automated
clearinghouse, direct payments, or similar
technologies for accepting payments for any
and all Village business including the sewer
utility, stormwater utility, water utility, and
any other utility created by the Village
Board.
3.07 FINANCIAL REPORTING.
The Village shall prepare annual finance
reports in accordance with governmental
accounting standards. The annual financial
report shall be audited by an independent
certified public accountant. The annual
report shall strive to meet all the standards
of the Government Finance Officer’s
Association of the United States and Canada
in preparing a comprehensive annual
financial report.
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 19 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
3.08 TREASURER’S BOND
ELIMINATED.
(1) The Village of Suamico elects not to
give the bond on the Village Treasurer
provided for by Section 70.67(1) of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) In accordance with the provisions of
Section 70.67(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes,
the Village Board of the Village of Suamico
hereby agrees and binds the Village of
Suamico to pay, in case the Village
Treasurer or the Treasurer’s successor in
office shall fail to do so, all taxes of any
kind required by law to be paid by the
Village Treasurer or Treasurer’s successor
in office to the Brown County Treasurer or
the Brown County Treasurer’s successor in
office. A certified copy of this section shall
be filed with the Brown County Treasurer’s
office and shall remain in effect until a
certified copy of its repeal is filed with such
County Treasurer.
3.09 DEBT MANAGEMENT.
(1) Introduction and Purpose. The
capital financing and debt policy provides
comprehensive guidance for future decisions
regarding financing of capital projects
including the appropriate use of debt. The
Village’s legacy of financial stability is built
upon a conservative approach to spending as
well as a long-term commitment to full and
timely repayment of debt. For a debt
management policy to be an effective tool,
the provisions of the policy must be
compatible with the Village’s goals
pertaining to the capital improvement
program, the 5-year budget plan, and the
operating needs of the Village. Multi-year
forecasts of debt service are to be included
in all budget plans.
(2) Guiding Principles. The following
policies and principles are intended to
govern the issuance of all Village debt.
(a) Debt financing should be considered
for capital improvement programs as
approved in the 5-year capital improvement
program budget, after all nondebt sources of
funds (e.g. cash, grants, loans, etc.) have
been considered.
(b) The Village has historically paid for
a large portion of its capital budget on a cash
basis through the use of various sinking
funds. It expects to continue this practice
and use cash to pay for capital expenditures
that it expects to recur on an annual basis
(such as Road Reconstruction and
Equipment Replacement) or when reserves
are available that are not expected to be
needed for other purposes in the foreseeable
future.
(c) The Village should consult the
Municipal Financial Advisor, if applicable,
to determine the most appropriate source of
financing (grants, low-interest statesponsored
loans, private market loans,
capital markets, etc.).
(d) Debt financing should not be used
for proprietary fund activities without a
designated revenue source for retiring
principal and interest. The Village should
identify a specific source of revenue for the
repayment of each debt issuance and
calculate the expected impact on rates and
user fees prior to the issuance of the debt.
(e) Generally, revenue debt should be
utilized to finance utility related projects to
minimize impact on statutory debt limits,
except in cases where it is determined that
utilizing less expensive General Obligation
debt will not have a materially adverse
impact on overall debt limits.
(f) Prior to debt issuance considerations,
“pay-as-you-go” financing should be
considered for all major projects, including
capital improvements projects, to keep debt
at a manageable level.
(g) Debt should be structured so that the
principal will be retired over the useful life
of the project financed. The Village shall not
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 20 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
issue debt for a period longer than the period
during which it intends to use the capital
improvement being financed.
(h) Village management shall
periodically work with the Municipal
Financial Advisor to determine whether an
economical advantage exists for refinancing
the outstanding debt given changes in the
interest rate and bond market and to review
its overall debt profile to monitor debt levels
relative to statutory and policy limits.
(i) The Village will maintain good
communications with bond rating agencies
about its financial condition with an intent to
retain a favorable bond rating.
(j) The Village should continue to avoid
assuming “development risk” and
implement specific guarantees from
developers (letters of credit, personal
guarantees, right to assess, etc.).
(k) The Village will work with the
Municipal Financial Advisor to diligently
monitor its compliance with bond covenants,
ensure its adherence to federal arbitrage
regulations, and file annual continuing
disclosure reports as required by the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission.
3.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY, AND
ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this ordinance,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation. Failure or refusal to
pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
3-Finance & Taxation Page 21 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 3
Ordinance 2008-03 Repealing and Recreating Section 3.02
Adopted 3-3-08
Ordinance 2009-25 Recreating Impact Fee Ordinance for Water and Sewer
Adopted 12-7-09
Ordinance 2010-15 Amending Chapter 3, Adding Sections 3.03, 3.04, 3.05, and 3.06
Adopted 6-21-10
Ordinance 2012-01 Repealing and Recreating 3.01(2) Tax Imposed
Adopted 2-20-12
Ordinance 2014-04 Amending Chapter 3.02 (18) (e) TID #1 Assessment Policy
Adopted 8-18-14
Ordinance 2019-08 Creating 3.08 Treasurer’s Bond Eliminated
Adopted 10-7-19
Ordinance 2020-07 Creating 3.09 Debt Management
Adopted 3-16-20
Village of Suamico
Chapter 4
4-Public Safety Page 1 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
PUBLIC SAFETY
Subchapter I – Fire Department Operations ........................................................................... 2
4.01 Authority to Provide Fire Protection ............................................................................... 2
4.02 Definitions ........................................................................................................................... 2
4.03 Composition of the Department ....................................................................................... 2
4.04 Authority at Emergency Incidents ................................................................................... 3
4.05 Investigations ...................................................................................................................... 4
4.06 Fire Jurisdiction ................................................................................................................. 4
4.07 Vacation of Buildings ......................................................................................................... 4
Subchapter II – Fire Prevention ................................................................................................ 4
4.08 Fire Prevention Code ......................................................................................................... 4
4.09 Local Adoption of State and National Codes .................................................................. 5
4.095 Fire Inspections ................................................................................................................ 5
4.10 Controlled Receptacles ...................................................................................................... 6
4.11 Ashes.................................................................................................................................... 6
4.12 Smoking .............................................................................................................................. 6
4.13 Negligent Handling of Burning Material ......................................................................... 6
4.14 Interfering with Firefighting ............................................................................................. 7
4.15 False Alarms ....................................................................................................................... 7
4.16 Lock Boxes .......................................................................................................................... 7
4.17 Portable Fire Extinguishers .............................................................................................. 7
4.18 Regulation of Fireworks .................................................................................................... 7
4.19 Open Burning ................................................................................................................... 13
4.20 Fire Inspection Required before Occupancy ................................................................. 16
4.21 Installation Permits .......................................................................................................... 16
4.22 Reference Standards ........................................................................................................ 17
4.23 Effective Date ................................................................................................................... 17
4.24 Flammable and Combustible Liquids Storage .............................................................. 17
4.25 Nuisance Smoke/Fires ...................................................................................................... 18
4.26 Fees Charged for Emergency Calls ................................................................................ 18
4.27 Tent Regulations .............................................................................................................. 19
Subchapter III – Law Enforcement ........................................................................................ 20
4.51 Police Department ............................................................................................................ 20
4.52 Chief of Police; Powers and Duties ................................................................................. 20
4.53 Police Officers................................................................................................................... 21
4.54 Rules and Regulations ..................................................................................................... 21
Subchapter IV – Emergency Alarm Ordinance ..................................................................... 21
4.91 Purpose.............................................................................................................................. 21
4.92 Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 21
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 2 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
4.93 False Alarms, Service Fees .............................................................................................. 22
4.99 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement......................................................................... 22
SUBCHAPTER I – FIRE
DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS
4.01 AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE FIRE
PROTECTION. Pursuant to Wis. Stat.
§61.65 (2)(a), the Village has established the
Village Fire Department to provide fire
prevention and protection services for the
Village residents, visitors and investors.
4.02 DEFINITIONS. The following is a
list of definitions for the intent of
consistency and clarification of this code.
(1) Fire Chief – The Suamico Fire
Department Chief
(2) Department – The Suamico Fire
Department
(3) He/his – Uniform language to be
inclusive of she/her
(4) Stop Work – To cease and desist
work activity, to stop an action.
(5) Commission – Fire Commission of
the Village
(6) Village Board – Board
(7) Village – Village of Suamico
(8) Officer – An officer of the Suamico
Fire Department
(9) Building Inspection Department –
The Village Zoning and Planning
Department and Building Inspectors
4.03 COMPOSITION OF THE
DEPARTMENT.
(1) Organizational Structure. The
Department shall be made up of a
combination of volunteers and fire
administrative staff as appropriated by the
Board and appointed according to the
bylaws of the Fire Commission.
(2) Fire Chief.
(a) Job Description. The job
description of the Fire Chief shall be
adopted by the Board. The Board reserves
the right to amend the job description as
needed.
(b) Appointment. The Commission
shall appoint the Chief according to the Wis.
Stat. §62.13 and the Commission’s bylaws.
(c) General Powers and Duties. The
Chief shall enforce the Wisconsin Statutes,
the Wisconsin Administrative Code and this
Code in matters relating to fire prevention,
code enforcement, public education and fire
suppression within the Village. It shall be
the duty of the Chief to direct the operation
of the Department.
(d) Presiding Officer. The Chief shall
preside at all meetings of the Department,
call special meetings, preserve order, decide
all points of order that may arise, and
enforce a rigid observance of the chapter
and the bylaws.
(e) Command of Fire Fighting
Operations. The Chief shall be present at all
fires, if possible, and have complete
command and entire responsibility of all fire
fighting operations, plan the control of the
same, direct the action of the Department
when it arrives at a fire, observe that the
Department does its duty, grant leaves of
absence at a fire when he may deem it
proper, and see that the fire apparatus is kept
in proper condition at all times.
(f) Reports to the Board. The Chief
shall submit a written report to the Board no
later than September 1 of each year, at such
time as he deems desirable, relating to the
conditions of various pieces of apparatus
and appurtenances, budget recommendations
for the coming year, the number of hydrants
and the condition of the same, the number of
fires occurring since the previous report and
the date of the same and loss occasioned
thereby, the total number of active members
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 3 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
in the Department, and resignations and
expulsions from the Department. He shall
also report upon the drill and training
program of the Department, together with
other pertinent information, including
recommendations for such improvements as
he deems proper and necessary for the
operation of the Department.
(g) Enforcement of Fire Prevention
Ordinances. He shall enforce all fire
prevention ordinances of the Village and the
state laws and regulations pertaining to fire
prevention and shall keep citizens informed
on fire prevention methods and on the
activities of the Department.
(h) Fire Incident Report. He shall keep
a computerized record of every incident to
which the Department was called and shall
enter in such book the location of the fire,
the time the alarm was received, the cause of
the fire, where the fire started, the cause of
delay, if any, in responding, the amount of
insurance carried on buildings and contents,
estimated fire loss, the time the fire was
extinguished, the names of the men
responding and general remarks.
(i) Apparatus Inventory. He shall keep
an inventory of all apparatus and equipment
and an inventory of all hose showing dates
and results of tests on each length, which
shall be individually numbered.
(j) Duties as Commanding Officer. He
shall perform such other duties as are
usually incumbent on the commanding
officer of the Fire Department.
(k) Fiscal Responsibility. Every year
the Chief shall file with the Administrator a
detailed estimate of the appropriations
needed for the conduct of the Department
operations during the ensuing fiscal year.
4.04 AUTHORITY AT EMERGENCY
INCIDENTS.
(1) Limited Access and Removal of
Property. The Chief or his designee may
prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any
emergency incident within which no
persons, except firefighters and those
admitted by order of any officer of the
department, shall be permitted to be present.
The Chief shall have the power to cause the
removal of any property whenever it shall
become necessary for the preservation of
such property from fire or to prevent the
spreading of fire or to protect the adjoining
property, and/or during the progress of any
fire he shall have the power to order the
removal or destruction of any property
necessary to prevent the further spread of
fire and the authority to preserve evidence of
suspected arson. He shall also have the
power to cause the removal of all wires or
other facilities and to turn off of all
electricity or other services, where they
impede the work of the department during
the progress of a fire or other hazardous
situation.
(2) Resistance to Operations. It shall
be lawful for any firefighter while acting
under the direction of the Chief or any other
officer in command to enter upon the
premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any
building or other property on fire or in a
hazardous environment for the purpose of
extinguishing fire or mitigating hazards.
Any person that hinders, resists or obstructs
any firefighter in the discharge of his duty as
is hereinbefore provided, the person so
offending shall be guilty under Wis. Stat.
§941.12 and subject to a forfeiture under the
penalty portion of this ordinance, of
resisting firefighters in the discharge of their
duty.
(3) Damage to Department Property.
No person shall willfully injure in any
manner any hose, hydrant or fire apparatus
belonging to the Village. No vehicle shall
be driven over any unprotected hose of the
department when laid down on any street,
private driveway or any other place, to be
used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 4 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
consent of the Department officials in
command of the emergency.
(4) The Chief or his designee in
command at any emergency incident shall
have full and complete police authority at
fires as authorized under Wisconsin Statute.
4.05 INVESTIGATIONS. The
Department shall investigate the cause,
origin, and circumstances of every fire
occurring in the Village by which property
has been destroyed or damaged and, so far
as possible, shall determine whether the fire
is the result of deliberate intent, carelessness
or design. Investigations shall begin
immediately upon occurrence of a fire. The
Chief or his designee shall immediately take
charge of the physical evidence, shall further
cooperate with local, county, state or federal
authorities in the collection of evidence and
in the prosecution of the case. Every fire
shall be reported in writing to the
Department within ten (10) days after the
occurrence of the same by the Department
Officer in command of the fire. The report
shall be in the form prescribed by the Chief
and shall contain a statement of all facts
relating to the cause, origin, and
circumstances of such fire, the extent of the
damage thereof, and the insurance upon
such property, and such other information as
may be required, including the injury, death,
or rescue of persons.
Open record requests to the Department
shall be filed with the Clerk and, with the
exception of open record requests for fire
reports, shall be completed by the Clerk
according to the provisions of Wis. Stat.
Ch. 19. The Chief shall be responsible for
open records requests for fire reports with a
copy to the Clerk.
4.06 FIRE JURISDICTION. The fire
limits of the Village shall be the
incorporated limits of the Village as
amended.
4.07 VACATION OF BUILDINGS. The
Chief is hereby empowered to close any
building or structure, and order it vacated
wherein violations of any regulations of this
chapter or any state or federal regulations
are found and which said violations
constitute a continuing hazard to the public
and are not abated within a reasonable time.
SUBCHAPTER II – FIRE
PREVENTION
4.08 FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
(1) Purpose. This ordinance provides
the Village with the rules and regulations
consistent with NFPA, NFC, and IFC
nationally-recognized good practices and/or
codes to improve public safety by promoting
the control of fire hazards; regulating the
installation, use and maintenance of
equipment; regulating the use of structures,
premises, and open areas; providing the
abatement of fire hazards; establishing the
responsibilities and procedures for code
enforcement; and setting forth the standards
for compliance and achievement of these
objectives. For the purposes of this section,
shall not apply to one (1) and two (2) family
dwellings unless specifically stated in the
code.
(2) Primary Code Adoption. This
section shall be known as the Village Fire
Prevention Code. This section adopts, but is
not limited to, the State of Wisconsin
Statutes, Department of Safety and
Professional Services Chapters 301-399, the
International Fire Code, and the National
Fire Protection Association shall be adopted.
The same, including any future
modifications or amendments, are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set
out at length herein. Not less than one (1)
copy of the adopted issue of the
International Fire Code and the adopted
standards and codes of the National Fire
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 5 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
Codes NFPA shall be filed in the office of
the Department and the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the limits of the
Village.
Any facility whose design and
construction occurred before the effective
date of this code is governed by the codes in
effect at the time of design and/or
construction. The provisions in Commerce
Chapter 14 SPS 314 and National Fire
Protection Association standards will apply
to the use, operation and maintenance of all
public buildings and places of employment
that exist on or after the effective date of this
ordinance.
(3) This act shall be deemed in exercise
of the police powers of the Village for the
preservation and protection of the public
health, peace, safety, and welfare, and all the
provisions of the Village Fire Prevention
Code shall be liberally construed for that
purpose.
4.09 LOCAL ADOPTION OF STATE
AND NATIONAL CODES. The following
are hereby adopted in their entirety.
(1) The Wis. Stats. §101.14 is hereby
adopted.
(2) The most current code, revision,
and/or amendment of National Fire
Protection Agency 101 Life Safety Code is
hereby adopted.
(3) The most current code, revision,
and/or amendment National Fire Protection
Agency Standards/codes are hereby adopted.
(4) The most current code, revision,
and/or amendment of the International Fire
Code is hereby adopted.
4.095 FIRE INSPECTIONS
(1) Inspection Duties. The Village fire
chief shall determine the frequency of fire
safety inspections as indicated by the State
of Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services (SPS Chapter 314.)
Village fire inspectors shall at least annually
inspect all buildings, premises and
thoroughfares within the fire limits for the
purpose of noting and causing to be
corrected any conditions liable to cause
fires. Repairs or alterations necessary to
remove the hazardous condition shall be
made within a reasonable time at the
expense of the owner. The village fire
inspector shall also investigate the storage
and handling the explosives and
inflammable liquids within the village.
(2) Written record of inspections. The
Village fire inspector shall keep a written or
electronic record of each property inspected.
The data within the record shall comply with
the requirements of the State of Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional
Services (SPS Chapter 314.)
(3) Correction of Fire Hazards. When
any inspection by the village fire inspector
reveals a fire hazard, the Village fire
inspector may serve a notice in writing upon
the owner of the property giving said owner
a reasonable time in which to remove the
hazard. If the fire hazard is not removed
within the time allowed, it shall be deemed a
nuisance and the inspector may have the
same removed by the village and the cost of
such removal shall be recovered in an action
by the village against the owner of the
property and may also be entered on the tax
roll as a special charge against the property.
(4) Entering on Premises. The Village
fire inspector shall be granted free access to
any property within the village at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making
fire inspections. No person shall hinder or
obstruct the village fire inspector in the
performance of official duties or refuse to
observe any lawful direction given by the
village fire inspector. Special inspection
warrant. If consent to entry to personal or
real properties which are not public
buildings or to portions of public buildings
which are not open to the public has been
denied, the fire inspector shall obtain a
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 6 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats.
§§ 66.0119 and 66.0119(3).
(5) Fire Inspection Fees.
(a) Annual fire prevention inspection fee.
An annual fire prevention inspection fee
shall be charged to the business owner for
required inspections per each building,
structure, and premises and leased premises
in which the business operates.
(b) Inspection fee schedule. All property
subject to the fire inspection fee shall be
charged according to the Village fee
schedule which may be amended by the
Village Board.
(c) Additional conditions.
1. Square footage refers to total floor
area of each building or structure, premises
or leased premises inspected per Municipal
code 4.095(1).
2. If the annual fire prevention
inspection fee, or any part thereof, remains
unpaid after November 1 of any year, the
fee shall be placed on the annual tax roll for
collection against the property owner under
Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. All rules and
regulations relating to the collection of real
estate taxes shall apply to the collection of
the annual fire prevention inspection fee.
3. The inspection fee shall be invoiced
on or before July 31 each year. Any fees
remaining unpaid 30 days after invoicing
shall receive an interest charge of one
percent per month on the unpaid balance.
4. All buildings, structures and
premises owned by the Village of Suamico
shall be exempt from the annual fire
prevention inspection fee.
4.10 CONTROLLED RECEPTACLES.
Burning of wood and/or paper products in
controlled receptacles will be allowed with a
permit, provided such wood and/or paper
products are placed within a barrel, trash
can, or other enclosed burner, and that such
barrel, trash can, or burner is covered and
prevents burning material or embers from
escaping. Standards for such burners may
be specified by the Board and inspected by
the Chief and/or Police Department or the
Chief's designee. No fire shall be started in
any wood and/or yard waste paper product
burner unless the same is at least twenty-five
feet (25’) from the nearest building or pile of
combustible material and such fire shall
remain under constant supervision and
control until they are extinguished.
4.11 ASHES. No person shall place or
store ashes in any wooden box or barrel,
paper carton or other combustible container,
upon any wooden floor or surface or against
any wooden wall, partition, fence, post or in
contact with any other woodwork or
combustible material.
4.12 SMOKING. Any person who, by
smoking, attempting to light or lighting
cigarettes, cigars, pipes or tobacco in any
manner in which lighters or matches are
employed who shall in a careless, reckless or
negligent manner set fire to any item of
clothing, household furnishings, building, or
any other property whatsoever so as to
endanger life or property in any way shall be
deemed guilty of violating this section and
shall be subject to the penalties of this
chapter.
4.13 NEGLIGENT HANDLING OF
BURNING MATERIAL (Ref. Wis. Stats.
§941.10). Whoever handles burning
material in a highly negligent manner shall
be subject to forfeiture as set forth at Section
4.99.
4.14 INTERFERING WITH
FIREFIGHTING (Ref. Wis. Stats.
§941.12).
(1) Whoever interferes with, tampers
with or removes, without authorization, any
fire extinguisher, fire hose or any other fire
fighting equipment; or
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 7 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
(2) Whoever interferes with
accessibility to a fire hydrant by piling or
dumping material near it without first
obtaining permission from the appropriate
municipal authority shall be subject to
forfeiture as set forth at Section 4.23.
4.15 INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARMS
(Ref. Wis. Stats. §941.13). Whoever
intentionally gives a false alarm to any
public officer or employee, whether by
means of a fire alarm system or otherwise,
shall be subject to forfeiture as set forth at
Section 4.99.
4.16 LOCK BOXES. The Chief shall have
the authority to require a key box (Knox
box) to be installed in an accessible location
where access to, or within a structure or area
is difficult because of security or where
immediate access is necessary for life saving
or a fire alarmed building/structure or where
deemed necessary by the Chief for fire
fighting purposes. The key box shall be a
type approved by the Chief and shall contain
keys necessary to gain total access to all
areas of the building, as required by the
Chief. The operator of the premises shall
immediately notify the Department and
provide the new key(s), any time a lock is
changed or re-keyed and a key(s) to that
lock is contained in the key box.
As of the effective date of this
ordinance:
(1) All new multi-family dwellings with
common areas shall be required to have a
lock box, approved by the Chief and/or his
Designee, installed before issuing a
Certificate of Occupancy.
(2) All new commercial or industrial
structures will be required to have a lock
box approved by the jurisdiction installed
before issuing a Certificate of Occupancy.
4.17 PORTABLE FIRE
EXTINGUISHERS.
(1) All public buildings within the
Village and/or wherever flammable and
combustible materials including dusts,
solids, liquids and gases are sold,
manufactured, handled or processed, shall
have a fire extinguisher in accordance to the
applicable code with a minimum rating of
2A 10 BC. One (1) fire extinguisher shall
be required for each three thousand (3,000)
square feet or fraction thereof and at least
one (1) per each floor.
(2) No person shall sell or trade any
form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which
is not approved or which is not in proper
working order, or the contents of which do
not meet the requirements of Village and
state fire and building codes.
(3) Not withstanding the foregoing,
portable fire extinguishers shall not apply to
the sale or trade of fire extinguishers to any
person or firm engaged in the business of
selling or handling of such extinguishers or
the sale or exchange of obsolete or damaged
equipment for junk.
4.18 REGULATION OF FIREWORKS.
(1) General Requirements.
(a) Definitions and Applicable Law.
The definitions and regulations set forth at
Wis. Stats. §167.10 (2006) are incorporated
herein.
(b) No person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall offer for sale, expose for
sale, sell or retail, keep with the intent to sell
at retail or use or explode any fireworks (as
defined in Wis. Stats. §167.10(1)) with the
following exceptions:
1. Fuel or a lubricant.
2. A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell.
3. A flare used or possessed or sold for
use as a signal in an emergency or in the
operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft,
or motor vehicle.
4. A match, cigarette lighter, stove,
furnace, candle, lantern, or space heater.
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 8 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
5. A cap containing not more than onequarter
(1/4) grain of explosive mixture, if
the cap is used or possessed or sold for use
in a device which prevents direct bodily
contact with a cap when it is in place for
explosion.
6. A toy snake which contains no
mercury.
7. A model rocket engine.
8. Tobacco and a tobacco product.
9. A sparkler on a wire or wood stock
not exceeding thirty-six inches (36”) in
length that is designed to produce audible or
visible effects or to produce audible and
visible effects.
10. A device designed to spray out
paper confetti or streamers and which
contains less than one-quarter (1/4) grain of
explosive mixture.
11. A fuseless device that is designed to
produce audible or visible effects or audible
and visible effects, and that contains less
than one-quarter (1/4) grain of explosive
mixture.
12. A device that is designed primarily
to burn pyrotechnic smoke-producing
mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that
produces audible or visible effects, or
audible and visible effects.
13. A cylindrical fountain that consists
of one (1) or more tubes and that is
classified by the Federal Department of
Transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive,
as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
14. A cone fountain that is classified by
the Federal Department of Transportation as
a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49
CFR 173.50.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village may grant special use permits (“use
permits”) for supervised displays of
fireworks by fair associations, amusement
parks, and other organizations or groups of
individuals through the application process
as set forth at Section 4.18 (2) below.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the use of fireworks by
railroads or their transportation agencies for
signal purposes or illumination, or the sale
or use of blank cartridges for a show or
theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes
in athletics or sports, or for use by military
organizations, or the use of fireworks for
agricultural purposes under conditions
approved by the Fire Department.
(d) The Fire Chief and/or Designee in
conjunction with the Police Department
Officers shall seize, take, remove, or cause
to be removed at the expense of the owner
all stocks of fireworks or combustibles
offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in
violation of this section.
(2) Application for Use Permits.
(a) The President or Designee shall
consider all applications for use permits as
described hereunder and shall approve or
deny each application for use permit.
(b) Application for a use permit shall be
made in writing ten (10) days in advance of
the date of display on forms provided by the
Clerk. A permit fee, as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board shall be charged
for each application.
(c) Such application shall require the
following:
1. The name and address of the
organization sponsoring the display together
with the names of the group actually in
charge of firing the display. For purposes of
this section, a group is considered three (3)
or more persons all over the age of eighteen
(18), all of whom own one (1) or more
residences within the Village. Permits for
an individual or a group of two (2) persons
shall not be granted. Organizations are
defined as entities which are incorporated or
registered as an LLP or LLC within the
United States of America.
2. Evidence of financial responsibility
(if required).
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 9 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
3. The date fireworks may be purchased
after.
4. The date and time of day at which the
display is to be held.
5. The exact location planned for the
display.
6. The number and kinds of fireworks to
be discharged.
7. The manner and place of storage of
such fireworks prior to the display.
(d) Upon receipt of the application, the
Fire Chief may inspect the site of the
proposed display for the purpose of
determining whether the provisions of these
regulations are complied with in the case of
the particular display.
(e) All fireworks that fire a projectile
shall be set up so that the projectile will go
into the air as nearly as possible in a vertical
direction, provided that where the fireworks
are to be fired beside a lake or other large
body of water, they may be directed in such
a manner that the falling residue from the
deflagration will fall into the body of water.
(f) No fireworks display shall be held
during any windstorm in which the wind
reaches a velocity of more than twenty (20)
miles per hour.
(g) All fireworks articles and items at
places of display shall be stored in a manner
and in a place secure from fire, accidental
discharge, and theft and in a manner
approved by the Fire Department.
(h) The Fire Chief or his designee
and/or Police Department Officers shall
have the right to revoke permits and/or stop
activity for any violation of these regulations
or where the holder’s conduct or condition
of sobriety is such as to imperil the public
safety.
(i) Fire protection and extinguishing
equipment shall be provided as required by
the Fire Chief of the Fire Department.
(j) A nonrefundable permit application
fee as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board for each site shall accompany
each application.
(k) Discharging or firing of the
fireworks in the supervised display shall not
be hazardous to property or endanger any
person or persons. After the permit shall
have been granted by the Village, sales,
possession, use and distribution of fireworks
for the display shall be lawful for that
purpose only. No permit granted hereunder
shall be transferable.
(l) Class B Use Permits.
Notwithstanding any other article herein to
the contrary, when issuing a use permit for
Class B fireworks as hereinafter defined, the
following additional requirements must be
met. For purposes of this paragraph, Class
B use permits are necessary for the use of
fireworks defined as “Class B” one and
three tenths (1.3) grams within the Code of
Federal Regulations and/or for use of
fireworks in professional displays as defined
by the Code of Federal Regulations or
otherwise.
Additional Regulations. Applications
for Class B permits shall require the
following additional information:
1. A diagram of the grounds on which
the display is to be held showing the point at
which the fireworks are to be discharged, the
location of all buildings, highways, and
other lines of communications, the lines
behind which the audience will be
restrained, and the location of all nearby
trees, telegraph or telephone lines or other
overhead obstruction.
2. A representative demonstration of the
pyrotechnic shall be provided if requested
by the Fire Department.
3. All displays shall comply with the
National Fire Protection Agency
Standard(s).
4. The Fire Chief shall confer with the
Direct Enforcement Officer (DEO) about the
application and whether issuance of a permit
would be consistent with public safety.
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 10 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
Being satisfied that the display is properly
lawful, the Fire Chief and DEO shall
together endorse the application stating that
they approve the display as being in
conformance with all parts of the law and
with these regulations. Failure to approve
the application by either the DEO or the Fire
Chief shall be sufficient cause to deny the
application.
5. The person, firm, or corporation
making the application shall file a signature
bond which shall be personally guaranteed
by the permittee, its agents or principals,
which said signature bond shall hold the
Village harmless from any and all damages
to property or personal injuries arising out of
any act or omission on the part of the
permittee or any agent or employee thereof.
In lieu of said signature bond, a permittee
may file a certificate of liability insurance in
the amount of not less than $300,000 per
accident and $500,000 per occurrence to
satisfy claims for damages to property or
personal injuries arising out of any act or
omission on the part of the permittee or any
agent or employee thereof.
6. Following endorsement by the Fire
Chief and the DEO the application shall be
sent to the President who shall then, upon
receipt of the financial responsibility as
required in section 4.18 (2) (d) above, issue
a nontransferable permit authorizing the
display. In no case shall such a display be
within five hundred (500) feet of a school,
theater, church, hospital, or similar
institution.
7. For all displays of fireworks all
spectators shall be restrained behind lines or
barriers as designated by local authorities
but in no case less than two hundred feet
(200’) from the point at which the fireworks
are to be discharged. Only authorized
persons and those in actual charge of the
display shall be allowed inside these lines or
barriers during the unloading, preparation,
or firing of fireworks.
8. No permit shall be issued under the
provisions of this act to a nonresident
person, firm, or corporation for conduct of a
pyrotechnic display in this Village until the
person, firm, or corporation shall have
appointed in writing a member of the bar of
this state and residing therein to be the
attorney for permittee upon whom all
process in any action or proceeding against
him may be served.
(3) Application for Seller(s) Permits.
(a) Seller’s permits shall be required for
any person(s) selling or retailing any/all
fireworks not exempt by Section 4.18 (1)
(b). No seller’s permit shall be issued to
minors.
(b) Applicants for a Fireworks Sale
License shall make an application for each
site in writing on forms provided by the
Clerk. A Licensee may possess and sell the
enumerated fireworks at more than one (1)
site within the Village. A nonrefundable
license application fee as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board for each site
shall accompany each application.
(c) The application for license shall
include, without limitation, the following
information:
1. Name, address, and telephone
number of the applicant.
2. Address(es) at which the applicant
intends to sell the enumerated fireworks.
3. Name(s), address(es), and consent(s)
of the owner(s) of the real estate upon which
the enumerated fireworks will be sold.
4. Itemization of which enumerated
fireworks the applicant intends to sell.
5. A statement that applicant shall not
employ minors to sell or handle fireworks
except under the immediate onsite
supervision of an adult age eighteen (18) or
older.
(d) The President or Designee shall
consider the application for licenses
hereunder and shall approve or deny each
application. If denied, the applicant shall
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 11 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
have the right to appeal the denial to the
Board. The Clerk shall issue the license
upon the approval of the President or
Designee or the Board. Once approved, the
Fire Department shall receive a listing of all
licenses and may inspect for occupancy and
Village ordinance compliance.
(e) Licenses issued hereunder shall be
for a term of one (1) year, from May 1
through the following April 30. Application
for annual licenses shall be filed not later
than April 1 each year.
(f) The Village may condition the
issuance of licenses hereunder as it sees fit
to protect the public interest and safety.
(g) The Village shall have the right to
suspend or revoke any licenses in
accordance with Paragraph 6 of this section.
(h) Licenses issued hereunder may not
be transferred or assigned without the
consent of the Village; and, no licensee may
use a site other than the site licensed
pursuant to the application of the licensee.
(i) The Fire Chief, DEO, or their
Designee may temporarily suspend and
confiscate licenses if violations occur and
order the site closed pending corrective
action or appeal to the Board.
(4) Obnoxious Odor Devices and
Products.
(a) No person may sell, possess, or use
any device, product, or item that has its
primary purpose the production of an
obnoxious odor or smell.
(b) Without limitation, it shall be
grounds for suspension or revocation of a
person’s seller or use permits if the licensee
or permittee sells or possesses for sale any
obnoxious odor devices, products, or items.
(5) Penalties. Any person who violates
any provision of this Section 4.18, shall be
penalized, upon conviction thereof, as set
forth in Section 4.99.
(6) Revocation and Suspension of
Seller’s Permits; Non-Renewal.
(a) Procedure. Whenever the holder of
any seller’s permit issued by the Village
violates any portion of the Village Code of
Ordinances, proceedings for the revocation
of such permit may be instituted in the
manner and under the procedure established
by this policy.
(b) Seller’s Permit Revocation,
Suspension, or Non-Renewal.
1. Notice and Hearing. Whenever a
person holding a permit to sell has failed to
maintain the premises according to
standards prescribed for sanitation, or when
the permittee has not observed and obeyed
any lawful order of the Board, Fire
Department or Police Department of the
Village, has violated Village Ordinances, or
for any other good reason, the Board shall
issue a summons to be signed by the Clerk
commanding the permittee complained of to
appear before the Board on a day and time
and at a place named in the summons to
show cause why the permit should not be
revoked, suspended, or not renewed.
In addition, any resident may file a
sworn, written complaint with the Clerk.
Such summons shall be served not less than
three (3) and not more than thirty (30) days
before the time at which the permittee is
commanded to appear and may be served
personally upon the permittee or the agent of
the permittee or upon the person in charge of
the permitted premises.
The complaint shall be served with the
summons and shall set forth the offenses
allegedly committed, the date and place of
said offense and the facts constituting the
alleged offense. If such permittee does not
appear as required by the summons, the
complaint shall be taken as true, and if the
Board deems its allegations sufficient, the
Board shall recommend revocation, nonrenewal,
or suspension of the permit as
provided herein.
2. Procedure on Hearing; Effect of
Revocation.
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 12 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
a. The President shall conduct the
hearing, administer oaths to all witnesses
and may issue subpoenas. So far as
practicable, the rules of evidence provided
in Wis. Stats. §227.08 shall be followed.
The complainant shall have the burden of
proving the charges to a preponderance of
the evidence. The permittee and the
complainant may be represented by counsel,
may call and examine witnesses and crossexamine
witnesses of the other party. All
proceedings and testimony shall be recorded
on tape. If either party requests a
stenographic recording and transcription, the
Village shall make the necessary
arrangements, but the expenses shall be
borne by the requesting party. The Clerk
shall serve as secretary to the Board and
shall make and receive all exhibits admitted
into the record. The Board, upon the
testimony and evidence presented at the
hearing, shall determine by simple majority
vote of those present whether the charges
are true or not.
If the vote is to suspend the seller’s
permit, it shall be for a period of not less
than ten (10) days or more than ninety (90)
days. Following the procedure above, the
recommendation may be to revoke the
seller’s permit.
If the Board determines that the charges
are not substantiated, the complaint shall be
dismissed without cost to either party. The
Board’s action shall be recorded by the
Clerk.
b. If the complaint is found to be true,
the permittee shall pay the Village the actual
cost of the proceedings. If the complaint is
found by the Board to be malicious and
without probably cause, the complainant
shall pay the costs of the proceedings in the
same amount.
c. When a permit is revoked, it shall be
so entered of record by the Clerk and no
other seller’s permit shall be granted to such
permittee for such premises for a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of the
revocation, nor shall any part of the money
paid as application fee for any permit so
revoked be refunded.
(c) Demerit Point System/Revocation
and Suspension of Seller’s Permit. In
addition to the procedures set forth at
Section 4.18 (6) (b) above, the Village may
suspend or revoke a seller’s permit without a
hearing upon the following demerit system:
1. Point Schedule. Upon conviction by
any Municipal Court, or other court of
competent jurisdiction, a seller’s permit
shall be awarded demerit points as follows:
TYPE OF VIOLATION DEMERIT
POINTS
____________________________________
Failure to be permitted: 100
____________________________________
False statement on application: 100
____________________________________
Zoning Code violations: 50
____________________________________
All other violations: 50
____________________________________
2. Concurrent Violations. If two (2) or
more violations are committed concurrently,
the highest point violation shall be assessed.
3. Upon conviction, demerit points shall
be awarded retroactive to the date of the
violation. If one hundred fifty (150) demerit
points are accumulated in a twelve (12)
month period, the Board shall suspend the
permit for a period of ten (10) days.
4. Upon conviction, demerit points shall
be awarded retroactive to the date of
violation. If two hundred (200) demerit
points are accumulated in a twenty-four (24)
month period, the Board shall suspend the
permit for a period of thirty (30) days.
5. Upon conviction, demerit points shall
be awarded retroactive to the date of
violation. If two hundred fifty (250) demerit
points are accumulated in a thirty-six (36)
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 13 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
month period, the Board shall suspend the
permit for a period of ninety (90) days.
6. Demerit points are accumulated for
each permit which results from conviction
for a municipal code violation or a state law
violation under the terms and conditions of
this chapter. The actual demerit points are
assessed upon entry of judgment and either
expiration of the appeal period thereafter or
the expiration of any appeal, and where the
results of the appeal sustain the Village’s
conviction of the holder of the permit.
7. Each seller’s permit shall stand
revoked without further proceedings upon
any conviction in Municipal Court or any
other court of competent jurisdiction (and no
reversal thereof upon appeal) of either the
permitted holder or any employee, or agent
or representative thereof, resulting in an
accumulation of three hundred (300) demerit
points within a forty-eight (48) month
period. Any violation and subsequent
conviction by the holder of the permit for
violations of the Brown County Code of
Ordinances shall be considered a violation
and conviction under this policy and shall
result in the accumulation of demerit points.
8. Other Provisions. Any permit issued
pursuant to this section shall be subject to
such further regulations and restrictions as
may be imposed by the Board by
amendment to this section or by the
enactment of new ordinances. If any
permittees fail or neglect to meet the
requirements imposed by such new
restrictions and regulations, his/her permit
may be revoked in accordance with this
section. In case of revocation of any permit
or any violation of any provision in this
policy or by the court or for any reasonable
cause except the imposition of new
restrictions, no refund shall be made of any
part of the permit fee.
9. Effect of Revocation of Permit.
Whenever any seller’s permit has been
revoked pursuant to this Section 4.18, at
least four (4) months from the time of such
revocation shall elapse before another
permit shall be issued for the same premises
and twelve (12) months shall elapse before
another permit shall be issued to the person
whose permit was revoked.
10. Repossession of Permit. Whenever
any seller’s permit under this Section 4.18
shall be revoked or suspended by the Board
or President or action of any court or Par.
(d), it shall be the duty of the Clerk to notify
the permit holder of such suspension or
revocation and to take physical possession
of the permit wherever it may be found and
file it in the Clerk’s office.
(7) Violations by Agents and
Employees. A violation of this policy by an
authorized agent or employee of a permittee
shall constitute a violation by the permittee.
(8) Applicability. This policy is
applicable to fireworks seller’s and user’s
permits issued by the Village. This policy is
not intended to replace established
procedures for licenses issued by the Village
as adopted in the Code of Ordinances. This
policy is in addition to any other penalties or
forfeitures that may be assessed by the
Municipal Court for the Village or any other
Court having jurisdiction for convictions
related and, further, is in addition to any
other penalties or forfeitures that may be
assessed in accordance with Section 4.99 of
the Village Code.
4.19 OPEN BURNING
(1) General. A person shall not kindle
or maintain or authorize to be kindled or
maintained any open burning unless
conducted and approved in accordance with
this section.
(a) Any open burning other than
recreational fires, requires a permit from the
Fire Chief or his Designee.
(2) Definitions: The following
definitions shall apply to this section:
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 14 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) Open fire. The burning of materials
wherein products of combustion are emitted
directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney from an
enclosed chamber. Open burning does not
include road flares, smudge pots and similar
devices associated with safety or
occupational uses typically considered open
flames or recreational fires.
(b) Accelerant. A flammable or
combustible liquid that will increase the rate
of burning of a material. Under no
circumstances may any flammable or
combustible liquid be used to start or
promote an open fire to burn.
(c) Chamber. For the purpose of this
definition, a chamber shall be regarded as
enclosed when, during the time combustion
occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or
chimneys necessary to provide combustion
air and permit the escape of exhaust gases
are open.
(d) Fuel. Fuel for any fires identified
under this code section shall only consist of
dry natural wood materials, leaves or
charcoal. Materials for fires shall NOT
include rubbish, garbage, trash, grass, any
material made of or coated with rubber,
plastic, leather, paint or petroleum-based
materials and shall not contain any
flammable or combustible liquids.
(e) Recreational Fire/Fire Pit. A below
ground pit with a minimum depth of ten
inches (10”) not to exceed three feet (3’) in
diameter. The fire pit shall be surrounded
on the outside, above ground, by a noncombustible
material such as concrete block
or rock.
(f) Size. Unless specified in the
definitions above, the maximum size of any
open fire, bonfire, recreational fire or
fire/barbecue pit may not exceed three feet
(3’) in diameter and the fuel height may not
exceed two feet (2’) in height. Special
permission (burning permits) may be
granted by the Chief or his designee for
larger piles.
(3) Burning permits shall be obtained
from the Fire Department. The permit shall
be good for ten (10) days unless otherwise
amended by this code.
(a) Fees for burning permits shall be as
set from time to time by resolution of the
Board.
(4) Safety Considerations: The
following shall be adhered to for open
burning:
(a) Atmospheric Conditions. Fires will
be limited to the following atmospheric
conditions: No fire shall be started unless
there are favorable conditions for burning
with regard to wind direction and speed. No
fire shall be started at a time when the wind
speed exceeds eight miles per hour (8 mph)
as measured at the Green Bay NOAA
National Weather Service station or local
circumstances make fires potentially
hazardous. Open burning shall be
prohibited when such atmospheric
conditions exist that would cause the smoke
from open burning to stagnate such as an
inversion or extremely high humidity.
(b) Burning times. Open fires other
than bonfires or recreational fire/barbecue
pits may only be conducted during daylight
hours and must be extinguished at dusk.
(c) Prohibited open burning. Open
burning that will be offensive or
objectionable to occupants of the
surrounding properties (creating a Public
Nuisance as defined in Chapter 11 of the
Village Code) due to smoke or odor
emissions when atmospheric conditions or
local circumstances make such fires
hazardous shall be prohibited. A fire
department officer is authorized to order the
extinguishment by either the party in control
of the fire or the Fire Department when open
burning creates or adds to a hazardous or
objectionable situation.
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 15 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
(5) Location. The location of open
fires shall be as follows:
(a) Recreational Fires/Fire Pit. The
location of open fires shall not be less than
thirty feet (30’) from any structure, and
provisions shall be made to prevent the fire
from spreading to within thirty feet (30’) of
any structure.
(6) Attendance.
(a) All open fires shall be constantly
attended until the fire is completely
extinguished. A minimum of one (1)
portable fire extinguisher complying with a
minimum 4-A rating or other approved
onsite fire extinguishing equipment, such as
shovel, dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose
or water truck, shall be available for
immediate utilization.
(b) Responsible Person. At least one
(1) responsible person of age sixteen (16)
years or older must be in attendance of all
fires.
(7) Portable Open-Flame Cooking
Devices. Portable open-flame cooking
devices, regardless of cooking fuel, shall not
be operated within ten feet (10’) of
combustible construction.
(a) Exceptions: Where buildings and
decks are protected by an automatic
sprinkler system.
(b) Prohibited locations. Portable openflame
cooking devices are prohibited on the
balcony of any multi-family residential
dwelling.
(8) Liability. In addition to any other
penalty as set for at Section 4.99 herein, or
within any other statute, code, or regulation,
any person violating this article shall
reimburse the Village for reasonable cost of
fire protection services made necessary by
the violation including, but not limited to,
the costs of investigation of the violation
and any response by the Village’s Fire
Department as a result of the violation. The
prosecution for violations of this article or
payment of the penalties provided shall not
prohibit any person from seeking any other
remedy against the person causing or
permitting the burning.
(9) Exempt Fires. The following
described fires shall be exempt from the
open fire requirements described in this
section.
(a) Approved training for fire protection
purposes. The Village Fire Department
shall be the authority to determine approval
of all such fires.
(10) Emergency Powers of the Chief.
When the Chief determines there are
environmental conditions likely to produce a
serious threat of fire to life and property, it
shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire
Department to impose a burning ban and
burning restrictions and require that no
person may:
(a) Set, build, or maintain any open fire,
bonfire, recreational fire, or fire/barbecue pit
or any other type of fire.
(b) Throw, discard, or drop matches,
ashes or other burning material while
outdoors in the immediate vicinity of
combustible natural vegetation.
(c) Light or use any fireworks, as
defined per Wisconsin Statutes, or caps, toy
snakes, sparklers, some bombs, or
cylindrical or cone fountains that emit
sparks and smoke except in displays or use
as authorized by the Fire Department where
adequate fire prevention measures have been
taken.
(d) Such a ban described above shall be
lifted when the environmental conditions
change so that serious threat is no longer
present.
(11) Careless Smoking.
(a) It is unlawful for any person, by
reason of careless, willful or wanton conduct
in smoking or in the use of lighters or
matches in smoking to set fire to any
bedding, carpet, curtains, draperies,
furniture, household equipment, combustible
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 16 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
materials, or other goods or chattels or to
any building.
(b) A plainly printed notice of the
provisions of this section shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in every sleeping room of
every place renting rooms for the
accommodation of the public. Such printed
notices shall also be posted in any place of
public assembly where smoking is
permitted.
(12) Posting of No Smoking Signs.
The Chief shall post or cause to be posted no
smoking signs in retail establishments where
flammable or combustible materials are
handled or sold and the act of smoking or
striking a match or lighter device presents a
fire hazard. Such signs shall be plainly
visible on a contrasting background and
shall be posted conspicuously in all areas
where such hazards exist. Such sign shall
bear the words “No Smoking” across the top
in large letters.
4.20 FIRE INSPECTION REQUIRED
BEFORE OCCUPANCY.
(1) No person shall occupy or change
the occupancy of a building or structure
covered under Wis. The State of Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional
Services (SPS Chapter 350 361-366.)
existing buildings; used by or for public
assembly, industrial, institutional,
multifamily (public spaces), office, or
mercantile purposes until such building or
structure has been inspected and approved
by the Fire Inspection Department, the
Building Inspection Department and a
Certificate of Occupancy is issued by the
Village.
(a) The owner shall post the capacity in
all buildings and on every level as approved
by the Fire Inspection Department and
Building Inspection Department. Signs
(notices) shall be prominently displayed
stating the maximum number of persons on
each floor for whom stairways and other
exits have been provided. Such notices shall
be placed in full view on each floor.
(b) The capacity limit sign shall have
the following wording: “Limit (number
inserted) Persons”. The maximum number
of persons shall be determined by the
capacity as permitted in the building code in
effect at the time of construction of the
building and/or the Fire Inspection and
Building Inspection Departments jointly.
The lettering shall be white on a dark
background. The letters shall not be less
than one and one half inches (1½”) in height
and the number shall not be less than three
inches (3”) in height.
(2) Fees for Fire Inspections Prior to
Occupancy. Fees shall be as adopted in the
Village of Suamico Fee Schedule. Said
schedule of fees shall be subject to review and
approval by the Village Board, which shall
adopt the same by resolution, and which may
be amended from time to time in the same
manner.
4.21 INSTALLATION PERMITS.
(1) The following installation permits
shall be required in the Village jurisdiction
for industrial and commercial buildings:
(a) Automatic fire extinguishing
systems. A permit is required for any
installation of or modification to an
automatic fire extinguishing system.
(b) Fire alarm and detection system and
related equipment. A permit is required for
installation of or modification to fire alarm
and detection systems and related
equipment.
(c) Fire pumps and related equipment.
A permit is required for installation of or
modification to fire pumps and related fuel
tanks, jockey pumps, controllers, and
generators.
(d) Private fire hydrants. A permit is
required for the installation or modification
of private fire hydrants.
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 17 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
(e) Standpipe systems. A permit is
required for the installation, modification, or
removal from service of a standpipe system.
(f) Spraying or dipping. A permit is
required to install or modify any spray
room/area, dip tank, or booth.
(g) Maintenance performed in
accordance with this code is not considered
a modification and does not require a permit.
(2) Department approval shall be
obtained. After an application is completed
with three (3) sets of plans for each type of
system, upon examination, the plans shall be
dated and stamped “Conditionally
Approved” or “Not Approved,” whichever
applies. If upon examination the department
determines that the application for permit
substantially conforms, a permit(s) shall be
issued by the Fire Department. The Fire
Department will stamp all plans
conditionally approved and return two (2)
sets of plans with the permit to the project
proponent. A conditional approval issued
by the department shall not be construed as
an assumption of any responsibility for the
design or construction. A letter shall be sent
to the submitter with a statement relating to
the examination of the plans and citing the
conditions of approval or denial. One (1) set
of stamped plans should be present on the
project site throughout the installation
process.
(3) Revocation of approval. The
department may revoke any approval issued
under the provisions of this chapter for any
false statements or misrepresentation of
facts upon which the approval was based. A
stop work order may be issued until a permit
is approved and/or said issues are rectified.
(4) All permitted installation projects
are subject to inspection by the department
before, during, and at the time of final
inspection for issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy. Conditions of issuing
Certificate of Occupancy are compliance
with all applicable codes and provisions of
the permit including certification
documentation and inspections.
4.22 REFERENCE STANDARDS.
(1) Wherever in this subchapter or
during code enforcement practices reference
is made to nationally recognized good or
safe practice, the intent is that the practice to
be followed shall be reasonable and safe as
determined by the Fire Chief.
(2) The Fire Chief may refer, among
other standard publications, to the National
Fire Code as published by the National Fire
Protection Association for determining what
is reasonable and safe.
(3) Any publications used to determine
nationally recognized good practice by the
department shall be broadly construed to
determine intent, but no provisions contrary
to the Wis. Adm. Code or any other
ordinance of the Village shall be used as a
reference.
4.23 EFFECTIVE DATE. The effective
date of this fire code will be January 23,
2006.
4.24 FLAMMABLE AND
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS STORAGE.
(1) Authority. The most current
version of the Wis. Adm. Code, ATCP 93
and the applicable National Fire Protection
Standards is hereby adopted, incorporated
herein at length by reference and made part
of the Village Fire Prevention Code.
The Department shall, as part of the
authorized inspection authority related to
storage tank inspections pursuant to the
Professional Services Contract between the
Department of Agriculture, Trade, and
Consumer Protection (ATCP) and the
Village, adopt ATCP 93 as it specifically
relates to the storage tank program only. A
Village permit must first be obtained by any
parties installing any flammable and
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 18 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
combustible liquid storage tanks in the
Village.
(2) Inspection Requirements - Scope
of Service. The department, as part of the
Local Program Operator responsibilities,
shall perform or contract to perform the
following inspection duties related to the
storage of flammable and combustible
liquids in the Village:
(a) Complete plan examinations for all
tank installations of less than five thousand
gallons (5,000 gal.). Approve/disapprove
plans which are submitted based upon
criteria established in ATCP 93 or successor
state law.
(b) Recommend permit fees, for
approval by the Board, for all work related
to the installation and alterations of tanks
less than five thousand gallons (5,000 gal.)
and permit fees for all tank removals.
(c) Perform installation inspections for
tank systems reviewed at either the state or
local level.
(d) Authorize stop work orders when
violations of ATCP 93 have occurred.
(e) Perform the annual inspection of
federally-regulated tank systems for
compliance with leak detection, operation
and maintenance and the closure
requirements established in ATCP 93.
(f) Perform inspections at the closure of
tank systems.
(g) Perform any and all duties or
authority as set forth in ATCP 93, the
Village Code, or the contractual inspection
agreement with the Department of
Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer
Protection (ATCP) as necessary and
determined by the department.
(3) Inspection Requirements Notice.
Notice inspection requirements shall be as
follows:
(a) The department and its contracted
agent shall be notified ten (10) days in
advance of any underground storage tank
removal.
(b) Twenty-four (24) hour minimum
advance notice shall be required for any
cancelled installation, upgrade, or removal
inspection appointment.
(4) Fees. Shall be as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board.
4.25 NUISANCE SMOKE/FIRES. To
ensure such fires do not compromise safety
or annoy neighbors, at no time shall smoke
created by burning be an annoyance or cause
discomfort to the neighborhood or the
traveling public. The fire shall be ordered
extinguished upon any complaint to the fire
department or police department.
4.26 FEES CHARGED FOR
EMERGENCY CALLS.
(1) Definitions. For purposes of this
section, the term “emergency call” is defined
as the Village of Suamico Fire Department
responding with Fire Department personnel
and apparatus to a reported or suspected fire,
vehicle accident, hazardous material incident,
or other similar emergency situation.
(2) Schedule of fees. Under the authority
granted to Villages under sec. 61.34(1), Wis.
Stats and sec. 66.60(16), Wis. Stats, the
Village of Suamico Fire Department shall
establish a schedule of fees which reflect the
Fire Department’s operating and maintenance
costs for response by its personnel and
apparatus to emergency calls. Said schedule
of fees shall be subject to review and approval
by the Village Board, which shall adopt the
same by resolution, and which may be
amended from time to time in the same
manner.
(3) Applicability. In accordance with the
schedule of fees established under subsection
(2) above, the Village may charge the property
owner, company, or responsible individual for
the Fire departments cost to respond to an
emergency call under any of the following
circumstances:
(a) In the event that the emergency call is
for an incident occurring on any highway that
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 19 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
is part of the national system of Interstate
highways, US highways, or any highway
maintained by the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation.
(b) In the event that the Fire Department
determines that the emergency call was caused
by the intentional or negligent act of any
person or company. Such intentional or
negligent acts may include, but are not limited
to, fire setting, causing a false alarm, and
failure to comply with burning regulations.
(c) For certain special rescue situations
and hazardous material responses where the
Fire Department determines that sufficient
Village supplies and materials and/or
manpower requires the recovery from the
responsible party. All invoices for hazardous
materials response will go through the local
emergency planning committee (LEPC) per
state guidelines.
(d) For auto accidents and rescue
extrications where rescue assistance is
supplied. This may include ambulance
services, transport, and associated costs such
as medications and mileage.
(e) For disposal of sorbent and hazardous
materials residues.
(f) For disposal of records and other
administrative costs.
4.27 TENT REGULATIONS.
(1) Definitions:
(a) A tent is defined as a structure,
enclosure, or shelter with partial or complete
sidewalls or drops, constructed of fabric or
pliable material supported by any manner
except air.
(b) An open tent is defined as a tent that
is open on all sides.
(c) Separation distances are measured
from the anchorage point, not the limits of
the tent.
(2) Criteria for Required Tent
Permit:
(a) If you will be erecting a tent over
400 square feet.
(b) If you will be erecting smaller tents
where the aggregate area of smaller tents
erected within 12 feet of each other is
greater than 400 square feet.
(c) If you will be erecting an open tent
over 700 square feet.
(d) If you will be erecting smaller open
tents where the aggregate area of smaller
open tents erected within 12 feet of each
other is greater than 700 square feet.
(e) If you will be utilizing electricity in
the tent or for the event.
(3) Tent Permit Requirements:
(a) Tents will need to comply with the
International Building Code IBC 3103.
(b) Tents shall comply with the current
International Fire Code sections 2403 and
2404.
(c) Tents shall comply with the current
National Electrical Code.
(d) Site plan of tent(s) (Size, Timeline,
Location, ETC).
(e) Fire Retardant Certificate.
(f) If cooking, must be 20 feet from
other tents.
(g) Tents need to be 20 feet (Measured
from anchor point) from structures / building
with exceptions (IFC 2403.8.2).
(h) No smoking signs.
(i) No open flame is allowed in or
within 20 feet of the tent.
(j) Tents shall be adequately anchored.
(Documentation may be requested).
(k) Minimum of 3’ required between
fabric envelope and contents in tent.
(l) If a generator is to be used. (If so, the
generator must be 20 feet away from the tent
and may require an electrical permit. The
generator shall be isolated from contact with
the public by fencing, enclosure, or other
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 20 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
approved means (lock). The generator shall
be grounded.
(m) A fire extinguisher shall be required
every 75 walking feet.
(n) An unobstructed fire lane (20 feet)
shall be provided and shall be within 150
feet of all portions of the facility.
(o) Will the tent walls be down? (If so,
exit lights needed at egress doors. If the exit
serves an occupant load of 50 or more, the
exit lights must be illuminated. Egress exits
maximum travel distance is 100 feet.
Occupant
Load
Min # of
Means of
Egress
Min Width
of Each
Means
Egress (”)
10 to 199 2 72
200 to 499 3 72
500 to 999 4 96
1,000 to
1,999
5 120
2,000 to
2,999
6 120
(4) Fees. The tent permit fee and/or tent
inspection fee shall be as listed in the
Village of Suamico Fee Schedule as adopted
by the Village Board and amended from
time to time.
SUBCHAPTER III – LAW
ENFORCEMENT
4.51 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
(1) In accordance with Wis. Stats.
§61.65(2), the Village hereby elects to
contract for police protection services with
Brown County. The Board reserves the
right to amend this section of the ordinance
at such time that it deems appropriate for the
good of the Village.
(a) Police Chief. The Police Chief for
the Village.
(b) Contract. The current agreement
entered into by and between the Village and
Brown County.
(c) County. Means Brown County.
(d) Department. Means the Police
Department of the Village as designated by
the Contract.
(2) Appointment of the Chief of
Police. The Chief of Police shall be the
individual designated by the contract
negotiated between the Village and Brown
County or as appointed by the Board, such
appointment to be made from personnel
assigned to the Village by the Brown
County Sheriff, or as otherwise allowed by
law.
(3) From time to time the Village shall
negotiate a contract with Brown County that
addresses staffing levels, finances,
appointment of the Chief of Police, and
disciplinary actions.
4.52 CHIEF OF POLICE; POWERS
AND DUTIES.
(1) The Chief of Police shall possess the
powers, enjoy the privileges, and be subject
to the liabilities conferred and imposed by
law upon marshals and constables. The
Chief shall:
(a) obey the lawful written orders of the
Board.
(b) cause the public peace to be
preserved and see that all laws and
ordinances of the Village and state are
enforced; and whenever any violation
thereof comes to his/her knowledge, he/she
shall cause the requisite complaint to be
made and see that the evidence is procured
for the successful prosecution of the
offender.
(c) subject to the contract between
Brown County and the Village, exercise
supervisory control over all personnel of the
department and may adopt, subject to the
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 21 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
approval of the Board, rules and regulations
for the government, discipline, equipment,
and uniforms of police officers.
(d) be solely responsible for the care
and condition of the equipment used by his
department.
(e) keep an accurate and complete
record of all complaints, arrests, traffic
violations, convictions, and dispositions of
his department.
(f) make budget recommendations for
the coming year to the Administrator by
September 1 of each year.
4.53 POLICE OFFICERS.
(1) General Powers and Duties. Each
officer of the department shall possess the
powers conferred on marshals and
constables by law, shall preserve the public
peace and shall enforce the laws and
ordinances of the state and Village subject to
the orders, rules, and regulations of the
Chief and the Board.
(2) Power of Arrest. The Police Chief
and any police officer shall arrest all persons
in the Village found in the act of violating
any law or ordinance of the Village or state
or aiding or abetting in such violation; they
shall arrest without warrant any person
whom they have reasonable grounds to
believe have violated any law or ordinance
and who would not be apprehended unless
immediately arrested; shall take any arrested
person in charge and confine them in the
County Jail; and shall, within a reasonable
time according to state law, bring such
person before the court having jurisdiction
thereof to be dealt with according to law.
4.54 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Rules and regulations governing the Police
Department shall be adopted from time to
time by the Suamico Board.
SUBCHAPTER IV – EMERGENCY
ALARM ORDINANCE
4.91 PURPOSE. It is hereby declared to
be the policy of the Village to encourage the
installation of reliable emergency alarm
systems to provide additional protection
from fire, crime, and other hazards which
might be a danger to persons and property,
but to discourage the incidence of
preventable or avoidable false alarms and to
protect the Village from damage claims
which may arise from the Village
responding to a false alarm.
4.92 DEFINITIONS.
(1) Alarm Business. Any business
operated by a person for profit which alters,
installs, leases, maintains, monitors,
replaces, sells, services, or responds to an
alarm system, or which causes any of these
activities to take place.
(2) Alarm System. One (1) or more
devices installed or placed to signal the
presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention to which Police or the Fire
Department are expected to respond.
(3) Alarm User. Any person who owns
or rents the premises on which an alarm
system is maintained within the Village.
(4) False Alarm. The activation of an
alarm through negligence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system or of his or her
employees or agents, the activation of an
alarm system through mechanical failure or
malfunction because of improper
maintenance by the alarm user, or the
activation of an alarm system because of
improper installation and/or use of
equipment by the alarm business; but does
not include alarms caused by tornados,
earthquakes, or other violent conditions or
acts of God.
(5) Burglar Alarm System. An alarm
system signaling an entry or attempted entry
into the area protected by the system.
(6) Hold-Up Alarm System. An alarm
system in which the signal transmission is
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 22 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
initiated by action of the robber or employee
of the protected premises.
(7) Fire Alarm. An alarm system
signaling the presence of fire or smoke.
(8) Proprietary System. An alarm
system sounding and/or recording alarm and
supervisory signals at the control center
located within the protected premises, the
control center being under the supervision of
the proprietor of the protected premises, but
which is not connected directly or by means
of an automatic dialing device to a police or
fire communication center, a central station,
or answering service.
4.93 FALSE ALARMS, SERVICE
FEES.
(1) Fees. An alarm user shall pay to the
Treasurer within ten (10) days after
activation the following service fees for
false alarms which occur within a
continuous two (2) year period.
(a) False Alarms:
1. First false alarm: Zero dollars ($0)
2. Second and third false alarms: Not
less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500) plus the costs of
prosecution.
3. Each subsequent false alarm: Not
less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500) plus
the costs of prosecution.
(b) Hold-Up or Burglary Alarms:
1. First false alarm: Zero dollars ($0)
2. Second and third false alarms: Not
less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500) plus the costs of
prosecution.
3. Each subsequent false alarm: Not
less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500) plus
the costs of prosecution.
4.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY, AND
ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this ordinance,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation. Failure or refusal to
pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
4-Public Safety Page 23 of 23 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 4
Ordinance 2009-07 Amending Chapter 4.19 Open Burning
Adopted 4-20-09
Ordinance 2017-06 Amending Chapter 4 Public Safety
Adopted 8-7-17
Ordinance 2017-07 Amending Chapter 4 Public Safety
Adopted 8-7-17
Ordinance 2018-07 Amending Chapter 4.19 Public Safety, Open Burning
Adopted 6-18-18
Ordinance 2018-12 Amending Chapter 4 Public Safety
Adopted 10-29-18
Ordinance 2020-04 Updates to Chapter 4 Public Safety
Adopted 3-2-20
Ordinance 2020-09 Amending Chapter 4 Public Safety
Adopted 6-15-20
Village of Suamico
Chapter 5
5-Licenses and Permits Page 1 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
LICENSES AND PERMITS ORDINANCE
5.01 License and Permit Fees .................................................................................................... 1
5.02 General Provisions as to Licenses ..................................................................................... 1
5.03 Regulation and Licensing of Direct Sellers and Solicitors ............................................. 3
5.04 Alcohol Beverages .............................................................................................................. 7
5.05 Block Party Permits ......................................................................................................... 17
5.06 Parades .............................................................................................................................. 17
5.07 Weights and Measures Regulations ............................................................................... 20
5.08 Special Events ................................................................................................................... 21
5.09 Dogs Licensed ................................................................................................................... 26
5.10 Sexually-Oriented Business ............................................................................................. 28
5.11 Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Article and Jewelry Dealers ....................................... 41
5.12 Cigarette and Tobacco Products Retailers License ...................................................... 43
5.13 Escort Service License ..................................................................................................... 43
5.14 Massage Establishments .................................................................................................. 48
5.99 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement......................................................................... 53
5.01 LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES.
Unless otherwise indicated, fees for licenses
and permits issued under this chapter shall
be as listed on the schedule of fees in the
office of the Clerk.
5.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO
LICENSES.
(1) Licenses and Permits Required.
No person shall engage in any trade,
profession, business or privilege in the
Village for which a license or permit is
required by any provision of this Code of
Ordinances without first obtaining such
license or permit from the Village in the
manner provided in this section, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
(2) Application. Unless otherwise
provided, application for a license or permit
shall be made in writing to the Clerk upon
forms provided by the Village, and the
applicant shall state the location of the
proposed activity and such other facts as
may be required for or be applicable to the
granting of such a license or permit.
(3) Payment of Fee. The fees required
for any license or permit shall be paid at the
office of the Clerk before the granting of the
license or permit.
(4) Bond and Insurance. All required
bonds shall be executed by two (2) sureties
or a surety company and be subject to the
approval of the Board. Where policies of
insurance are required, such policies shall be
approved as to substance and form by the
Village Attorney. Satisfactory evidence of
coverage by bond or insurance shall be filed
with the Village before the license or permit
is issued.
(5) Approval or Denial of Licenses.
Where approval of any Village or state
officer is required prior to the issuance of
any license or permit, such approval shall be
presented to the Village before any license
or permit is issued.
(6) Certificate. License or permit
certificates shall show the name of the
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 2 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
licensee or permittee, date of issue, activity
licensed and the term of the license or
permit and shall be signed in the name of the
Village by the President and the Clerk and
be impressed with the Village seal. The
Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses and
permits issued.
(7) Terms.
(a) Unless otherwise provided, the
license year shall end on June 30 of each
year.
(b) Where the issuance of licenses for a
period of less than one (1) year is permitted,
the effective date of such license shall
commence with the date of issuance.
(c) Permits shall be issued for the term
set forth in the permit.
(8) Exhibition of Certificate. Every
licensee or permittee shall carry his or her
license or permit certificate upon his or her
person at all times when engaged in the
activity for which the license or permit was
granted, except that where such activity is
conducted at a fixed place or establishment,
the license or permit certificate shall be
exhibited at all times in some conspicuous
place in his or her place of business. The
licensee or permittee shall exhibit the license
certificate when applying for a renewal and
upon demand of any police officer, or
person representing the issuing authority.
(9) Transfer. Unless otherwise
provided, no license or permit shall be
transferable or assignable.
(10) Determinations of the Board. All
determinations made by the Board shall be
subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch.
68.
(11) Inspection. Any police officer or
any Village officials may enter upon the
premises where any licensed or permitted
activity is being conducted for the purpose
of inspection at any reasonable time.
(12) Revocation and Suspension of
Licenses.
(a) Except as otherwise provided, any
license issued under this chapter may be
revoked for cause by the Board. No license
shall be revoked except upon written
verified complaint filed with the Board by
the President, a member of the Board, any
police officer, or a resident of the Village.
The licensee shall be served with a written
copy of the charges and shall be given an
opportunity to be heard before the Board.
The licensee shall be given notice of such
hearing, which shall be not more than
twenty (20) nor less than five (5) days after
notice, except as otherwise agreed between
the parties.
(b) At such hearing, the licensee shall
be entitled to be represented by counsel,
shall have the right to present and crossexamine
witnesses and, upon request, may
have subpoenas issued by the President or
presiding officer of the Board to compel the
attendance of witnesses.
(c) After hearing the evidence, the
Board may revoke such license or impose a
limited period of suspension. The
determination of the Board shall be final,
subject to review under Wis. Stats. Ch. 68,
provided the licensee shall not be entitled to
a further hearing unless granted by the
Board.
(d) The Police Department and/or
Brown County Sheriff Department shall
repossess any license revoked hereunder.
(e) If the licensee does not apply for a
hearing within the time provided, the license
may be revoked by the Board.
(13) Refusal of License. The Clerk
shall refuse to issue a license or permit to
any person, partnership, or corporation if
there remains any unpaid bill, fee, or tax
outstanding on any parcel under that person,
partnership, or corporation’s control in the
Village. Upon the prompt payment of those
outstanding fees, the Clerk shall issue the
license or permit.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 3 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
5.03 REGULATION AND LICENSING
OF DIRECT SELLERS AND
SOLICITORS.
(1) Registration Required. It shall be
unlawful for any direct seller or solicitor to
engage in direct sales or solicitations within
the Village without being registered and
licensed for that purpose as provided herein.
(2) Definitions. In this section, the
terms used shall be defined as follows:
(a) Direct Seller. Any person who sells
goods or services or takes sales orders for
the later delivery of goods at any location
other than the permanent business place or
residence of said person and shall include,
but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and
transients. For purpose of this section, the
acceptance of a "donation" in exchange for
goods, or an order for goods, shall be
deemed an act requiring compliance with all
of the regulatory provisions of this section,
including registration and the posting of a
bond.
(b) Permanent Merchant. A direct
seller who, for at least one (1) year prior to
the consideration of the application of this
section to said merchant has continuously
operated an established place of business in
the Village or has continuously resided in
the Village and now does business from his
or her residence.
(c) Goods. Includes personal property
of any kind and shall include goods
provided incidental to services offered or
sold.
(d) Charitable Organization. Includes
any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or
eleemosynary person, partnership,
association or corporation, but shall not
include religious organizations.
(3) Exceptions. The following shall be
exempt from all provisions of this section:
(a) Any person delivering newspapers,
fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to
regular customers on established routes.
(b) Any person selling goods at
wholesale to dealers in such goods.
(c) Any person selling agricultural
products which such person has grown.
(d) Any permanent merchant or
employee thereof who takes orders away
from the established place of business for
goods regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within this county and who
delivers such goods in their regular course
of business.
(e) Any person who has an established
place of business where the goods being
sold are offered for sale on a regular basis
and in which the buyer has initiated contact
with and specifically requested a home visit
by said person.
(f) Any person who has had, or one who
represents a company which has had, a prior
business transaction such as a prior sale or
credit arrangement on other than a one-time
basis with the prospective customer.
(g) Any person selling, or offering for
sale, a service not connected with the sale or
offering for sale of goods.
(h) Any person holding a sale required
by statute or by order of the court and any
person conducting a bona fide auction sale
pursuant to law.
(i) Any employee, officer or agent of a
charitable organization who engages in
direct sales for or on behalf of said
organization, provided that there is
submitted to the Clerk proof that such
charitable organization is registered under
Wis. Stats. §440.41. However, any
charitable organization not registered under
Wis. Stats. §440.41 or which is exempt from
that statute's registration requirements shall
be required to register under this section.
(j) Any person who claims to be a
permanent merchant, but against whom
complaint has been made to the Clerk that
such person is a transient merchant,
provided that there is proof submitted to the
Clerk that such person has leased for at least
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 4 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
one (1) year, or purchased, the premises
from which he or she is conducting business,
or proof that such person has conducted
such business in this Village for at least one
(1) year prior to the date complaint was
made.
(k) Any religious organization having
tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code
upon submitting proof thereof to the Clerk.
(l) Any political candidate running for
public office or citizens supporting political
candidates of legitimate recognized political
parties running for public office in
compliance with Wisconsin statutes.
Chapter 5 does not prohibit persons from
circulating nomination papers, from
soliciting signatures, or from soliciting
campaign donations for public office.
(m) Legally chartered tax exempt
organizations.
(4) Registration or Licensing.
(a) Applicants for registration or
licensing must complete and return to the
Clerk a registration form furnished by the
Clerk which shall require the following
information:
1. Full legal name, permanent address
and telephone number and temporary
address, if any.
2. Date of birth, age, height, sex, race,
weight, color of hair and eyes.
3. Name, address and telephone number
of the person, firm, association or
corporation that the direct seller represents,
is employed by or whose merchandise is
being sold.
4. Temporary address and telephone
number from which business shall be
conducted, if any.
5. Nature of business to be conducted
and a brief description of the goods offered
and any services offered.
6. Names, addresses, and phone
numbers of suppliers of articles to be sold
and proposed method of delivery of goods,
if applicable.
7. Make, model, license number and
state, color, and year of any vehicle to be
used by applicant in the conduct of his or
her business.
8. Last cities, villages, or towns, (not to
exceed three (3)), where applicant conducted
similar business.
9. Place where applicant can be
contacted for at least seven (7) days after
leaving Village.
10. Name and addresses of last two (2)
Brown County property owners who can
vouch for said applicant.
11. Date license is required. The dates
must be consecutive dates. A new
application and license is required for each
occasion.
12. Hours business will be conducted.
13. Statement as to whether applicant
has been convicted of any crime or
ordinance violation other than a traffic
violation, the nature of the offense, and date
of conviction.
14. Signature of applicant.
15. Date of application.
(b) Applicants shall present to the Clerk
for examination:
1. A driver's license or some other proof
of identity as may be reasonably required by
the Clerk.
2. A State of Wisconsin certificate of
examination and approval from the sealer of
weights and measures where applicant's
business requires use of weighing and
measuring devices approved by State of
Wisconsin authorities.
3. A State of Wisconsin health officer's
certificate where applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing,
and is required to be certified under State of
Wisconsin law; such certificate to state that
applicant is apparently free from any
contagious or infectious disease, dated not
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 5 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
more than ninety (90) days prior to the date
of application for license is made.
(c) At the time the registration is
returned, an investigative fee, as listed on
the schedule of fees in the office of Clerk,
shall be paid to the Clerk to cover the costs
of processing said registration. Religious
and charitable organizations are exempt
from paying said fee.
1. The applicant shall sign a statement
appointing the Clerk his or her agent to
accept service of process in any civil action
brought against the applicant arising out of
any sale or service performed by the
applicant in connection with direct sales
activities of the applicant in the event the
applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be
served personally.
2. Upon payment of said fee and the
signing of said statement, the Clerk shall
register the applicant as a direct seller and
date the entry. Said registration shall be
valid for a period of one (1) year from the
date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal
as provided in sub. (5)(b) below, or
forfeiture as provided in sub. (8) below.
(5) Investigation: Granting or Denial
of License.
(a) Upon receipt of a completed
registration form, the Clerk shall
immediately refer it to the Police
Department and/or Brown County Sheriff
Department to make an investigation. The
Police Department, Brown County Sheriff or
his or her designee shall complete the
investigation and file a report with the Clerk
within seventy-two (72) hours.
(b) The Clerk shall refuse to issue a
license to the applicant for any of the
following reasons:
1. The application contains any material
omission or materially inaccurate statement.
2. The applicant was convicted of a
crime, statutory violation or ordinance
violation within the last five (5) years, the
nature of which is directly related to the
applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling
or solicitation.
3. The applicant failed to comply with
any applicable provision of Par. 4(b) above.
4. If as a result of the investigation
required under this section, the applicant's
business or character are found to be
unsatisfactory, the Police Department,
Brown County Sheriff or his or her designee
shall endorse on said application his or her
disapproval and his or her reasons for the
same and return the application to the Clerk
who shall notify the applicant that his or her
application was not approved and no license
will be issued.
(c) In the event the Clerk shall refuse to
issue the applicant a license, the Clerk shall
provide the applicant an opportunity to
refute said reasons for denial of the license.
After the Clerk has made a final
determination, he or she shall either issue
the license or provide the applicant with
written reasons for refusing to issue the
license.
(d) Any person denied application for a
license may appeal the denial through the
appeal procedure provided by Wis. Stats.
Ch. 68.
(6) Registration and Issuance of
License.
(a) Upon compliance with the forgoing
requirements and filing of a bond, if
applicable, the Clerk shall register the
applicant as a direct seller, transient
merchant or solicitor and issue a license to
the applicant. The license shall be operative
only during the days requested on the
registration form.
(b) Such license shall contain the
signature of the Clerk, the name and address
of direct seller, transient merchant or
solicitor, the type of goods or services being
sold or the nature of the solicitation, the
dates during which the license is operative
and the license number of any vehicle used
for sales or solicitation.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 6 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
(c) Registrants shall exhibit their license
at the request of any citizen or police officer.
(d) Every applicant who intends to take
sales orders and down payments for the later
delivery of goods and services and is not a
resident of Brown County, Wisconsin, or
who is such a resident and represents a
business or organization whose principal
place of business located outside the State of
Wisconsin, shall file with the Clerk a surety
bond. The bond shall be for a term of one
(1) year from the date of issuance of the
license, naming the Village in the amount of
one thousand dollars ($1,000) conditioned
that the applicant comply with all applicable
ordinances of this Village and statutes of the
State of Wisconsin regulating peddlers,
canvassers, solicitors and transient
merchants. Such bond shall guarantee to
any citizen of this Village that all money
paid as a down payment will be accounted
for and applied according to the
representations of the seller and that the
property purchased will be delivered
according to the representations of the seller.
Action on such bond may be brought by the
person aggrieved and for whose benefit,
among others, the bond is given. The surety
may, pursuant to a court order, pay the face
amount of the bond to the Clerk of Courts in
which suit is commenced and be relieved of
all further liability.
(7) Regulation of Direct Sellers.
(a) Prohibited Practices.
1. A direct seller shall be prohibited
from calling at any dwelling or other place
between the hours of 7 p.m. and 9 a.m.,
except by appointment; calling at any
dwelling or other place where a sign is
displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers",
"No Solicitors", or words of similar
meaning; calling at the rear door of any
dwelling place; or remaining on any
premises after being asked to leave by the
owner, occupant or other person having
authority over such premises.
2. A direct seller shall not represent or
make false, deceptive or misleading
statements concerning the quality, quantity
or character of any goods offered for sale,
the purpose of his or her visit, his or her
identity or the identity of the organization he
or she represents. A charitable or religious
organization direct seller shall specifically
disclose what portion of the free donation or
the sale price of goods being offered will
actually be used for the charitable or
religious purpose for which the organization
is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed
as a percentage of the sale price of the
goods.
3. No direct seller shall impede the free
use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians
and vehicles. Where sales are made from
vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations
shall be observed.
4. No direct seller shall make any loud
noises or use any sound amplifying device
to attract customers if the noise produced is
capable of being plainly heard outside a one
hundred foot (100’) radius of the source.
5. No direct seller shall allow rubbish or
litter to accumulate in or around the area in
which he or she is conducting business.
(b) Disclosure Requirements.
1. After the initial greeting and before
any other statement is made to a prospective
customer, a direct seller shall expressly
disclose his or her name, the name of the
company or organization he or she is
affiliated with, if any, and the identity of
goods or services he or she offers to sell.
2. If any sale of goods is made by the
direct seller, or any sales order for the later
delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the
buyer shall have the right to cancel said
transaction if it involves the extension of
credit of more than twenty-five dollars
($25), or is a cash transaction, in accordance
with the procedure as set forth in Wis. Stats.
§423.203 and the seller shall give the buyer
two (2) copies of a typed or printed notice of
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 7 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
that fact. Such notice shall conform to the
requirements of Wis. Stats. §423.203(1)(a),
(b), and (c); (2) and (3).
3. If the direct seller takes a sales order
for the later delivery of goods, he or she, at
the time the order is taken, provide the buyer
with a written statement containing the
terms of the agreement; the amount paid in
advance, whether full, partial or no advance
payment is made; the name, address and
telephone number of the seller; the delivery
or performance date; and whether a
guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so,
the terms thereof.
(8) Records. The Village Police
Department and/or Brown County Sheriff's
Department shall report to the Clerk all
convictions for violation of this section and
the Clerk shall note any such violation on
the record of the registrant convicted.
(9) Revocation of License.
(a) Any license issued under this section
may be revoked by the Village Clerk after
notice if the registrant made any material
omission or materially inaccurate statement
in the application for a license, made any
fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading
statement or representation in the course of
engaging in direct sales, violated any
provision of this section or was convicted of
any crime or ordinance or statutory violation
which is directly related to the registrant's
fitness to engage in direct selling.
(b) The Clerk shall notify the licensee in
writing of the revocation of license and
provide the licensee with an opportunity for
an appeal hearing. Written notice of the
revocation shall be mailed to the permanent
address shown on the registration form or
shall be served personally on the registrant.
The licensee can appeal such revocation to
the Village Board upon written request
within thirty (30) days of such revocation.
Upon receipt of a written request for an
appeal hearing, the licensee shall be given
notice of such hearing, which shall be not
more than twenty (20) nor less than five (5)
business days after receipt of the written
appeal request, except as otherwise agreed
between the parties. If the licensee does not
request a hearing within the time provided,
the license shall remain revoked.
5.04 ALCOHOL BEVERAGES.
(1) State Statutes Adopted. In
addition to those state statutes adopted in
11.72 of said Code of Ordinances, the
provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 125, defining
and regulating the sale, procurement,
dispensing and transfer of alcohol
beverages, including provisions relating to
persons under the legal drinking age, are
adopted and made part of this section by
reference. A violation of any of such
provisions shall constitute a violation of this
section.
(2) Licenses, Permits, Authorization
Required.
(a) When Required. Except as provided
by Wis. Stats. §125.06, no person shall,
within the Village, serve, sell, manufacture,
rectify, brew or engage in any other activity
for which this chapter or Wis. Stats. Ch.
125, requires a license, permit or other
authorization without holding the
appropriate license, permit or other
authorization as provided in this chapter.
See Wis. Stats. §125.04(1).
(b) Separate License Required for Each
Place of Sale. Except for licensed public
warehouses, a license shall be required for
each location or premises where alcohol
beverages are stored, sold or offered for
sale. See Wis. Stats. §125.04(9).
(3) Classes of Licenses and Fees. The
following classes and dominations of
licenses may be issued by the Clerk under
the authority of the Board upon compliance
with the law and payment of the fee herein
specified, which when so issued shall permit
the holder to sell, deal or traffic in alcohol
beverages as provided in the referenced state
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 8 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
statute. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, the full license fee shall be charged
for the whole or fraction of any year.
(a) Class A Fermented Malt Beverage
Retailer's License. See Wis. Stats. §125.25.
(b) Class B Fermented Malt Beverage
Retailer's License. See Wis. Stats. §125.26.
1. Six (6) months. A Class "B" license
may be issued at any time for six (6) months
in any calendar year, for three-quarters (3/4)
of the applicable license fee. Such license
shall not be renewable during the calendar
year in which issued. See Wis. Stats.
§125.26(5).
2. Picnic. See Wis. Stats. §125.26(6).
(c) Wholesaler's Fermented Malt
Beverage License. May not exceed twentyfive
dollars ($25) per year or fraction
thereof. See Wis. Stats. §125.28.
(d) Retail Class A Liquor License. See
Wis. Stats. §125.51(2).
(e) Retail Class B Liquor License. A
Retail Class B liquor license shall permit its
holder to sell liquor in original packages or
containers in multiples not to exceed four
(4) liters at any one time to be consumed off
the licensed premises. See Wis. Stats.
§125.51(3).
(f) “Class C” Wine Licenses. May sell
wine by the glass or in an opened original
container for consumption on the premises
where sold. “Class C”: wine licenses may
be granted to an applicant only if:
? the applicant meets the qualifications
set out in §125.04(5) for other retail
licenses;
? the license is for a restaurant in
which the sale of alcohol beverages
accounts for less than fifty percent
(50%) of gross receipts; and
? wine is the only intoxicating liquor
sold in the barroom. §125(3m), Stats.
The annual fee for renewal of a wine
license is the fee set from time to
time by resolution of the Board.
1. A license may be issued after July 1
in any license year which shall expire on the
following June 30. The fee for the license
shall be prorated according to the number of
months or fractions of months remaining
until the following June 30.
2. The fee for such license shall be fifty
percent (50%) of the annual license fee. The
license may not be renewed during the
calendar year in which issued. See Wis.
Stats. §125.51(9).
(g) Operator's License. See Wis. Stats.
§125.17.
1. Operator's licenses may be granted to
individuals by the Board for the purposes of
complying with Wis. Stats. §125.32(2) and
Wis. Stats. §125.68(2).
2. Operator's licenses may be issued
only on written application on forms
provided by the Clerk.
3. Operator's licenses shall be valid for
one (1) or two (2) years and shall expire on
June 30 of each year or on June 30 of the
second year after issuance.
(h) Provisional Operator's License.
1. The applicant shall submit an
operator's license application, showing proof
of registration for the bartender’s awareness
course that has been approved and complies
with Wis. Stats. §125.04 and §125.17 and
must pay the annual fee as provided in
Section 5.01 of this chapter.
2. The applicant is then issued a
provisional license for sixty (60) days and is
informed that they must complete the course
within sixty (60) days. Upon completion,
the applicant must return the certification of
completion and is then issued the permanent
license.
3. If the applicant does not complete the
course within the sixty (60) day period, the
provisional license will expire. The
applicant may then apply for another
provisional license, following the same
requirements as provided above and again
pay the fee. Only two (2) provisional
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 9 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
licenses will be issued during one calendar
year.
(i) Manager's License. See Wis. Stats.
§125.18.
(j) Reserve “Class B” Intoxicating
Liquor Licenses. The fee for a reserve
“Class B” intoxicating liquor license as
defined by Wis. Stats. §125.51(4)(a)4 shall
be ten thousand dollars ($10,000) for initial
issuance except that the fee for the initial
issuance of a reserve “Class B” intoxicating
liquor license to a bona fide club or lodge
situated and incorporated in the state for at
least six (6) years is the fee established in
Section (a) for such a club or lodge. The fee
established in this subdivision is in addition
to any other fee required under this section.
The annual fee for renewal of a reserve
license is the fee set from time to time by
resolution of the Board.
(4) License Application.
(a) Form. Application for a license to
sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages shall be made in
writing on forms prescribed by the
Wisconsin Department of Revenue and filed
with the Clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior
to issuance. The premises shall be
physically described, including every room
and storage space to be covered by the
license and including all rooms joined by
connecting entrances or not separated by a
solid wall.
(b) Application to be Notarized. The
application shall be signed and sworn to by
the applicant as provided by Wis. Stats.
§887.01.
(c) Publication. Prior to the issuance of
a license under this section, the Clerk shall
publish notice of the application in the
official Village newspaper.
(d) List of Licensees. By July 15 of
each year, the Clerk shall forward to the
State Department of Revenue a list
containing the name, address and trade name
of each person holding a license issued
under this section, except a picnic,
manager's or operator's license.
(6) License Restrictions.
(a) Statutory Requirements. In addition
to the requirements imposed by provision of
Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in
Sec. 5.04(1) of the Suamico Village Code of
Ordinances, the following restrictions shall
apply to the issuance of licenses or permits
pursuant to this section:
(b) Location.
1. No retail "Class A" or "Class B"
license shall be issued for premises, the
main entrance of which is less than three
hundred feet (300’) from the main entrance
of any established public school, parochial
school, hospital, or church. Such distance
shall be measured by the shortest route
along the highway from the closest point of
the main entrance of such school, church or
hospital to the main entrance to the premises
covered by the license.
2. This paragraph shall not apply to
premises licensed as such on or before June
30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises
licensed as such prior to the occupation of
real property within three hundred feet
(300’) thereof by any school, hospital or
church building.
(c) Violators of Liquor or Beer Laws or
Ordinances. No retail Class A or B license
shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a violation of any federal or
state liquor or fermented malt beverage law
or the provisions of this section or whose
license has been revoked under Wis. Stats.
§125.12, during one (1) year prior to such
application. A conviction of a member of a
partnership or the partnership itself shall
make the partnership or any member thereof
ineligible for such license for one (1) year.
(d) Health and Sanitation Requirements.
No retail Class B license shall be issued for
any premises which does not conform to the
sanitary, safety and health requirements of
the State Department of Industry, Labor and
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 10 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
Human Relations pertaining to buildings and
plumbing, to the rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health and Social
Services (departments have been shuffled)
applicable to restaurants and to all such
ordinances and regulations adopted by the
Board.
(e) License Quota. The number of
persons and places that may be granted retail
Class B liquor licenses under this section is
limited as provided in Wis. Stats.
§125.51(4).
(f) Corporations. No corporation
organized under the laws of this state, any
other state or foreign country may be issued
any alcohol beverage license or permit
unless such corporation meets the
requirements of Wis. Stats. §125.04(6).
(g) Age Requirement. No license
hereunder, except an operator's license, shall
be granted to any person who has not
attained the legal drinking age. Operator's
licenses may be issued only to applicants
who have attained the age of eighteen (18).
(h) Effect of Revocation of License.
Twelve (12) months shall elapse before
another license shall be granted to the
person whose license was revoked.
(i) Delinquent Taxes, Assessments and
Claims. No license or license renewal shall
be issued for any premises or person for
which taxes, assessments or other claims of
the Village or the State of Wisconsin are
delinquent and non-paid. Included within
the definition of delinquent taxes, delinquent
assessments or other delinquent payments
due the Village shall be any delinquency
(unpaid) for special assessments, personal
property taxes, real estate taxes, motel or
hotel taxes, failure to pay any adjudicated
fines or penalties, failure to pay any fees or
monies due to the Village of any kind or
nature, etc.
(j) Issuance for Sale in Dwellings
Prohibited. No license shall be issued to
any person for the purpose of possessing,
selling or offering for sale any alcohol
beverages in any dwelling house, flat or
residential apartment.
(k) Minimum Period of Operation. No
Class B alcohol beverage license shall be
issued or renewed for a business which does
not operate at least one hundred four (104)
days during the license year.
(l) Inspection of Application and
Premises. The Clerk shall notify the Police
Department, Fire Department and Building
and Housing Inspector of all license and
permit applications, and these officials shall
inspect or cause to be inspected each
application and premises to determine
whether the applicant and the premises
sought to be licensed comply with the
regulations, ordinances and laws applicable
thereto and the applicant’s fitness for the
trust to be imposed. No license or permit
provided for in this section shall be issued
without the approval of a majority of the
Board.
(m) Search of Licensed Premises.
Cooperation Required with Lawful Police
Investigation. It shall be a condition of any
license issued hereunder that the licensed
premises may be entered and inspected at
any reasonable hour by any police officer of
the Village without any warrant, and the
application for a license hereunder shall be
deemed to consent to this provision. Any
refusal to permit such inspection or refusal
to cooperate with any lawful police
investigation shall automatically operate as a
revocation of any license hereunder and
shall be deemed a violation of this section.
(n) Safety and Sanitation Requirements.
Each licensed premises shall be maintained
and conducted in a sanitary manner and
shall be a safe and proper place for the
purpose for which used.
(6) Form and Expiration of Licenses.
All licenses shall be numbered in the order
in which they are issued and shall state
clearly the specific premises for which
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 11 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid
and the name of the licensee and, unless
sooner revoked, shall expire on June 30
thereafter except as otherwise provided by
law. The Clerk shall affix his or her
affidavit as required by Wis. Stats.
§125.04(4).
(7) Transfer of Licenses.
(a) As to Person. No license shall be
transferable as to licensee except as
provided by Wis. Stats. §125.04(12).
(b) As to Place. Licenses issued
pursuant to this section may be transferred
to another premise once during any license
year as provided in Wis. Stats. §125.04(12).
Application for such transfer shall be made
on blanks furnished by the State Department
of Revenue. Proceedings for transfer shall
be had in the same manner and form as the
original application. The fee for such
transfer shall be ten dollars ($10).
(8) Posting and Care of Licenses.
Every license or permit required under this
section shall be framed and posted and at all
times displayed as provided in Wis. Stats.
§125.04(10). No person shall post such
license or permit any other person to post it
upon premises other than those mentioned in
the application, or knowingly deface or
destroy such license. Any licensee or permit
holder who fails to post his license or permit
as therein required shall be presumed to be
operating without a license.
(9) Regulation of Licensed Premises
and Licensees.
(a) Gambling and Disorderly Conduct
Prohibited. Each licensed and permitted
premises shall at all times be conducted in
an orderly manner; and no disorderly,
riotous or indecent conduct or gambling
(except as provided by state law) shall be
allowed at any time on any such premises.
(b) Employment of Underage Person.
No licensee shall employee any underage
person who does not have a valid operator's
license to serve, sell, dispense or give away
any alcohol beverage.
(c) Sales by Clubs. No club shall sell
intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages except to members and guests
invited by members.
(d) Safety and Sanitation Requirements.
Each licensed premises shall be maintained
and conducted in a sanitary manner and
shall be a safe and proper place for the
purpose for which used.
(e) Permitted Cups or Cans Only.
Intoxicants will be sold outdoors only in
foam or plastic cups or cans. The use of
glass bottles is prohibited, except for catered
events as defined in Chapter 5.08(10).
(f) Solicitation of Drinks Prohibited.
Any licensee, permittee, or bartender of a
retail alcohol beverage establishment
covered by a license or permit issued under
Wis. Stats. Ch. 125, who permits an
entertainer or employee to solicit a drink of
any alcohol beverage as defined in Wis.
Stats. §125.02(1) or any other drink from a
customer on the premises, or any entertainer
who solicits such drinks shall be deemed in
violation of this section.
(g) Open Containers. A licensee or
person in charge shall not allow the sale,
service or consumption of alcohol beverages
in open containers outside the licensed
premises.
(h) Outdoor Areas.
1. New Applications. An application
for a license pursuant to this chapter may
include an outdoor area in the proposed
premises. The inclusion of the outdoor area
in the licensed premises shall be subject to
review in the same manner as any other
license application and the restrictions
provided in this section.
2. Amendment. A licensee may apply
to amend a licensed premises to include an
outdoor area. The request shall be filed with
the Clerk no less than thirty (30) days prior
to the first date of use of the outdoor area.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 12 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
The application for amendment shall be
subject to review in the same manner as any
other license application, inspection by the
Building Inspector and Police Department,
and the restrictions provided in this chapter.
3. Physical Requirements.
a. Outdoor Areas that Directly Abut
Adjoining Residentially Zoned Properties
Must:
1. Provide for a twenty foot (20’) buffer
between the limits of the outdoor premises
and the adjoining residential lot.
2. Provide an approved privacy fence at
least six feet (6’) in height either
surrounding the outdoor premises or
extending along the property line of the
premises a minimum of thirty feet (30’)
beyond the outdoor premises.
b. Patios and Decks.
1. A licensed outdoor area must:
i. be immediately adjacent to the indoor
portion of the licenses premises.
ii. have been reviewed and approved by
the Design Review Committee if installed
after January 1, 2007.
iii. reasonably contain occupants to the
licensed area.
2. All service shall be limited to persons
seated at tables.
3. All service shall be discontinued by
10 p.m. and premises vacated by 10:30 p.m.
(discontinued by 10:30 p.m. and premises
vacated by 11:00 p.m. on Friday and
Saturday only) except for the owner and
regular employees of the licensed premises
for the purpose of cleaning up.
4. Music may be broadcast directly into
the outdoor area by means of outdoor
speakers, jukeboxes, or other devices at a
reasonable level until 10 p.m, (until 11 p.m.
on Friday and Saturday).
5. The outdoor premises shall be used
only for serving food and alcohol.
6. All lighting must be shielded and not
be of an intensity or brilliance to create glare
which is distracting to adjoining properties
or can become a hazard or danger to
vehicular traffic.
7. The outdoor premises must have
provisions to limit the risk of vehicular
traffic from entering area.
c. Beer Gardens/Outdoor Service Area.
A beer garden is defined as an enclosed area
with specially marked entrances and exits.
In addition to the provision of Section 5.04
(10) (h) 3.b. above, no person shall possess,
sell, or offer for sale any alcohol beverages
in any parking lot or any other open area for
any special event unless a temporary beer
garden is established in accordance with the
following provisions.
1. Fencing.
i. Erect an enclosed area consisting of a
fence or wall not less than six feet (6’) in
height or with two (2) temporary fences not
less than four feet (4’) in height and spaced
six feet (6’) apart. No fence which defines a
temporary beer garden area shall be located
closer than five feet (5’) away from the
adjacent public right-of-way. Consumption
of alcohol beverages shall be restricted to
that area within the confines of the beer
garden.
ii. Obtain a specific waiver of the
fencing requirements contained within
Section 5.04 (10) (h) 3.c.1.i. from the Board.
The request shall be submitted upon a form
provided by the Clerk and shall be filed at
the time of license application. The request
shall specify what safeguards the licensee
will take to prevent abuse in the dispersion
and consumption of alcohol beverages. The
Board may grant or deny, in whole or part,
or may grant subject to conditions the
waiver requested.
2. Noise. No musical instruments,
radios, juke boxes, or other means of electric
sound amplification may be used or operated
in a licensed outdoor area after 10 p.m., (11
p.m. on Friday and Saturday), unless an
exception has been granted pursuant to
Suamico Village Ordinances.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 13 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
4. Unlicensed Outdoor Area. An
unlicensed outdoor area is subject to and
used in conjunction with the licensed
premises and shall not be used for the
purpose of serving or consuming alcoholic
beverages.
5. License Responsibility. Any licensed
outdoor area is subject to all regulations of
this chapter and Wis. Stats. Ch. 125.
6. Maintaining Order. The licensee
shall maintain peace and order over any
outdoor area adjacent to and used in
conjunction with a licensed premises
whether or not said outdoor area is licensed.
Violation of this section may result in the
Police Department exercising its authority
under Chapter 5.04(10)(i) of the Suamico
Code of Ordinances, and ordering any
outdoor premises or the entire area closed in
the public interest.
(i) Disorderly House.
1. Duty to Maintain Order. A licensee
under this section shall have a duty to
maintain peace and order in and around the
licensed premises. This duty shall extend to
and include any adjacent parking lot or
facility adjacent to and servicing the
licensed premises.
2. Police Power to Close Licensed
Premises. The Police Department may order
any disorderly house closed until 8 a.m. the
following day when, in reasonable view of
the department, the licensee or person in
charge failed to maintain peace and order as
per Section 5.04 (10) (i) 1. of this section, or
the department otherwise believes that the
public peace and safety is served by such
closing by reason of threat to bodily
security, property, or peaceful repose of any
member of the general public.
(j) Online Ordering and Curbside
Pickup of Alcohol Beverages.
1. No establishment shall allow online
purchase of alcohol beverages and curbside
delivery of such purchases ("Click and
Collect"), without first obtaining an
"Extension of Premises" from the Suamico
Village Board to license that portion of the
establishment's parking lot that will allow
vehicles to park for purposes of picking up
their online order.
a. The licensed establishment shall file a
detailed operation plan with their "Extension
of Premises" form that clearly details how
their "Click and Collect" operation will
function. The operation plan shall include
the licensee's protocol for assuring that
underage persons and intoxicated persons do
not pick up alcohol via the "Click and
Collect" program.
b. Failure of licensee to provide a
detailed operation plan with their "Extension
of Premises" application shall result in the
Village of Suamico Clerk's Office not
issuing the license.
2. No establishment holding an alcohol
beverage license shall allow online purchase
and pick-up of alcohol beverages unless the
sale is consummated on the licensed
premises.
a. Payment for the purchase must be
completed on premises and may not be
completed until the purchaser is at the
licensed premises and has presented valid
photo identification that has been verified by
a licensed operator employed by the
premises.
b. The licensed operator must verify that
the person placing the "Click and Collect"
order is the same person picking up the
order.
c. The sale and delivery of "Click and
Collect" purchases shall be made only by a
licensed operator.
d. No alcohol sales are permitted if the
purchaser fails to present valid photo
identification.
e. The "Click and Collect" system must
allow the purchase of alcohol to be denied
without affecting the remainder of the
purchase.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 14 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
3. Each "Click and Collect" transaction
must capture and retain an image of the
vehicle into which the order is being loaded
for thirty (30) days.
4. Pick-up of "Click and Collect" orders
shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m.
5. There shall be a minimum four- (4)
hour waiting period between order time and
pick-up time.
6. Orders placed after 2:00 p.m. cannot
be picked up until the following day
7. If the "Click and Collect" purchaser
is not the driver of the vehicle into which the
order is being loaded, the licensed operator
must verify that the driver is 21 years of age
or older.
8. The licensed operator shall report to
his or her manager any purchaser who
shows signs of alcohol consumption, and in
conjunction with the manager, shall assess
sobriety for purposes of approving or
denying the sale.
9. The pick- up area for "Click and
Collect" purchases shall be clearly defined
with visible markings, signs, and/or barriers
and must be within 150 ft. from the pick-up
door.
10. No events other than the delivery of
"Click and Collect" orders shall be allowed
on the expanded premises.
11. Penalty. Any licensee or person who
violates any provision of this subsection
shall be subject to forfeiture as set forth in
Chapter 5.99, Penalty, Severability and
Enforcement.
(10) Closing Hours. The Village
hereby adopts Wis. Stats. §§ 125.32(3) and
125.68(4), and any future amendments,
relating to closing hours for Class “A”,
Class “B” “Class A”, “Class B” and “Class
C” sales of fermented malt beverages and
intoxicating liquor.
(11) Revocation and Suspension of
Licenses; Non-Renewal.
(a) Procedure. Whenever the holder of
any license under Chapter 5.04 violates any
portion of this Code of Ordinances, Brown
County Code of Ordinances, Wisconsin
statutes, or federal law, proceedings for the
revocation of such license may be instituted
in the manner and under the procedure
established by this section and Wis. Stats.
§125.11 and §125.12.
(b) Abandonment of Premises.
1. Grounds for Cancellation for Nonuse
of License. Any Class A or Class B
Fermented Malt and/or Intoxicating Liquor
Licenses granted under this chapter for
which the subject premises:
a. Is not open for business within ninety
(90) days of granting of such license; or
b. Is not open for business for a period
of ninety (90) consecutive days or more; or
c. Is not open for business at least fifty
percent (50%) of the days within any twelve
(12) month period, either within a licensing
year or overlapping two (2) licensing years
may be cancelled unless, after notice and
hearing as provided in Section (2) thereof,
the Board may determine that good cause
exists for failure of the licensee to be open
for business for periods in excess of the
minimums set forth in this Section. If such
cause is found to exist, the Board may set
such terms as it deems appropriate to the
continuation of the license with respect to
minimum days of operation or a timeframe
within which the subject premises must open
for business to avoid cancellation of the
subject license(s).
2. Notice and Hearing. Prior to
cancellation of any license, the Clerk shall
notify the licensee in writing of the Village’s
intention to cancel the license for nonuse
and provide the licensee with an opportunity
for a hearing. Such notice shall also specify
the time, place and date of the hearing,
which shall be not less than fifteen (15) days
after the date of the notice. Such hearing
shall be conducted as provided in
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 15 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
accordance with Wis. Stats. §125.12(2)(b),
any amendments thereto. Judicial reviews
shall be as provided in Wis. Stats.
§125.12(2)(d), or any amendments thereto.
(c) License Revocation, Suspension or
Non-Renewal.
1. Notice and Hearing. Whenever a
person holding a license to sell alcoholic
beverages has failed to maintain the
premises according to standards prescribed
for sanitation, or in whose premises persons
are permitted to loiter for purposes of
prostitution, or when the licensee has not
observed and obeyed any lawful order of the
Board or police officers of the Village, has
violated Village ordinances, Brown County
ordinances, Wisconsin statutes, federal law,
or for any other good reason, the Board shall
issue a summons to be signed by the Clerk
commanding the licensee complained of to
appear before the Board on a day and time
and at a place named in the summons to
show cause why the license should not be
revoked, suspended or not renewed. In
addition, any resident may file a sworn,
written complaint with the Clerk. Such
summons shall be served not less than three
(3) and not more than ten (10) days before
the time at which the licensee is commanded
to appear and may be served personally
upon the licensee or the agent of the licensee
or upon the person in charge of the licensed
premises.
a. The complaint shall be served with
the summons and shall set forth the offenses
allegedly committed, the date and place of
said offense and the facts constituting the
alleged offense. If such licensee shall not
appear as required by the summons, the
complaint shall be taken as true, and if the
Board deems its allegations sufficient, the
Board shall recommend revocation, nonrenewal
or suspension of the license as
provided herein.
2. Procedure on Hearing; Effect of
Revocation. The President shall conduct the
hearing, administer oaths to all witnesses
and may issue subpoenas. So far as
practicable, the rules of evidence provided
in Wis. Stats. §227.08 shall be followed.
The complainant shall have the burden of
proving the charges to a preponderance of
the evidence. The licensee and the
complainant may be represented by counsel,
may call and examine witnesses and crossexamine
witnesses of the other party. All
proceedings and testimony shall be recorded
on tape. If either party requests a
stenographic recording and transcription, the
Village shall make the necessary
arrangements, but the expenses shall be
borne by the requesting party. The Clerk
shall serve as secretary to the Board and
shall make and receive all exhibits admitted
into the record. The Board, upon the
testimony and evidence presented at the
hearing, shall determine by simple majority
vote of those present whether the charges
are true or not.
a. If the vote is to suspend the license, it
shall be for a period of not less than ten (10)
days or more than ninety (90) days.
Following the procedure above, the
recommendation may be to revoke the
license.
b. If the Board determines that the
charges are not substantiated, the complaint
shall be dismissed without cost to either
party. The Board’s action shall be recorded
by the Clerk. If the complaint is found to be
true, the licensee shall pay the Village the
actual cost of the proceedings. If the
complaint is found by the Board to be
malicious and without probable cause, the
complainant shall pay the costs of the
proceedings in the same amount.
c. When a license is revoked, it shall be
so entered on record by the Clerk and no
other license shall be granted to such
licensee or for such premises for a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of the
revocation, nor shall any part of the money
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 16 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
paid as application fee for any license so
revoked be refunded.
3. Point Schedule. Upon conviction by
any Municipal Court, or other court of
competent jurisdiction, a wholesale, retail
operator’s license, or any alcohol related
license or permit shall be awarded demerit
points as follows: fifty (50) demerit points
for each violation.
a. Upon conviction, demerit points shall
be awarded retroactive to the date of the
violation. For demerit points up to fifty (50)
within a twelve (12) month period, a
warning to the licensee of the consequences
of additional violations shall be issued to the
license holder. If one hundred (100) demerit
points are accumulated in a twelve (12)
month period, the Board shall suspend the
license for a period of ten (10) days.
b. Upon conviction, demerit points shall
be awarded retroactive to the date of
violation. If two hundred (200) demerit
points are accumulated in a twenty-four (24)
month period, the Board shall suspend the
license for a period of thirty (30) days.
c. Upon conviction, demerit points shall
be awarded retroactive to the date of
violation. If two hundred fifty (250) demerit
points are accumulated in a thirty-six (36)
month period, the Board shall suspend the
license for a period of ninety (90) days.
d. Demerit points are accumulated for
each wholesale, retail, or operator’s license
as results from conviction for a municipal
code violation or a state law violation under
the terms and conditions of this Chapter.
The actual demerit points are assessed upon
entry of judgment and either expiration of
the appeal period thereafter or the expiration
of any appeal, and where the results of the
appeal sustain the Village’s conviction of
the holder of the wholesale, retail or
operator’s license.
e. Each wholesale, retail or operator’s
license issued under this chapter shall stand
revoked without further proceedings upon
any conviction in Municipal Court or any
other court of competent jurisdiction (and no
reversal thereof upon appeal) of either the
licensed holder or any employee, or agent or
representative thereof, resulting in an
accumulation of three hundred (300) demerit
points within a forty-eight (48) month
period, or for similar violations and
subsequent convictions of Wis. Stats. Ch.
125 or 139, or any other federal or state
liquor or fermented malt beverage law. Any
violation and subsequent conviction by the
holder of the wholesale, retail or operator’s
license, or an offense under Wis. Stats.
Ch. 125 or 139, or any other federal or state
liquor or fermented malt beverage law, shall
be considered a violation and conviction
under this section and shall result in the
accumulation of demerit points.
(d) Other Provisions. Any license
issued pursuant to Section 5.04 shall be
subject to such further regulations and
restrictions as may be imposed by the Board
by amendment to this section or by the
enactment of new ordinances. If any
licensees shall fail or neglect to meet the
requirements imposed by such new
restrictions and regulations, his or her
license may be revoked in accordance with
this section. In case of revocation of any
license or any violation of any provision of
this Chapter in accordance with this Section
or by the court or for any reasonable cause
except the imposition of new restrictions, no
refund shall be made of any part of the
license fee.
(e) Effect of Revocation of License.
Whenever any license issued under Section
5.04 has been revoked, at least four (4)
months from the time of such revocation
shall elapse before another license shall be
issued under Chapter 5.04 for the same
premises and twelve (12) months shall
elapse before another license shall be issued
under Section 5.04 to the person whose
license was revoked.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 17 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
(f) Repossession of License or Permit.
Whenever any license or permit under this
section shall be revoked or suspended by the
Board or President or action of any court or
Par. (d), it shall be the duty of the Clerk to
notify the licensee or permit holder of such
suspension or revocation and to take
physical possession of the license or permit
wherever it may be found and file it in the
Clerk’s office.
(12) Violations by Agents and
Employees. A violation of this section by
an authorized agent or employee of a
licensee shall constitute a violation by the
licensee.
5.05 BLOCK PARTY PERMITS. Local
residential streets may be temporarily closed
for purposes of conducting block parties,
upon written approval of one hundred
percent (100%) of the adult landowners
abutting that portion of the street sought to
be closed.
(1) Permit Required. Applicants
requesting a street closure for this purpose
shall obtain a permit from the Clerk.
(a) After receiving permit application
and validating names and addresses of adult
residents abutting the portion of the street
sought to be closed, the Clerk will forward
permit application to the Director of Public
Works for his or her approval.
(b) If approved by the Director of Public
Works, the original is forwarded to the Clerk
to be placed on file at the Village Office. A
copy is to be given to the applicant. A copy
will also be forwarded to the Police
Department and Fire Department.
(c) As directed by the Director of Public
Works, proper warning signs shall be placed
upon any portion of the Village street
permitted to be closed herein.
(d) The permit must be obtained at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled event
and is only valid on dates and times stated
on permit. The street must be accessible for
emergency vehicle use.
(e) The applicant is liable for all costs of
repairs to Village streets and/or property
resulting from the block party, and will be
billed for these costs. The applicant will
barricade the block party site as required by
the Director of Public works and is liable for
all damages for failure to erect and maintain
suitable barricades.
(f) Applicant must submit a rental fee
for each barricade, fee as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board. Only
barricades supplied and approved by the
Director of Public Works can be used and
must be returned to Public Works within
three (3) business days after party.
(g) The applicant must show proof of
liability insurance at time of application for
dates, location, and times of block party
with the following: Limits of liability shall
not be less than: bodily injury liability - not
less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000) each occurrence, property
damage liability – not less than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) each
occurrence. The sponsoring party shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Village for
any and all damage or liability whatsoever
occasioned within the described premises.
5.06 PARADES.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Parade. Any parade, march, run,
walk, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant,
or procession, or any similar display, in or
upon any street, park, or in a public place in
the Village.
(b) Parade Permit. A permit required
by this section.
(c) Person. Any person, firm,
partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
(2) Permit Required. No person shall
participate in or form any parade unless a
parade permit has been obtained from the
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 18 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
Public Works Director or Police
Department.
(3) Exceptions. This section shall not
apply to:
(a) Funeral processions.
(b) Students going to and from school
classes or participating in educational
activities provided such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the
proper school authorities.
(c) A governmental agency acting
within the scope of its functions.
(4) Application. A person seeking a
parade permit shall file an application with
the Clerk on the forms provided. The Clerk
will then forward the application to the
Police Department and Public Works
Director.
(a) The applicant shall indemnify and
hold harmless the Village for any damage,
injury, or liability whatsoever occasioned
within the described parade or as a result of
said parade.
(b) The applicant is liable for all costs
of repairs to Village streets and/or property
resulting from the parade and will be billed
for these costs.
(c) The applicant must show proof of
liability insurance at the time of application
for dates, location, and time of parade with
the following: Limits of liability shall not
be less than: bodily injury liability – not
less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000) each occurrence and property
damage liability – not less than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) each
occurrence.
(d) The applicant shall also be
responsible for any or all costs incurred by
the Police Department or Public Works
Department as a result of the parade. The
Police Department or Public Works
Department can waive any or all costs to
their respective department if such waiver
would be in the best interest of the Village.
(e) Filing Period. An application for a
parade permit shall be filed with the Clerk
not less than forty-five (45) days or more
than ninety (90) days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
(f) Contents. The application for a
parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
1. The name, address, and telephone
number of the person seeking to conduct
such parade.
2. If the parade is proposed to be
conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address, and
telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization, and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
3. The name, address, and telephone
number of the person who will be the parade
chairperson and who will be responsible for
its conduct.
4. The date when the parade is to be
conducted.
5. The route to be traveled, the starting
point, and the termination point.
6. The approximate number of persons
who, and animals and vehicles which, will
constitute such parade; the type of animals,
and description of the vehicles.
7. The hours such parade will start and
terminate.
8. A statement as to whether the parade
will occupy all or only a portion of the width
of the streets proposed to be traversed.
9. The location by streets of any
assembly areas for such parade.
10. The time at which units of the
parade will begin to assemble at any such
assembly area or areas.
11. The interval of space to be
maintained between units of such parade.
12. If the parade is designed to be held
by, and on behalf of, or for any person other
than the applicant, the applicant for such
permit shall file with the Clerk a
communication in writing from the person
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 19 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
proposing to hold the parade authorizing the
applicant to apply for the permit as an agent.
13. Any additional information which
the Public Works Director or Police
Department finds reasonably necessary as to
whether a permit should be issued.
(g) Late Applications. The Public
Works Director, where good cause is shown,
may consider any application which is filed
less than forty-five (45) days before the date
such parade is proposed to be conducted.
(h) Fee. The fee for any parade permit
shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board. The fee
shall be paid at the office of the Clerk at the
time of application. No fee paid shall be
refunded unless the permit is denied.
(5) Standards for Issuance. The
Public Works Director shall issue a permit
when, from a consideration of the
application, after receiving approval from
the Police Department, and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, it
appears that:
(a) The conduct of the parade will not
substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of other traffic contiguous to its
route.
(b) The conduct of the parade will not
require the diversion of so great a number of
police officers of the Village to properly
police the line of movement and the areas
contiguous thereto as to prevent normal
police protection of the Village.
(c) The conduct of such parade will not
require the diversion of so great a number of
ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance
service to portions of the Village other than
that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto.
(d) The concentration of persons,
animals, and vehicles at assembly points of
the parade will not unduly interfere with
proper fire and police protection of or
ambulance service to areas contiguous to
such assembly areas.
(e) The conduct of such parade will not
interfere with the movement of police,
rescue, or fire fighting equipment enroute to
an emergency or call for service.
(f) The conduct of the parade is not
reasonably likely to cause injury to persons
or property, to provoke disorderly conduct,
or create a disturbance.
(g) The parade is scheduled to move
from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays enroute.
(6) Notice of Rejection. The Public
Works Director shall act upon the
application for a parade permit within five
(5) working days after filing thereof. If the
Police Department or Public Works Director
disapproves the application, a notice of such
action stating the reasons for the denial of
the permit shall be mailed to the applicant
within seven (7) working days after the date
upon which the application was filed.
(7) Appeal Procedure. Any person
aggrieved may appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the Board. The appeal will be
scheduled on the next available Board
meeting in which the applicant has an
opportunity to be heard by the Board.
(8) Notice to Village and Other
Officials. Immediately upon the issuance of
a parade permit, the Clerk shall send a copy
thereof to the following:
(a) Police Department.
(b) Fire Department.
(c) County Rescue Service.
(d) Public Works Director.
The Clerk shall keep the original copy of the
parade permit on file at the Village office.
(9) Contents of Permit. Each parade
permit shall state the following:
(a) Name of permit holder.
(b) Address and phone number of
permit holder.
(c) Date of parade.
(d) Starting and ending time.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 20 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
(e) The maximum length of the parade
in miles or fractions thereof.
(f) A map showing the parade route
listing all streets to be traversed.
(g) Number of street barricades to be
used.
(h) Amount of street barricade deposit
received.
(i) Such other information as the Public
Works Director or Police Department shall
find necessary to the enforcement of this
section.
(10) Duties of Permittee. A permittee
hereunder shall comply with all permit
directions and conditions and with all
applicable laws and ordinances.
(11) Possession of Permit. The parade
chairperson or other person heading or
leading such parade shall carry the parade
permit upon the person during the conduct
of the parade.
(12) Public Conduct during Parades.
(a) Interference. No person shall
unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or
interfere with any parade or parade assembly
or with any person, vehicle, or animal
participating or used in a parade.
(b) Driving through Parades. No driver
of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
or persons comprising a parade when such
vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a parade.
(c) Parking on Parade Route. The
Police Department or Public Works Director
may prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof
constituting a part of the route of the parade.
The Pubic Works Director shall post signs to
such effect, and no person shall park or
leave unattended any vehicle in violation
thereof. No person shall be liable for
parking on a street unposted in violation of
this section.
5.07 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
REGULATIONS.
(1) Application of State Codes.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this section, the statutory provisions of Wis.
Stats. Ch. 98, Weights and Measures, and
Wis. Adm. Code, ATCP 92, Weighting and
Measuring Devices, are hereby adopted and
by reference made a part of this section as if
fully set forth herein. Any act required to be
performed or prohibited by any statute or
code incorporated herein by reference is
required or prohibited by this section. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of the statutes incorporated
herein or Wis. Adm. Code provisions
incorporated herein are intended to be made
a part of this section. This section is
adopted pursuant to the provisions of Wis.
Stats. Ch. 98.
(2) Appointment of Inspectors. In
order to assure compliance with this section,
the Village hereby grants the authority and
duties of sealers and inspectors required by
this section to the State of Wisconsin
Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection.
(3) Definitions.
(a) Commercial Weighing or Measuring
Devices. Devices used or employed in
establishing the size, quantity, extent, area,
or measurement of quantities, things,
produce or articles for sale, hire, or award,
or in computing any basic charge or
payment for services rendered on the basis
of weight, or measure.
(b) Weights and Measurers Program.
The program that includes administration
and enforcement of this section, Wis. Stats.
Ch. 98, and applicable Wis. Adm. Code
provision, and any related actions.
(4) Weights and Measures License
Required.
(a) License Requirements. Except as
provided in Subs. (b), no person shall
operate, or maintain any commercial
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 21 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
weighting, or measuring devices, or any
other weights, and measures or systems and
accessories related thereto which are used
commercially within the Village for
determining the weight, measure, or count
unless each such device is licensed by an
annual weights and measures license issued
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(b) Exemptions. Sales permitted at a
farmers market, or sales permitted by direct
sellers, transient merchants and solicitors are
exempt from licensing under this section.
(5) Application for License. An
application for a weights and measures
license shall be made in writing on a form
provided for such purpose by the Clerk and
shall be signed by the owner of the
commercial business, or by its authorized
agent. Such applications shall state the type,
and number of weighing and measuring
devices to be licensed, location of the
devices, the applicant’s full name, and post
office address, and whether such applicant is
an individual, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation, or their entity. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application
shall state the names, and addresses of each
partner. If the applicant is a corporation, or
limited liability company, the application
shall state the name and address of all
officers and agents of the applicant,
including the registered agent thereof. The
Clerk has the right to verify the number of
measuring devices reported in the
application by onsite visit of the business.
(6) Issuance of License and Fees.
Upon compliance with this section, the
Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant
upon payment of an annual fee assessment
(see Paragraph (7) below). Each business
shall have one (1) license for operating
within the Village.
(7) Fee Assessment.
(a) Annual Fee. The Board shall
annually assign fees to each licensee based
on the number and types of weighing and
measuring devices licensed as of July 1 of
each year. The total of the fees assigned and
the fees collected shall not exceed the actual
costs of the Weights and Measures Program.
(b) Clerk to Prepare Fee Schedule. The
Clerk shall at least annually prepare a
schedule of fees based on the following:
Total number
of devices
(Program Cost) X (number of
devices per applicant)
(c) Failure to Pay Assessment. If the
assessed fee is not paid within thirty (30)
days of the date of mailing of the invoice, an
additional administrative collection charge
of ten percent (10%) of the fee shall be
added to the amount due, plus interest shall
accrue thereon at the rate of one percent
(1%) per month, or fraction thereof until
paid. If the licensee is the owner of the real
estate premises where the licensed weights
and measures devices are located, any
delinquent assessment shall be extended
upon the current or the next tax roll as a
charge against the real estate premises for
current services, as provided in Wis. Stats.
§66.60(16). No licenses shall be issued or
renewed under this section if the licensee is
delinquent in the payment of a fee assessed
under this section.
(d) Mailing of Notices. Schedules,
notices, and invoices shall be considered
mailed to a licensee when mailed by first
class mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at
the licensee’s address as shown on the
application form.
(e) Change of Ownership. If the
ownership of a commercial business
licensed under this section is transferred
during a license year, the owner of the
business as of July 1 of the license year shall
be liable and responsible for the payment of
the fees assessed under this section.
5.08 SPECIAL EVENTS. It is the
purpose of the Board of Suamico to regulate
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 22 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
the assemblage special events of large
numbers of people, in excess of those
normally needing the health, sanitary, fire,
police, transportation and utility services
regularly provided in the Village, in order
that the health, safety and welfare of all
persons in the Village, residents and visitors
alike, may be protected.
(1) License Required.
(a) No person shall permit, maintain,
promote, conduct, advertise, act as
entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage,
or sell or give tickets to an actual or
reasonably anticipated special event of two
hundred fifty (250) people or more, whether
on public or private property without a
special event license.
(b) An alcohol beverage license holder
that anticipates an event of any number that
requires an amendment to the alcohol
beverage license must also be issued a
special event license. To hold an event the
person or alcohol beverage license holder
must have first completed an application
issued by the Clerk and/or Police
Department, application for which has first
been issued at least thirty (30) days in
advance of the special event. A license to
hold a special event issued to one (1) person
and/or alcohol beverage license holder shall
permit any person to engage in any lawful
activity in connection with the holding of
the licensed assembly. An application for a
one (1) day alcohol beverage license
amendment for a special event can be
obtained per Section 5.04 (10) (h) 2.
(c) As used in this chapter a special
event assembly means a company of persons
gathered together at any location at any
single time for any purpose.
(d) The fee for each license shall be as
set from time to time by resolution of the
Board. In addition to the annual special
event license an additional fee may be
charged for subsequent events for site
inspection for events that comply with
previously approved site plans.
(e) A license shall permit the special
event assembly of only the maximum
number of people stated in the license. The
licensee shall not sell tickets to nor permit to
assemble at the licensed location more than
the maximum permissible number of people.
(f) The licensee shall not permit the
sound of the special event to carry
unreasonably beyond the enclosed
boundaries of the location of the assembly
and during the hours of operation, plans
must be made to reduce the noise Sunday
through Thursday after the hour of 10 p.m.
until 7 a.m. and 11 p.m. until 7 a.m. on
Friday and Saturday.
(g) This Code shall not apply to any
regularly established permanent place of
worship, stadium, athletic field, arena,
auditorium, coliseum, or other similar
permanently established place of assembly
for special events which do not exceed by
more than two hundred fifty (250) people
the maximum seating capacity of the
structure where the assembly is held.
(h) This Code shall not apply to
government-sponsored fairs or events held
on regularly established fairgrounds nor to
special events required to be licensed by
other codes and regulations of the county
and Village.
(2) Conditions for Issuing License.
Before an applicant may be issued a license,
the applicant shall first:
(a) Determine the maximum number of
people which can be assembled or admitted
to the location of the special event assembly,
provided that the maximum number shall
not exceed the maximum number which can
reasonably assemble at the location of the
assembly in consideration of the nature of
the special event assembly and provided
that, where the special event assembly is to
continue overnight, the maximum number
shall not be more than is allowed to sleep
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 23 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
within the boundaries of the location of the
special event assembly by the zoning or
health ordinances of the County and of the
Village, in which the special event assembly
is to be located.
(b) Provide proof that he or she will
furnish at his or her own expense before the
special event assembly commences:
1. Potable water, meeting all federal and
state requirements for purity, sufficient to
provide drinking water for the maximum
number of people to be assembled at the rate
of at least one (1) gallon per person per day
and water for bathing at a rate of at least ten
(10) gallons per person per day.
2. Toilets meeting all state and local
specifications, conveniently located
throughout the grounds, sufficient to provide
facilities for the maximum number of people
to be assembled at the rate of at least one (1)
toilet for every one hundred (100) people
plus the appropriate number of handicapped
accessible facilities. In the event that only
one (1) unit is needed it shall be a
handicapped accessible unit. An efficient,
sanitary means of disposing of waste matter
deposited, which is in compliance with all
state and local laws and regulations; a
lavatory with running water under pressure
and a continuous supply of soap and paper
towels shall be provided with each toilet.
3. A sanitary method of disposing of
solid waste, in compliance with state and
local laws and regulations, sufficient to
dispose of solid waste production of the
maximum number of people to be assembled
at a rate of at least two and a half (2½)
pounds of solid waste per day, together with
a plan for holding and a plan for collecting
all such waste at least once per day of the
assembly and sufficient trash cans with tight
fitting lids and personnel to perform the
task.
4. Physicians and nurses adequate
emergency medical services, licensed to
practice in Wisconsin sufficient to provide
the average medical care enjoyed by
residents of Wisconsin for the maximum
number of people to be assembled at the rate
of at least one (1) physician for every one
thousand (1,000) people and at least one (1)
nurse for every one thousand five hundred
(1,500) people, together with a designated
area enclosed covered structure where
treatment may be rendered, containing
separately enclosed treatment rooms for
each physician, with at least one (1)
emergency ambulance available for use at
all times.
5. If the special event assembly is to
continue during the hours of darkness,
illumination sufficient to light the entire area
of the assembly at a rate of at least five (5)
foot candles, but not to shine unreasonably
beyond the boundaries of the enclosed
location of the special event.
6. A parking area inside of the special
event grounds sufficient to provide adequate
and safe parking space for the maximum
number of people to be assembled at the rate
of at least one (1) parking space for every
four (4) persons or additional adequate and
safe offsite parking with written approval of
property owner.
7. Telephones connected to outside lines
sufficient to provide service for the
maximum number of people to be assembled
at the rate of at least one (1) separate line
and receiver for each one thousand (1,000)
persons. Cell phones are acceptable.
8. If the special event assembly is to
continue overnight, camping facilities in
compliance with all state and local
requirements as set forth in the Wis. Adm.
Code and County or other local
governmental Ordinances sufficient to
provide camping accommodations for the
maximum number of people to be
assembled.
9. Security guards approved by the
Police Department, either regularly
employed, duly sworn, off-duty Wisconsin
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 24 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
police officers or private guards, licensed in
Wisconsin, sufficient to provide adequate
security for the maximum number of people
to be assembled at a rate of at least one (1)
officer or guard for every two hundred fifty
to five hundred (250-500) people. The
Police Department may require additional
numbers of security or police officers,
depending upon the circumstances of the
special event or type of special event.
10. Fire protection, including alarms,
extinguishing devices, and fire lanes and
escapes, sufficient to meet all state and local
standards for the location of the special
event assembly as set forth in the Wis. Adm.
Code and Ordinances of this County and
Village, and sufficient emergency personnel
to efficiently operate the required
equipment. The Fire Chief or his or her
designee may require additional manpower
or equipment if the circumstances of the
special event require such.
11. All reasonably necessary
precautions to insure that the sound of the
special event assembly will not carry
unreasonably beyond the enclosed
boundaries of the location of the special
event assembly.
12. Provide proof that applicant has
commercial general liability insurance
coverage covering applicant and its agents
and invitees for any and all liability and
naming the Village of Suamico as An
Additional Named Insured with respect to
the granting of this permit. Said coverage
shall not be less than one million dollars
($1,000,000) combined single limit for
bodily injury and property damage.
(3) Application for Special Event
License.
(a) Application for a license to hold an
actual or anticipated special event shall be
made in writing to the Clerk and/or Police
Department at least thirty (30) days in
advance of such special event assembly.
(b) The application shall contain a
statement made upon oath or affirmation
that the statements contained therein are true
and correct to the best knowledge of the
applicant and shall be signed and sworn to
or affirmed by the individual making
application in the case of an individual,
natural human being, by all officers in the
case of a corporation, by all partners in case
of a partnership or by all officers of an
incorporated association, society or group
or, if there be no officers, by all members of
such association, society or group.
(c) The application shall contain and
disclose:
1. The name, age, residence, and
mailing address of all persons required to
sign the application by Section 5.08 (2)
above and, in the case of a corporation, a
certified copy of the articles of incorporation
together with the name, age, residence, and
mailing address of each person holding ten
percent (10%) or more stock of said
corporation.
2. The address and/or legal description
of all property upon which the assembly is
to be held together with the name, residence,
and mailing address of the record owners of
all such property.
3. Proof of ownership of all property
upon which the special event assembly is to
be held or a statement made upon oath or
affirmation by the record owners of all such
property that the applicant has permission to
use such property for a special event.
4. The nature or purpose of the special
event assembly.
5. The total number of days and/or
hours during which the special event
assembly is to last.
6. The maximum number of persons
which the applicant shall permit to assemble
at any time, not to exceed the maximum
number which can be reasonably assembled
at the location of the special event assembly,
in consideration of the nature of the special
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 25 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
event assembly, or the maximum number of
persons allowed to sleep within the
boundaries of the location of the special
event assembly by the Zoning Ordinances of
the municipality if the special event
assembly is to continue overnight.
7. The maximum number of tickets to
be sold, if any.
8. The plans of the applicant to limit the
maximum number of people permitted to
assemble.
9. The plans for fencing the location of
the special event assembly and the gates
contained in such fence.
10. The plans for supplying potable
water including the source, amount
available, and location of outlets.
11. The plans for providing toilet and
lavatory facilities including the source,
number and location, type, and means of
disposing of waste deposited.
12. The plans for holding, collection,
and disposing of solid waste material.
13. The plans to provide for medical
facilities including the location of the
designated medical area and construction of
a medical structure, names and addresses
and hours of availability of physicians and
nurses, and provisions for an emergency
ambulance service.
14. The plans, if any, to illuminate the
location of the special event assembly
including the source and amount of power
and the location of lamps.
15. The plans for parking vehicles
including size and location of lots, points of
highway access, and interior roads including
routes between highway access and parking
lots.
16. The plans for telephone service
including the source, number, and location
of telephones.
17. The plans for camping facilities, if
any, including facilities available and their
location.
18. The plans for security including the
number of officers and/or guards, their
deployment, and their names, credentials,
and hours of availability.
19. The plans for fire protection
including the number, type and location of
all protective devices including alarms and
extinguishers, and the number of emergency
fire personnel available to operate the
equipment.
20. The plans for sound control and
sound amplification, if any, including
number, location, and power of amplifiers
and speakers.
20.5 The plans for any tents. (Refer to
Chapter 4.27 Tent Regulations).
21. The plans for food concessions and
concessionaires who will be allowed to
operate on the grounds including the names
and addresses of all concessionaires and
their license or permit numbers.
22. The application shall include the
bond required and the license fee.
(4) Issuance of License. The
application for a license shall be processed
within twenty (20) days of receipt and shall
be issued if all conditions are complied with
and a satisfactory site inspection by village
staff has been done. Any violation of the
conditions of the permit would result in no
special events permits for said location
being issued for the next six (6) months.
(5) Limitation on Number of Events.
Unless the license is for a catered event as
defined in Chapter 5.08(10), the Village
shall limit the number of events per location
to no more than four (4) events per calendar
year.
(6) Revocation of License. The license
may be revoked by the Clerk, Fire Chief,
and/or Police Department at any time if any
of the conditions necessary for the issuing of
or contained in the license are not complied
with, or if any condition previously met
ceases to be complied with.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 26 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
(7) Enforcement.
(a) The provisions of this section may
be enforced by injunction in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(b) Holding a special event assembly in
violation of any provision or condition in
this legislation shall be deemed a public
nuisance and may be abated as such.
(c) Enforcement of this chapter shall be
the responsibility of the Police Department.
The Building Inspector, Health Officer, or
Fire Department may enforce any provisions
of this chapter relating to his or her position.
Each day the violation exists shall be
considered a separate offense.
(8) Denial of Permit. Reasons for
denial of a special event permit include, but
are not limited to:
(a) The event will disrupt traffic within
the Village beyond practical solution.
(b) The event will create a likelihood of
endangering the public.
(c) The event will interfere with access
to emergency services.
(d) The location or time of the special
event will cause undue hardship or excessive
noise levels to adjacent businesses or
residents.
(e) The event will require the diversion
of Village resources(s) that would
unreasonably affect the maintenance of
regular Village service levels.
(f) The application contains incomplete
or false information.
(g) The applicant fails to provide proof
of insurance.
(h) Inadequate provision for garbage or
debris removal.
(i) Inadequate provision of temporary
restroom facilities.
(j) Inadequate provisions for parking.
(9) License Denial, Appeal Procedure.
Any license applicant under this section who
is denied a license by the Clerk and/or
Police Department, or his or her designee,
shall have the right to appeal said denial.
(a) The applicant can appeal the denial
within ten (10) days after receiving notice of
denial.
(b) The applicant must file an appeal, in
writing, within said ten (10) days with the
Clerk and/or Police Department.
(c) Upon receipt of the appeal, the Clerk
and/or Police Department shall forward it,
within two (2) days (excluding Sundays and
holidays), to the Board.
(d) The Board shall then schedule a
public hearing concerning the appeal, which
shall be held within twenty (20) days of
receipt of notice of appeal by the Clerk
and/or Police Department.
(e) The Board shall give the license
applicant an opportunity to be heard at the
appeal.
1. If the applicant desires, he or she may
be represented at the hearing by counsel and
may present witnesses in the applicant's
behalf.
2. Within five (5) days of the hearing,
the Board shall make a decision on the
appeal and shall either uphold the denial of
the Clerk and/or Police Department or shall
issue a license if the Board feels a license is
warranted.
3. If the Board issues a license, it may
impose conditions on the license in the same
manner the Clerk and/or Police Department
could do so under this code.
4. If the applicant desires a verbatim
transcript of the appeal hearing, the
applicant may request one at the applicant's
expense.
(10) Catering. A caterer holding a
retail license may sell alcohol beverages,
caterer as defined in Wis. Stats. §125.02(3r).
5.09 DOGS LICENSED. No person shall
own, harbor or keep any dog within the
Village unless the dog is licensed as
provided by Wis. Stats. §174.05.
(1) Animal Fanciers License.
(a) Definition. An animal fancier is any
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 27 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
person who owns or keeps, when accessory to
an established residential use, four (4) to ten
(10) dogs for personal and noncommercial
purposes, which includes but is not limited to
hunting, tracking, exhibition in shows,
obedience trials, field trials, dog sledding, dog
foster rescue or to enhance or perpetuate a
given breed, and other uses determined by the
humane officers to be similar in nature.
(b) License Required. An Animal Fancier
License is issued to an animal fancier on an
annual basis for the keeping of four (4) to ten
(10) dogs pursuant to the regulations of this
section.
(c) Application and Fee.
1. Each person requiring a license under
this section shall complete an application form
furnished by the village and shall file the
completed application with the Village Clerk.
2. The application forms furnished by the
village under this section shall require the
following information and such additional
information as the village may deem
necessary:
(a) premises;
(b) A list of the dogs to be kept on the
subject premises, including the breed and age
of each dog;
(c) The purpose of obtaining the license.
(d) Dogs listed in the application for the
permit must be considered pets only. Breeding
of dogs and other activities specified in the
definition of kennels in Section 18.03 of the
Zoning Code must comply with section 18.04
of the code.
(e) If applicable, documentation for any
animals currently used for exhibition in
shows, obedience trials or field trials.
(f) If applicable, documentation that the
property owner is a dog foster parent with a
valid Foster Animal Rescue Program,
providing foster care for dogs on a temporary
basis. The humane officer shall be authorized
to make the determination that a Foster
Animal Rescue Program is valid.
(g) A plot plan showing the location of
any dog runs or structures used to house the
dogs.
(h) The dog license tag number of each
dog currently licensed.
3. The fee to be paid to the village for a
license under this section shall be established
in the village fee schedule.
(d) Grant or Denial of License; Notice.
1. Following review and approval by the
Humane Officer, the Public Safety Committee
shall review the application and hold a public
hearing. The Public safety Committee shall
make a recommendation to the Village Board
of Trustees on whether to grant or deny the
license.
2. If the Public Safety Committee holds
a hearing, a copy of the notice of the
meeting at which the hearing will be held
shall be mailed to the owners of property
within 300 feet of the applicant’s property
and the owners of the property immediately
across the street at least 15 days prior to the
hearing.
3. The Village board, after receiving a
recommendation from the Public Safety
Committee, shall vote to grant or deny the
license. In addition to the operational plans of
subsection (F) below, Public Safety
Committee or Village board may impose
additional conditions on the granting of any
license under this section; and failure to
comply with such conditions may be cause for
revocation of the license.
(e) Limitations.
1. There shall be no more than one animal
fancier license issued to any qualified
property.
2. No person in a multiple family
dwelling, 2 or more attached dwellings, or
mobile home, shall be granted an animal
fancier license.
(f) Operation.
1. All dogs kept or maintained on a
premise under an animal fancier license issued
under this section must also be duly licensed
by the village, except dogs that are in
temporary foster care are not required to be
licensed.
2. All dogs shall be owned by the license
holder or the occupant of the residence, except
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 28 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
dogs that are in temporary foster care.
3. All dogs shall be maintained in a
healthy condition or, if ill, shall be given
appropriate treatment immediately.
4. The quarters in which dogs are kept
shall be maintained per Sec. 11.22 of this
chapter.
5. Feces and odorous materials shall be
removed from yards, pens, and enclosures at
least once daily and such material shall be
stored in tightly covered metal containers until
final disposal.
6. The premises and the dogs shall be
kept free of insect infestation.
7. All dog pens or enclosures shall be
sufficiently large to permit freedom of
movement to the dogs.
(g) Term of License. Licenses issued
under this subsection shall expire annually on
December 31. Renewals of licenses may be
granted by the Village Board after
recommendation by the Public Safety
Committee. Conditions for the reissuance of
an animal fancier license may be added by
action of the Village Board at any time during
the license year.
(h) Inspection. Any person accepting a
license under this section thereby agrees to
allow inspections by the humane officer
and/or police department, or representative of
those parts of the premises where dogs are
kept. Such inspections shall be made between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. unless a
complaint has been submitted to the humane
officer, police department, or the village, by
an owner or occupant of an adjoining property
alleging that violations occur between 8:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(i) Violations. License holders will be
allowed, following notification of any
violations of this subsection or any subsection
of this chapter by the humane officer or police
department, to correct any violations. Failure
to correct these violations in the time allowed
shall result in immediate revocation of the
license by the Village Board. A forfeiture of at
least $25 nor more than $100, plus applicable
costs, is applicable per day for each day a
violation occurs for failing to have the proper
license or to follow the conditions set forth in
the license by the Village Board.
(j) Appeal; Denial or Revocation of a
License.
1. Any person who is denied a license or
whose license is revoked may appeal the
denial or revocation to the Suamico Village
Board within 60 days of the date of the denial
or revocation of the license.
2. All requests for appeals must be in
writing and addressed to the Village Clerk;
whereupon, the Clerk shall set the appeal for
hearing within 45 days of the receipt of the
written request.
5.10 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED
BUSINESS.
(1) Purpose and Intent.
(a) It is the purpose and intent of this
ordinance to regulate sexually-oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the citizens
of the Village and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent any
deleterious location of sexually-oriented
businesses within the Village, thereby
reducing or eliminating the adverse
secondary effects from such sexuallyoriented
businesses including but not limited
to preventing prostitution, sexual assault,
criminal activity, depreciation of property
values, health risks associated with sexuallytransmitted
diseases, and sexual abuse.
These negative secondary effects have been
established based on studies by the National
Obscenity Law Center.
(b) The provisions of this ordinance
have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials,
including sexually-oriented materials.
Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of
this ordinance to restrict or deny access by
adults to sexually-oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 29 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
exhibitors of sexually-oriented
entertainment to their intended market.
Neither is it the intent nor effect of the
ordinance to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
(c) Further it is the intent of this
ordinance to specifically exempt
performances at civic centers, performing
arts centers, dinner theatre specifically
where dance, ballet and music and dramatic
performances of artistic merit are offered on
a regular basis.
(2) Definitions. "Sexually-Oriented
Businesses" are those businesses defined as
follows:
(a) Adult arcade. An establishment
where, for any form of consideration, one
(1) or more still or motion picture projectors,
slide projectors, or similar machines, or
other image producing machines, for
viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each,
are regularly used to show films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(b) Adult bookstore, adult novelty store,
or adult video store. A commercial
establishment which has as a portion of its
stock-in-trade or derives a portion of its
revenues or devotes a portion of its interior
business or advertising to the sale, rental for
any form of consideration, of any one or
more of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or
other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other visual representations which are
characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia
which are designed for use or marketed
primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse
of themselves or others.
(c) Adult booth. Any area of a sexuallyoriented
business set off from the remainder
of such establishments by one (1) or more
walls or other dividers or partitions and used
to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any
adult material (visual or other
representations intended for individuals aged
eighteen (18) and older) or to view any live
performance that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure, depiction, or description of
specified anatomical areas or the conduct or
simulation of specified sexual activities.
(d) Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar,
restaurant, bottle club, or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not
alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features:
1. Persons who appear nude or in a state
of nudity or semi-nude.
2. Live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.
3. Films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(e) Adult motel. A motel, hotel or
similar commercial establishment which:
1. Offers public accommodations, for
any form of consideration, which provides
patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas and
which advertises the availability of this
sexually oriented type of material by means
of a sign visible from the public right-ofway,
or by means of any off-premises
advertising including but not limited to,
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 30 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio or television.
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a
period of time less than ten (10) hours.
3. Allows a tenant or occupant to subrent
the sleeping room for a time period of
less than ten (10) hours.
(f) Adult motion picture theater. A
commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas are regularly
shown for any form of consideration.
(g) Adult theatre. A theater, concert
hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of
consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of nudity or live
performances which are characterized by
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.
(h) Escort. A person who, for any form
of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.
(i) Escort agency. A person or business
association who furnishes, offers to furnish,
or advertises to furnish escorts as one (1) of
its primary business purposes for a fee, tip,
or other consideration.
(j) Massage parlor. Any place where,
for any form of consideration or gratuity,
massage, alcohol rub, administration of
fomentations, electric or magnetic
treatments, or any other treatment
manipulation of the human body which
occurs as a part of or in connection with
specified sexual activities, or where any
person providing such treatment,
manipulation, or service related thereto,
exposes his or her specified anatomical
areas. The definition of sexually-oriented
businesses shall not include the practice of
massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a
licensed hospital, nor by a licensed
physician, surgeon, chiropractor or
osteopath, nor by any nurse or technician
working under the supervision of a licensed
physician, surgeon, chiropractor or
osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur,
semiprofessional or professional athlete or
athletic team or school athletic program.
(k) Sexual encounter establishment. A
business or commercial establishment, that
as one (1) of its primary business purposes
offers for any form of consideration, a place
where two (2) or more persons may
congregate, associate, or consort for the
purpose of specified sexual activities or the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or
activities when one or more of the persons is
in a state of nudity or semi-nude. The
definition of sexually-oriented businesses
shall not include an establishment where a
medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medicallyapproved
and recognized sexual therapy.
(l) Adult material. Any of the
following, whether new or used:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals, or
other printed matter, or digitally-stored
materials.
2. Films, motion pictures, video or
audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or
other visual representations or recordings of
any kind, that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure, depiction, or description of
specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or
simulation of specified sexual activities.
3. Instruments, novelties, devices, or
paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities,
or that depict or describe specified
anatomical areas.
(m) Employee. A person who works or
performs in and/or for a sexually-oriented
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 31 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
business, regardless of whether or not said
person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said
business.
(n) Establishment. Means and includes
any of the following:
1. The opening or commencement of
any such business as a new business.
2. The conversion of an existing
business, whether or not a sexually-oriented
business, to any of the sexually-oriented
businesses defined in this chapter.
3. The addition of any of the sexuallyoriented
businesses defined in this chapter to
any other existing sexually-oriented
business.
4. The relocation of any such sexuallyoriented
business.
(o) Nudity or state of nudity.
1. The appearance of the human anal
cleft, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or
the areola or nipple of the female breast.
2. A state of dress which fails to
opaquely and fully cover the human anal
cleft, anus, male or female genitals, pubic
region or areola or nipple of the female
breast.
(p) Operator. Means and includes the
owner, permit holder, custodian, manager,
operator or person in charge of any
premises.
(q) Person. An individual,
proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
(r) Semi-nude. A state of dress in which
clothing covers no more than the genitals,
pubic region, anal cleft, anus, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting
straps or devices.
(s) Sexually-oriented business. An adult
arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theatre, adult theater,
massage parlor, sexual encounter
establishment, or escort agency.
(t) Specified anatomical areas. As used
in this division means and includes any of
the following:
1. Less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, the
appearance of the anal cleft, anus, or areola
or nipple of the female breast.
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state of sexual arousal, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(u) Specified sexual activities and/or
sexual activity. As used in this ordinance
mean and include any of the following:
1. Sexual Contact. The fondling or
other intentional touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breast for the purpose of sexually arousing
or gratifying either person;
2. Sexual Conduct. Vaginal intercourse
between a male and a female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus
between persons regardless of sex; and,
without the privilege to do so, the insertion,
however slight, of any part of the body or
any instrument, apparatus, or other object
into the vaginal or anal cavity of another.
Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to
complete vaginal or anal intercourse;
3. Masturbation. Manipulation of
genitals for sexual gratification.
(u) Straddle Dance. The use by any
person, including specifically, but without
limitation, a sexually-oriented business
employee or agent, of any part of his or her
body to touch the genitals, pubic region,
buttock, anal cleft, anus, or female breast of
any sexually-oriented business patron or any
other person, or the touching of the genitals,
pubic region, buttock, anal cleft, anus, or
female breast or any person by any sexuallyoriented
business patron. Conduct shall be a
"straddle dance" regardless of whether the
"touch" is direct or through a medium.
Conduct commonly referred to by the slang
terms "lap dance," table dance," couch
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 32 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
dance," and "face dance" shall be included
within this definition of straddle dance.
(3) Regulations Applicable to All
Sexually-Oriented Businesses.
(a) General Compliance. All sexuallyoriented
businesses shall comply with the
provisions of this ordinance, all other
applicable Village ordinances, resolutions,
rules, and regulations, and all other
applicable federal, state, and local laws
dealing with but not exclusively public
nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness or
obscene or harmful matter in exhibition or
public display thereof.
(b) Hours of Operation.
1. No sexually-oriented business shall
be open for business between the hours of
10 p.m. and noon.
2. All adult establishments shall be open
to inspection as all reasonable times by the
Police Department and Code Enforcement
Officer.
(c) Restrooms. All restrooms in
sexually-oriented businesses shall comply
with Zoning Ordinances of the Village
Municipal Code (hereinafter "Municipal
Code") and those adopted provisions stated
by reference. No adult materials or
specified sexual activity or performance
shall be provided or allowed at any time in
the restrooms of a sexually-oriented
business. Separate male and female
restrooms shall be provided for and used by
sexually-oriented business employees and
patrons.
(d) Restricted Access. No sexuallyoriented
business patron shall be permitted
at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic
portions of any sexually-oriented
business, including specifically, but without
limitation, any storage areas or dressing or
other rooms provided for the benefit of
sexually-oriented business employees. This
section shall not apply to persons delivering
goods and materials, food and beverages, or
performing maintenance or repairs to the
sexually-oriented business premises;
provided, however, that any such persons
shall remain in such non-public areas only
for the purposes and to the extent and time
necessary to perform their job duties.
(e) Specific Prohibited Acts.
1. No sexually-oriented business patron
or any other person at any sexually-oriented
business, other than a sexually-oriented
business employee employed to provide
adult entertainment in accordance with the
regulations in this ordinance, shall appear,
be present, or perform while nude or seminude.
2. No sexually-oriented employee or
agent shall appear, be present, or perform
while in a state of nudity.
3. No sexually-oriented business
employee or any other person at any
sexually-oriented business shall perform or
conduct any specified sexual activity with or
for any sexually-oriented business patron or
any other sexually-oriented business
employee or any other person. No sexuallyoriented
business patron or any other person
at any sexually-oriented business shall
perform or conduct any specified sexual
activity with or for any sexually-oriented
business employee or any other sexuallyoriented
business patron or any other person.
4. Straddle dances shall be prohibited at
all sexually-oriented business
establishments.
(f) Exterior Display. No sexuallyoriented
business shall be maintained or
operated in any manner that causes, creates,
or allows public viewing of any adult
material, or any entertainment depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, from
any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way,
or any property other than the lot on which
the sexually-oriented business is located.
No portion of the exterior of a sexuallyoriented
business shall utilize or contain any
flashing lights, search lights, or spotlights,
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 33 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
or any other similar lighting systems, or any
words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representations of any
manner that describe, present or represent a
specified sexual activity or specified
anatomical part, except to the extent
specifically allowed pursuant to Section 5.10
(3) (g) with regards to signs. This section
shall apply to any advertisement, display,
promotional material, decoration, or sign; to
any performance or show, and to any
window, door, or other opening.
(g) Signage Limitations. All signs of
sexually-oriented businesses shall comply
with Zoning Ordinances of the Suamico
Municipal Code. Signs otherwise permitted
pursuant to this ordinance shall contain only:
1. The name of the sexually-oriented
business.
2. The specific type of sexually-oriented
business conducted on the premises.
(h) Noise. No loudspeakers or sound
equipment audible beyond the sexuallyoriented
business's premises shall be used at
any time.
(i) Manager’s Station. Each sexuallyoriented
business shall have one (1) or more
manager's stations. The interior of each
sexually-oriented business shall be
configured in such a manner that there is a
direct and substantially unobstructed view
from at least one (1) manager's station to
every part of each area, except restrooms, of
the premise's interior to which any sexuallyoriented
business patron is permitted access
for any purpose.
(j) Information Posting-Main Entrance.
The operator of sexually-oriented business
shall ensure there are conspicuously
displayed at a place near the main entrance
of the establishment, or portion thereof, any
information, brochures, or pamphlets
supplied by the Health Department
pertaining to sexually transmitted diseases,
including HIV/AIDS.
(k) Information Charges. The Brown
County Health Department shall charge its
reasonable costs for supplying such posters,
brochures, pamphlets, and other information
supplied under this section.
(l) Security. During live performances,
where fifty (50) or more patrons are
expected or present, an operator shall ensure
there is adequate and readily identifiable
security personnel stationed near any room
where performers dress or change clothing.
(m) Age Limitations. No person under
the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to
enter, remain, or be employed on the
premises of a sexually-oriented business, nor
be permitted to purchase or receive, whether
for consideration or not, any sexuallyoriented
material/adult material or other
goods or services at or from any sexuallyoriented
business.
(n) Loitering and Exterior Lighting and
Monitoring. It shall be the duty of the
operator to:
1. Not allow customers, patrons, or
visitors to stand idly by in the premises of
any sexually-oriented business.
2. Initiate and enforce a no loitering
policy within the external boundaries of the
real property upon which the sexuallyoriented
businesses are located.
3. Post conspicuous signs stating that no
loitering is permitted on such property.
4. Designate one (1) or more employees
to monitor the activities of persons on the
premise by visually inspecting such property
at least once every thirty (30) minutes or
inspecting such property by use of video
cameras and monitors.
5. Provide adequate lighting of the
exterior premises to provide for visual
inspection or video monitoring to prohibit
loitering. Monitoring of the exterior of the
premises shall be done continuously at all
times that the premises are open for
business.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 34 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
6. It shall be unlawful for a person
having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
(o) Location:
1. No adult establishment shall be
located:
a. Within any zoning district other than
I-2.
b. Within one hundred feet (100’) of
any daycare.
c. Within two thousand six hundred
forty feet (2,640’) of an existing adult
establishment.
2. For purposes of this section, distances
are to be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the property line of the adult
establishment, to the nearest property line of
another adult establishment, dwelling,
school, church, daycare or establishment
selling or dispensing fermented malt
beverages or intoxicating liquor.
(4) Special Regulations for Adult
Cabarets.
(a) General Requirements. A sexuallyoriented
business that regularly features
persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity
or live performances that are characterized
by specified sexual activities shall be
operated in accordance with the following
regulations. It is unlawful for an adult
cabaret operator to knowingly fail to ensure
compliance with the regulations of this
section and encompassing chapter.
(b) Performance Area.
1. A person shall not appear in a state of
semi-nudity or engage in a live performance
which is characterized by specified sexual
activities except upon designated stages or
platforms permanently anchored to the floor
(a "cabaret stage").
2. Each cabaret stage shall be elevated
above the level of, and separate from, the
patron seating areas.
3. Each cabaret stage shall be elevated
at least twenty-four inches (24”) above floor
level.
4. All parts of the cabaret stage, or a
clearly designated area thereof within which
the adult cabaret employee or agent appears
in a state of semi-nudity or performs, shall
be a distance of at least sixty inches (60”)
from all areas of the premises to which
patrons have access.
5. A continuous barrier or railing, the
top of which is at least forty-two inches
(42”) measured from the cabaret stage floor,
shall separate each cabaret stage from all
patron seating areas.
6. No adult cabaret patron shall be
allowed at any time on a cabaret stage.
(c) Prohibited Acts. An adult cabaret
employee or agent may not have sexual
contact or engage in sexual conduct with a
patron, nor may a patron have sexual contact
or engage in sexual conduct with an
employee or agent. A patron shall not place
any money or consideration on the person or
in or on the costume of an employee or
agent of the sexually-oriented business.
(d) Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be
provided and equally distributed throughout
the public areas of the adult cabaret premise
so that all objects are plainly visible at all
times. A minimum lighting level of not less
than ten foot (10’) candles of light shall be
maintained by the operator of the adult
cabaret in all areas of the adult cabaret
where patrons are admitted.
(e) Tipping. No adult cabaret patron
shall offer, and no adult cabaret employee or
agent performing on any cabaret stage shall
accept, any form of tip or gratuity offered
directly or personally to the employee or
agent by the patron. Rather, all tips and
gratuities for adult cabaret employees
performing on any cabaret stage shall be
placed into a receptacle provided for receipt
of such tips and gratuities by the adult
cabaret business.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 35 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
(f) Notice of Select Rules. A sign at
least two feet (2’) by two feet (2’), with
letters at least one inch (1”) high shall be
conspicuously displayed on or adjacent to
every cabaret stage stating:
“This adult cabaret is regulated by the
Village. Entertainers are:
1. Not permitted to engage in any type
of physical sexual contact with patrons or
other individuals.
2. Not permitted to accept any tips
directly or personally from patrons. Any
such tips must be placed into the receptacle
provided by management.
3. Not permitted to appear, be present,
or perform in a state of nudity.”
(g) Age Limitations. No adult cabaret
employee or agent or patron at an adult
cabaret or on premises used therefore shall
be under the age of eighteen (18).
(5) Special Regulations Pertaining to
Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films or
Videos.
(a) Duties of the Operator. A person
who operates or causes to be operated a
sexually-oriented business, other than an
adult motel, which exhibits on the premises
in a viewing room(s) of less than one
hundred (100) square feet of floor space, a
film, video cassette, or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements:
1. An operator shall provide the
Building Inspection Department a diagram
of the premises showing the location of all
manager's stations, viewing rooms, overhead
lighting fixtures, video cameras and
monitors installed for monitoring purposes
and restrooms, and shall designate all
portions of the premises in which patrons
will not be permitted.
a. Restrooms shall not contain video
reproduction equipment.
b. A professionally-prepared diagram in
the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however,
each diagram shall be oriented to the north
or to some designated street or object and
shall be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches (6”).
c. If and when the diagram becomes
outdated due to interior changes of the
above-mentioned configurations, the
operator shall notify the Building Inspector
of the change and provide an appropriate
addendum to the diagram.
2. It shall be the duty of the operator,
and of any employees present on the
premises, to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in
which patrons will not be permitted in the
diagram filed pursuant to Section 5.10 (5)
(a) 1.
3. Interior premises shall be equipped
with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illuminate
of not less than ten foot (10’) candle as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the
duty of the operator, and of any employees
present on the premises, to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained
at all times that the premises is occupied or
open for business.
4. It shall be the duty of the operator,
and of any employees present on the
premises, to ensure that no sexual activity or
sexual conduct occurs in or on the premises
between patrons, between patrons and
employees/operator or by any of the same
individually.
5. It shall be the duty of the operator,
and of any employees present on the
premises, to ensure that not more than one
(1) person is present in a viewing room at
any time. No person shall enter a viewing
room that is occupied by another person.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 36 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
6. It shall be the duty of the operator, or
of any employee who discovers two (2) or
more patrons in a viewing room or discovers
any person making or attempting to make an
opening of any kind between viewing
rooms, to immediately escort such persons
from the premises.
7. It shall be the duty of the operator, or
of any employee, who discovers an opening
of any kind between viewing rooms to
immediately secure such rooms, and prevent
entry into them by any patron until such
time as the wall between the rooms has been
repaired to remove the opening. Removal
and repairing the openings between viewing
rooms shall be in a manner that is as
structurally substantial as the original wall
construction.
8. It shall be the duty of the operator,
during each business day, to regularly
inspect the walls between viewing rooms for
openings of any kind.
9. It shall be the duty of the operator,
and of any employee on the premises, to
initiate and enforce a no loitering policy in
all viewing rooms, cubicles or booth
enclosures.
10. It shall be the duty of the operator to
post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry
areas of the business, stating all of the
following on each sign, in at least one inch
(1”) lettering:
a. No loitering is permitted in viewing
rooms;
b. The occupancy of viewing rooms is
limited to one (1) person;
c. Sexual activity or sexual conduct on
the premises is prohibited;
d. The making of openings between
viewing rooms is prohibited;
e. Violators will be required to leave the
premises.
11. Each viewing room, booth or
cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
a. Floor coverings in viewing rooms
shall be nonporous, easily cleanable
surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
b. Wall surfaces and seating surfaces in
viewing rooms, or any room or area
providing patron privacy is constructed of,
or permanently covered by nonporous easily
cleanable material.
c. Seating within a viewing room shall
be designed to accommodate only one (1)
person.
d. Viewing rooms, booths or cubicles
shall be separated from adjacent booths,
rooms or cubicles and any non-public areas
by a wall not less than six feet (6’) high.
e. Have at least one (1) side totally open
to a public lighted aisle and unobstructed by
any door, lock or other control-type devices,
so that there is an unobstructed view from a
manager's station at all times anyone is
occupying a booth, room, or cubicle.
f. The lighting level shall be a minimum
of ten foot (10’) candles at all times, as
measured from the floor. If a lesser level of
illumination in the aisles is necessary to
enable a patron to view the adult
entertainment in a booth, room, or cubicle
adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of
illumination my be maintained in such aisles
provided, however, at no time shall there be
less than one foot (1’) candle of illumination
in said aisles, as measured from the floor.
g. It shall be the duty of the operator to
ensure that premises are clean and sanitary
at all times.
h. The operator shall ensure there are
conspicuously posted inside each booth,
cubicle or viewing room an unmutilated and
undefaced sign, poster or equivalent
supplied by the Health Department which
contains information regarding sexuallytransmitted
diseases, and the telephone
numbers from which additional information
can be sought.
i. The interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 37 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
unobstructed view from a manager's station
of every area of the premises, including the
interior of each viewing room but excluding
restroom interiors, to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose. A
manager's station shall not exceed 32 (thirtytwo)
square feet of floor area. If the
premises has two (2) or more manager's
stations designated, then the interior shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from at least one (1) of
the manager stations of each area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted
access. The view required in this paragraph
must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's stations. It is the duty of the
operator to ensure that at least one (1)
employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron
is on the premises.
j. The operator shall ensure posted
regulations concerning booth, cubicle or
viewing room occupancy are labeled on
signs, with lettering at least one inch (1”)
high, placed in conspicuous areas of the
premise and in each of the viewing, booth,
or cubicle enclosures. The Health
Department shall charge its reasonable costs
for supplying such posters, brochures,
pamphlets, and other information supplied
under this section.
k. It shall be the duty of the operator,
and it shall also be the duty of any
employees present on the premises to ensure
that the view area from a manager's station,
as specified in Par. (11) i. above, remains
unobstructed at all times by any doors,
walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials or enclosures at all times that any
patron is present on the premises.
12. It shall be unlawful for a person
having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
(6) Special Regulations for Adult
Novelty Stores.
(a) Age Limitations.
1. No sexually-oriented business
employee or patron at an adult novelty store
shall be under the age of eighteen (18).
2. No person under the age of eighteen
(18) shall be admitted to any adult novelty
store.
3. No person under the age of eighteen
(18) shall be allowed or permitted to remain
in any adult store.
4. No person under the age of eighteen
(18) shall be allowed or permitted to
purchase or receive, whether for
consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult
novelty store.
(7) Special Regulations for Adult
Motels.
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a
hotel, motel, or similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated
two (2) or more times in a period of time
that is less than ten (10) hours creates a
rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as the term is
defined in this chapter.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a person who
is in control of a sleeping room in a hotel,
motel, or similar commercial establishment
to rent or subrent a sleeping room to a
person and within ten (10) hours from the
time the room is rented, rent or subrent the
same sleeping room again.
(c) For the purposes of Section 5.10 (7)
(b), the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the
act or permitting a room to be occupied for
any form of consideration.
(8) Special Regulations for Adult
Theaters.
(a) Seating. Each adult theater shall
provide seating only in individual chairs
with arms or in seats separated from each
other by immovable arms and not on
couches, benches, or any other multiple
person seating structures. The number of
seats shall not exceed the maximum number
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 38 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
of persons allowed to occupy the adult
theater.
(b) Aisle. Each adult theater shall have
a continuous main aisle alongside the
seating area in order that each person seated
in the adult theater shall be visible from the
aisle at all times.
(c) Sign. Each adult theater operator
shall post a conspicuous sign located at or
near the main entrance of the adult theater
that lists the maximum number of person
who may occupy the theater at any one time,
and this number shall not exceed the number
of seats in the auditorium or viewing area of
the adult theater.
(9) Nuisance Declared.
(a) Any sexually-oriented business
established, operated, or maintained in
violation of any the provisions or
requirements of this ordinance shall be
declared to be unlawful and a public
nuisance. The Village may, in addition to or
in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this
ordinance or the Village's Municipal Code,
commence an action to enjoin, remove, or
abate such nuisance in the manner provided
by law and shall take such other steps and
apply to such court or courts as may have
jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate
or remove such public nuisance, and restrain
and enjoin any person(s) from establishing,
operating, or maintaining a sexuallyoriented
business contrary to the provisions
of this ordinance.
(10) License Required.
(a) Except as provided in Section 5.10
(10) (d), from and after the effective date of
this ordinance, no adult establishment shall
be operated or maintained in the Village
without first obtaining a license to operate
issued by the Village.
(b) A license may be issued only for one
(1) adult establishment located at a fixed and
certain place. Any person, partnership, or
corporation which desires to operate more
than one (1) adult establishment must have a
license for each.
(c) No license or interest in a license
may be transferred to any person,
partnership, or corporation.
(d) All adult establishments existing at
the time of the passage of this ordinance
must submit an application for a license
within ninety (90) days of the passage of this
ordinance. If an application is not received
within said ninety (90) day period, then such
existing adult establishment shall cease
operations.
(e) Application for License.
1. Any person, partnership or
corporation desiring to secure a license shall
make application to the Clerk. The
application shall be filed with and dated by
the Clerk. A copy of the application shall be
distributed within ten (10) days of receipt
thereof to the Police Department, the
applicable Health Department, Building
Inspection Division, Public Safety
Committee, and Planning Department and to
the applicant.
2. The application for a license shall be
upon a form approved by the Clerk. An
applicant for a license, which shall include
all partners or limited partners of a
partnership applicant, or all officers or
directors of a corporate applicant, and any
other person who is interested directly in the
ownership or operation of the business, shall
furnish the following information under
oath:
a. Name and address, including all
aliases.
b. Written proof that the individual is at
least eighteen (18) years of age.
c. All residential addresses of the
applicant for the past ten (10) years.
d. The business, occupation, or
employment of the applicant for the ten (10)
years immediately preceding the date of
application.
e. Whether the applicant previously
operated in this or any other state, county, or
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 39 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
Village under an adult establishment license
or similar business license; whether the
applicant has ever had such a license
revoked or suspended, the reasons therefore,
and the business entity or trade name under
which the applicant operated that was
subject to the suspension or revocation.
f. All criminal convictions, whether
federal or state, or Village ordinance
violation convictions, forfeiture of bond and
pleadings of nolo contendere on all charges,
except minor traffic violations.
g. Fingerprints or two (2) portrait
photographs at least two inches (2”) by two
inches (2”) of the applicant.
h. The address of the adult
establishment to be operated by the
applicant.
i. If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall specify the name of the
corporation, the date and state of
incorporation, the name and address of the
registered agent, and all officers and
directors of the corporation.
(f) Standards for Issuance of License.
1. To receive a license to operate an
adult establishment, an applicant must meet
the following standards:
a. If the applicant is an individual:
1. The applicant shall be at least
eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Subject to Wis. Stats. Ch. 111, the
applicant shall not have been convicted of or
pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any
crime involving moral turpitude,
prostitution, obscenity, or other crime of a
sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of
the application.
3. The applicant shall not have been
found to have previously violated this
ordinance within five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of application.
b. If applicant is a corporation:
1. All officers, directors, and others
required to be named under 5.10 (10) (e) 2
shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Subject to Wis. Stats. Ch. 111, no
officer, director, or other person required to
be named under 5.10 (10) (e) 2 shall have
been convicted of and/or pleaded nolo
contendere to a felony or any crime
involving moral turpitude, prostitution,
obscenity, or other crime of a sexual nature
in any jurisdiction within five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the
application.
3. No officer, director, or other person
required to be named under Section 5.10
(10) (e) 2 shall have been found to have
previously violated this ordinance within
five (5) years immediately preceding the
date of the application.
c. If the application is a partnership,
joint venture, or any other type of
organization where two (2) or more persons
have a financial interest:
1. All persons having a financial interest
in the partnership, joint venture, or other
type of organization shall be at least
eighteen (18) years of age.
2. No persons having a financial interest
in the partnership, joint venture, or other
type of organization shall, subject to Wis.
Stats. Ch. 111, have been convicted and/or
pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any
crime involving moral turpitude,
prostitution, obscenity, or other crime of a
sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of
the application.
2. No license shall be issued unless the
Police Department has investigated the
applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The
results of the investigation shall be filed in
writing with the Clerk no later than thirty
(30) days after the date of the application.
3. The applicable Health Department,
Building Inspection Division and Planning
Department shall inspect the premises
proposed to be licensed to verify compliance
with their respective codes and shall report
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 40 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
compliance findings to the Clerk within
thirty (30) days of the date of the
application.
4. No license shall be issued unless the
applicant provides proof of one (1) of the
following:
a. Ownership of a property zoned
building or parcel of real property upon
which a building can be constructed. Proper
zoning includes permissible non-conforming
use status.
b. A lease on a building which is
properly zoned to house the venture. Proper
zoning includes permissible non-conforming
use status.
c. An option to purchase property which
is properly zoned for the venture. Proper
zoning includes permissible non-conforming
use status.
d. An option to lease property which is
properly zoned for the venture. Proper
zoning includes permissible non-conforming
use status.
(g) Fees. A license fee as adopted from
time to time by resolution of the Board shall
be submitted with the application for a
license. Such fee shall be waived if the
proposed adult establishment is operating
under or has applied for an alcohol beverage
license and has paid the alcohol beverage
licensing fee thereunder.
(h) Display of License or Permit. The
license shall be displayed in a conspicuous
public place in the adult establishment.
(i) Renewal of License or Permit.
1. Every license issued pursuant to this
ordinance will terminate on December 31 of
the year it is issued, unless sooner revoked,
and must be renewed before operation is
allowed in the following year. Any operator
desiring to renew a license shall make
application to the Clerk. The application for
renewal must be filed not later than sixty
(60) days before the license expires. The
application for renewal shall be filed in
triplicate and dated by the Clerk.
A copy of the application for renewal
shall be distributed by the Clerk to the
Police Department and the applicant. The
application for renewal shall be upon a form
provided by the Clerk and shall contain such
information and date, given under oath or
affirmation, as is required for an application
for a new license.
2. A license renewal fee shall be
submitted with the application for renewal.
In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500) shall be
assessed against the applicant who filed for
a renewal less than sixty (60) days before
the license expires.
3. If the Police Department is aware of
any information bearing on the operator's
qualifications, that information shall be filed
in writing with the Clerk.
(j) Denial of Application.
1. Whenever an initial application is
denied, the Clerk shall, within thirty (30)
days of the denial, advise the applicant in
writing of the reasons for such action. If the
applicant requests a hearing within ten (10)
days of receipt of the notification of denial,
a public hearing shall be held at the next
regularly-scheduled meeting of the Board
and no more than thirty (30) days after the
denial of the application. The procedure
before the Board shall be as set forth in
Section 5.10 (10) (k) 2 below.
2. Failure or refusal of the applicant to
give any information relevant to the
investigation of the application or his or her
refusal to submit to or cooperate with any
investigation required by this ordinance
shall constitute an admission by the
applicant that he or she is ineligible for such
license and shall be grounds for denial
thereof by the Clerk.
(k) Suspension, Revocation, or Non-
Renewal of License.
1. The license granted herein may be
revoked or suspended for up to six (6)
months or non-renewed by the Board as
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 41 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
follows:
a. If the applicant has made or recorded
any statement required by this section
knowing it to be false or fraudulent or
intentionally deceptive;
b. For the violation of any provision of
this section, except for establishment license
matters involving violations of Village
codes, in which the license shall be revoked
after the second (2nd) conviction thereof in
any license year;
c. After one (1) conviction of any
establishment personnel of an offense under
Wis. Stats. Ch. 944, or of an offense against
the person or property of a patron of the
property or of an offense involving
substances in Wis. Stats. Ch. 161 Sub. III,
where there is shown the participation or
knowledge of any other establishment
personnel or of any individual within the
business structure of the applicant.
2. Notice and Hearing. No license shall
be revoked, suspended, or not renewed by
the Board except upon due notice and
hearing to determine whether grounds for
such action exists. Such hearing shall be
held before the Board. Notice of such
hearing shall be in writing and shall state the
grounds of the complaint against the
licensee. The notice shall be served upon
the licensee at least fifteen (15) days prior to
the date of the hearing and shall state the
time and place thereof.
The licensee shall be entitled to be
heard, to be represented by counsel, to
cross-examine opposing witnesses, to
present witnesses on his or her behalf under
subpoena by the Board if such is required,
and the hearing may be stenographically
recorded at the licensee's option and
expense. At the conclusion of such hearing,
the Village shall submit a report including
findings of fact and conclusion of law and a
recommendation as to what, if any action to
taken to the Clerk within thirty (30) days of
the hearing. The Board shall provide the
complainant and licensee with a copy of the
report. The Board shall then file its findings
of fact and conclusions of law with the
Clerk.
Either the complainant or licensee may
file an objection to the report and have the
opportunity to present arguments supporting
the objection to the Board. The Board shall
determine whether arguments shall be
presented orally or in writing, or both. If the
Board, after arguments presented by the
complainant or the licensee, finds the
complaint to be true, or if there is no
objection to a report recommending
suspension or revocation, the license shall
be suspended or revoked as provided at Sub.
(1) hereinabove. The Board shall decide the
matter and shall prepare a written decision
which shall be filed with the Clerk and a
copy thereof delivered to the licensee and
complainant within thirty (30) days after its
decision and no later than sixty (60) days of
the report appeal.
Any decision of the Board may be
appealed to the Circuit Court of Brown
County, State of Wisconsin for
administrative review pursuant to Wis. Stats.
Ch. 277.
5.11 PAWNBROKERS AND
SECONDHAND ARTICLE AND
JEWELRY DEALERS. Wis. Stat.
§134.71, is hereby adopted and, by
reference, made a part of this chapter with
the same force and effect as though fully set
out herein notwithstanding the below
subsections. Failure to comply with any of
the provisions of this ordinance shall
constitute a violation of this chapter,
punishable according to the penalties set
forth in Section 5.99, Suamico Municipal
Code.
(1) Article. Any item of value,
excluding only motor vehicles, large
appliances, furniture, books, and clothing
other than furs.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 42 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
(2) Reportable Transaction. Every
transaction conducted by a pawnbroker,
secondhand article and jewelry dealers in
which an article or articles are received
through a pawn, purchase, consignment, or
trade, or in which a pawn is renewed,
extended, voided, or redeemed, or for which
a unique transaction number or identifier is
generated by their point-of-sale software,
and is reportable except:
(a) The bulk purchase or consignment
of new or used articles from a merchant,
manufacturer, or wholesaler having an
established permanent place of business, and
the retail sale of said articles, provided the
pawnbroker must maintain a record of such
purchase or consignment that describes each
item, and must mark each item in a manner
that relates it to that transaction record.
(b) Retail and wholesale sales of articles
originally received by pawn or purchase,
and for which all applicable hold and/or
redemption periods have expired.
(3) Secondhand Article Dealer. Any
person, other than an auctioneer, who
engages in the business of purchasing or
selling secondhand articles, with exceptions
as stated in Wis. Stat. §134.71 (g).
(4) When Digital Photos are
Required.
(a) The licensee must also take a color,
digitized photograph of every item pawned
or sold that does not have a unique serial or
identification number permanently engraved
or affixed, excluding only electronic media.
One (1) group photo shall suffice for mass
items such as several coins acquired in one
(1) transaction. If a photograph is taken, it
must be at least two inches (2”) in length by
two inches (2”) in width and must be
maintained in such a manner that the
photograph can be readily matched and
correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate. Such
photographs must be available to the Chief
of Police, or the Chief’s designee, upon
request. Items photographed must be
accurately depicted and submitted as digital
images, in a format specified by the issuing
authority, electronically cross-referenced to
the reportable transaction they are associated
with. Entries of required digital images
shall be retained a minimum of ninety (90)
days.
(5) Daily Reports to Police.
(a) Pawnbrokers and secondhand article
and jewelry dealers must submit every
reportable transaction to the Police
Department daily in the following manner.
Pawnbrokers and secondhand article and
jewelry dealers must provide to the Police
Department all required information
pursuant to state statute, by transferring it
from their computer to the web server via
modem designated by the Suamico Police
Department. All required records must be
transmitted completely and accurately after
the close of business each day in accordance
with standards and procedures established
by the Police Department using procedures
that address security concerns of the
pawnbroker or secondhand article and
jewelry dealer and the Police Department.
The pawnbroker or secondhand article and
jewelry dealer must display a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the
premises, which informs all patrons that all
transactions are reported daily to the Police
Department.
(b) If a pawnbroker or secondhand
article and jewelry dealer is unable to
successfully transfer the required reports by
modem, the pawnbroker or secondhand
article and jewelry dealer must provide the
Police Department with printed copies of all
reportable transactions by noon the next
business day.
(c) If the problem is determined to be in
the pawnbroker’s or secondhand article and
jewelry dealer’s system and is not corrected
by the close of the first business day
following the failure, the pawnbroker or
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 43 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
secondhand article and jewelry dealer must
provide the required reports as detailed in
state statute, and shall be charged a daily
reporting failure fee of ten dollars ($10)
until the error is corrected, or, if the problem
is determined to be outside the pawnbroker’s
or secondhand article and jewelry dealer’s
system, the pawnbroker or secondhand
article and jewelry dealer must provide the
required reports pursuant to state statute and
resubmit all such transactions via modem
when the error is corrected.
(d) Regardless of the cause or origin of
the technical problems that prevented the
pawnbroker or secondhand article and
jewelry dealer from uploading the reportable
transactions, upon correction of the problem,
the pawnbroker or secondhand article and
jewelry dealer shall upload every reportable
transaction from every business day the
problem has existed.
(e) The provisions of this section
notwithstanding, the Police Department
may, upon presentation of extenuating
circumstances, delay the implementation of
the daily reporting penalty.
(f) Section 5.11 (4) above shall not
apply to businesses that did not have two
hundred (200) reportable transactions in the
past calendar year. However, any such
pawnbroker or secondhand article and
jewelry dealer must follow the daily
reporting procedure for each reportable
transaction by submitting a written
transaction form approved by the Police
Department to the department on the
business day following the date of the
reportable transaction.
(6) Fees. The fee for each license shall
be as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board.
5.12 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO
PRODUCTS RETAILERS LICENSE.
(1) State Statutes Adopted. In
addition to those State Statutes adopted in
11.78 of said Code of Ordinances, the
provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 134.65
defining regulating the sale of any cigarettes
or tobacco products are adopted and made
part of this section by reference. A violation
of any of such provisions shall constitute a
violation of this section.
5.13 ESCORT SERVICE LICENSE
(1) Definitions.
(a) Employee. An escort whose name is
furnished by an escort service, is referred to
a customer through an escort service, or is
an agent, employee, independent contractor,
or volunteer for an escort service shall be
considered an employee of such service for
the purposes of this ordinance.
(b) Escort. Any person who, for
consideration, accompanies or offers to
accompany another person to or about social
affairs, entertainment or places of
amusement, consorts with another person
about any place of public resort or within
any private quarters, or agrees to privately
model lingerie, perform a striptease, or
perform in a nude or semi-nude state for
another person or persons.
(c) Escort Service. Any person who, for
consideration, furnishes, offers to furnish,
advertises to furnish, or refers escorts.
(d) In Call. Any agreement whereby an
escort is provided on a premises owned,
leased rented, or controlled by the escort or
escort service.
(e) Person. Any natural person, sole
proprietorship, partnership, corporation or
association, excepting the United States of
America, the State of Wisconsin, and any
political subdivision thereof.
(2) Exemptions. This section does not
apply to businesses, agencies and persons
licensed by the State of Wisconsin or the
Village pursuant to a specific statute or
ordinance, and employees employed by a
business so licensed and which perform an
escort or an escort service function as a
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 44 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
service merely incidental to the primary
function of such profession, employment, or
business and which do not hold themselves
out to the public as an escort or an escort
service.
(3) Regulated Acts.
(a) License and Registration Required.
No escort service shall operate or provide
service in the Village without first obtaining
a license. No person shall escort in the
Village unless employed by a licensed escort
service and properly registered pursuant to
subsection (11).
(b) Incalls in Residential Zones. No
escort or escort service may conduct incalls
on residentially-zoned property.
(c) Separate License. A license may be
issued only for one escort service with one
trade name. Any person, partnership, or
corporation which desires to operate more
than one escort service must have a separate
license for each service.
(d) Transfer Prohibited. No license or
interest in a license may be transferred to
any person, partnership, or corporation.
(e) Unlawful Acts. No escort or escort
service may engage in unlawful acts while
acting as an escort. A violation of a criminal
statute or ordinance by an escort shall be
considered a violation of this ordinance by
the licensee.
(f) Advertising. No person may
advertise indicating that an escort service is
available in the Village of Suamico unless
that service possesses a valid license. No
escort service may advertise using a trade
name unless that trade name is disclosed in
its application. Any advertisements or escort
activity conducted under an unreported trade
name shall be considered unlicensed
activity.
(g) Physical Contact Prohibited. No
escort shall touch a customer or the clothing
of a customer while exposing specified
anatomical areas, as defined in §5.10(2)(t),
Suamico Municipal Code.
(h) Customers under Age 18. No person
shall escort or agree to escort a person under
the age of 18 years.
(4) Application for License.
(a) Application to Clerk. Any person,
partnership, or corporation desiring to secure
a license shall make application to the
Village Clerk. The application for a license
shall be upon a form approved by the
Village Clerk. Each applicant for a license,
which shall include all partners or limited
partners of a partnership applicant, and all
officers, directors, and any other person who
is interested directly in the control of the
business for corporate applicants, shall
furnish the following information under
oath:
1. Name, address, and age.
2. Whether the applicant holds any
interest in any other escort service license or
similar license or permit.
3. Whether the applicant has ever had
any other escort service license or similar
license or permit revoked or suspended, and
the reason therefor.
4. All convictions and pending charges
of felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance
violations.
5. Fingerprints and two portrait
photographs at least two inches by two
inches of the applicant.
6. All convictions and pending charges
of felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance
violations of a corporation, partnership or
other organization for which the applicant
was or is a director, officer, partner, or
person interested directly in the control of
the organization.
7. If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall specify the name of the
corporation, the date and state of
incorporation, the name and address of the
registered agent, and all officers and
directors of the corporation, and provide a
certified copy of the articles of
incorporation.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 45 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
8. If the applicant is a partnership, the
application shall specify the name and
address of all partners and provide a
certified copy of the partnership agreement
or articles of partnership.
(b) Additional Information. Each
service shall furnish the following
information under oath at the time of
application:
1. The trade name of the escort service.
An escort service may operate under only
one trade name per license.
2. The complete address of the proposed
business location with a copy of the deed,
lease, or other document pursuant to which
the applicant occupies such premises.
3. The service’s Federal Employer
Identification number.
4. A written plan setting forth:
a. The exact nature of the business to be
conducted;
b. Office organization;
c. Advertising theme and method;
d. Copies of contracts to be used with
escorts and customers;
e. The method of operation of the escort
service, including the hours that the service
will be open to the public; and
f. The methods of promoting the health
and safety of escorts.
(5) Standards for Issuance of License.
(a) Standards. To receive a license to
operate an escort service, an applicant must
meet the following standards:
1. All persons required to be named
under subsection (4)(a) shall be at least 18
years of age.
2. No person required to be named
under subsection (4)(a) shall have been
convicted of a felony.
3. Subject to Ch. 111, Wis. Stats., no
person required to be named under
subsection (4)(a) shall have been convicted
of a law or ordinance violation involving
moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity, or
another crime of a sexual nature in any
jurisdiction.
4. No person required to be named
under subsection (4)(a) shall have been
convicted of a violation of a law or
ordinance which substantially relates to the
licensed activity.
5. No person required to be named
under subsection (4)(a) shall have been a
director, officer, partner, or person interested
directly in the control of an organization that
has been convicted of a violation of any law
or ordinance which substantially relates to
the licensed activity.
(b) Investigation. The Suamico Police
Department shall investigate the applicant's
qualifications to be licensed.
(c) False Information. Providing false
or inaccurate information on the application
or in the investigation of the application
shall constitute an admission by the
applicant that he or she is ineligible for such
license and shall be grounds for denial of the
application.
(d) Lack of Cooperation. Failure or
refusal of the applicant to give any
information required by this section or
relevant to the investigation of the
application or cooperate with any
investigation required by this ordinance
shall constitute an admission by the
applicant that he or she is ineligible for such
license and shall be grounds for denial of the
application.
(e) Committee Review. The Village
Health & Safety Committee shall review the
application and the recommendation of the
Police Department and recommend action to
the Village Board. Should the Health &
Safety Committee fail to act upon an
application within 60 days of its filing, the
application shall be deemed granted, except
as provided in subsection (f).
(f) Pending Charges. If any charges are
currently pending which, if resulting in a
conviction, would disqualify the applicant
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 46 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
pursuant to subsection (a) above, the Village
Board may postpone action on the
application until such time as the charge is
resolved. Should the Village Board fail to
act upon an application within 60 days of the
resolution of the charge, the application
shall be deemed granted.
(6) Fees. A non-refundable application
fee of $500 and a license fee of $500 shall
be submitted with the application for a
license.
(7) Denial of Application. Whenever
an application is denied, the Village Clerk
shall, within 14 days of the denial, advise
the applicant in writing of the reasons for
such action. The applicant may appeal the
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(8) Renewal of License or Permit.
(a) Process. Every license issued
pursuant to this ordinance will terminate on
December 31 of the year it is issued, unless
sooner revoked, and must be renewed before
operation is allowed in the following year.
Any operator desiring to renew a license
shall make application to the Village Clerk
not later than October 31 of the year in
which the license will terminate. The
application for renewal shall be filed with
and dated by the Village Clerk. The
application for renewal shall be upon a form
provided by the Village Clerk and shall
contain such information and data, given
under oath or affirmation, as is required for
an application for a new license.
(b) Fee. A license renewal fee of $500
shall be submitted with the application for
renewal.
(c) Investigation. The Suamico Police
Department shall investigate the applicant’s
continuing qualifications to be licensed.
(9) Suspension, Revocation, or Non-
Renewal of License.
(a) Grounds. The license granted herein
may be revoked or suspended for up to six
months or non-renewed by the Village
Board as follows:
1. If the licensee or any person required
to be named under subsection (4)(a) has
made or recorded any statement required by
this section knowing it to be false or
fraudulent or intentionally deceptive; or
2. For the violation by the licensee, an
employee, or any person required to be
named under subsection (4)(a) of any
provision of this section, the Suamico
Municipal Code, or the Wisconsin Statutes
that substantially relates to the licensed
activity; or
3. After the conviction of the licensee,
an employee, or any person required to be
named under subsection (4)(a) of an offense
under Ch. 944, Wis. Stats., an offense
against the person or property of a patron, an
offense involving substance in Subchapter II
of Ch. 961, Wis. Stats., or any other offense
which is substantially related to the licensed
activity.
(b) Notice. No license shall be revoked,
suspended, or not renewed by the Village
Board except upon due notice and hearing to
determine whether grounds for such action
exist. Such hearing shall be held before the
Health & Safety Committee. Notice of such
hearing shall be in writing and shall state the
grounds of the complaint against the
licensee. The notice shall be served upon the
licensee at least 15 days prior to the date of
the hearing and shall state the time and place
thereof.
(c) Hearing. The licensee shall be
entitled to be heard, to be represented by
counsel, to cross-examine opposing
witnesses, to present witnesses on his or her
own behalf under subpoena by the Village
Board if such is required, and the hearing
may be stenographically recorded at the
licensee's option and expense.
(d) Recommendation. Within 15 days
of a hearing pursuant to subsection (c), the
Health & Safety Committee shall submit a
report to the Village Board, including a
recommendation as to what, if any, action
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 47 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
the Village Board should take with respect
to the license. The Committee shall provide
the complainant and licensee with a copy of
the report.
(e) Village Board Decision. The
Village Board shall consider the
recommendation of the Health & Safety
Committee no later than the second
regularly-scheduled meeting following its
receipt of the Committee’s report. The
complainant and licensee may file an
objection to the report and have the
opportunity to present arguments supporting
the objection to the Village Board. The
Village Board shall determine whether
arguments shall be presented orally or in
writing, or both. If the Village Board, after
arguments presented by the complainant or
the licensee, finds the complaint to be true,
or if there is no objection to a report
recommending suspension or revocation, the
license shall be suspended or revoked as
provided at subsection (a). The Village
Board shall decide the matter and shall
prepare a written decision which shall be
filed with the Village Clerk. The Village
Clerk shall provide the licensee a copy of
the decision by certified mail at the address
indicated on the license, which shall be
postmarked no later than 20 days after the
Village Board’s decision.
(f) Appeal. If the Village Board
suspends, revokes, or non-renews a license,
the written notice provided the licensee shall
indicate that the decision may be appealed to
a court of competent jurisdiction.
(10) Responsibilities of the Licensee.
(a) Compliance. The licensee shall
ensure compliance of the service and all
employees with the provisions and
requirements of this ordinance. Every act or
omission by an employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be deemed the act or omission of the
licensee of the escort service by which the
escort is employed, and the licensee shall be
punishable for such act or omission in the
same manner as if the licensee committed
the act or caused the omission.
(b) Records and Reports Required.
Every escort and escort service shall:
1. Provide to each patron a written
contract and receipt of payment for services.
The contract shall clearly state the type of
services to be performed, the length of time
such services shall be performed, the total
amount of money such services shall cost
the patron, and any special terms or
conditions relating to the services to be
performed.
2. Maintain a legible written record of
each transaction of any escort furnished to
or arranged for on behalf of any person or
customer. The record shall show the date
and hour of each transaction, the name,
address, and telephone number of the person
requesting an escort, and the name of every
escort furnished.
3. The records required by subsections 1
and 2 shall be kept available and open for
inspection by the Suamico Police
Department during business hours.
(11) Registration of Escorts.
(a) Information. All escorts shall, prior
to acting as an escort, register with the
Suamico Police Department. Such
registration shall include the following:
1. Name, address, birth date, any
aliases, pseudonyms, or stage names used,
and telephone number(s).
2. The name of the licensed escort
service by which they are employed.
3. Photographs and fingerprinting with
the Suamico Police Department.
(b) Identification Card. Upon
registration, the Suamico Police Department
will provide to each escort an identification
card containing their photograph, identity,
and the escort service by which the escort is
employed. The escort shall keep the card
available for production at all times while
acting as an escort.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 48 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
(c) Duration. All registrations
hereunder are valid for the term of the
affiliated escort service’s license.
(d) Fee. The registration fee shall be
$25 per registration, which shall be paid to
the Police Department to cover the costs of
the identification card and administration.
(e) Employment by Multiple Services.
Any escort employed by more than one
escort service shall submit a separate
registration for each service by which the
escort is employed.
(12) Penalties and Prosecution.
(a) Forfeiture and License Revocation.
1. Any person, partnership, or
corporation who is found to have violated
subsection (3)(a) of this ordinance shall
forfeit a definite sum not less than $2,000
and not exceeding $5,000 and a court shall
revoke any license issued to the person
under this chapter.
2. Any person, partnership, or
corporation who is found to have violated
any other section of this ordinance shall
forfeit a definite sum not exceeding $5,000
and a court shall revoke any license issued
to the person under this chapter.
(b) Separate Offense. Separate Offense.
Each violation of this ordinance shall be
considered a separate offense, and any
violation continuing more than one day shall
be considered a separate offense.
(13) Wis. Stats. Ch. 68, Not to Apply.
Wis. Stats. Ch. 68, shall not apply to the
administrative process outlined above.
(14) Severability. If any provision of
this ordinance is deemed invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other
provisions of same.
5.14 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
(1) Generally.
(a) Definitions. The following words,
terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
1. Manager. Means the operator or an
agent licensed under this section who shall
not be licensed as a massage technician.
2. Massage. Means any process or
procedure consisting of rubbing, stroking,
kneading or tapping, by physical or
mechanical means, upon the external parts
or tissues of the body of another for a
consideration.
3. Massage establishment. Means a
place of business wherein private massage is
practiced, used or made available as a
principal use of the premises.
4. Massage room. Means the area
where private massage is performed.
5. Massage technician. Means a person
who practices, administers or uses, or offers
to practice, administer or use, massage for a
consideration.
6. Operator. Means any person,
association, firm, partnership or corporation
licensed by the village to operate a massage
establishment.
7. Patron. Means any person who
receives a massage under such
circumstances that it is reasonably expected
that he will pay money or give any
consideration therefor.
8. Sexual or genital parts. Means and
includes the genitals, pubic area, buttocks,
anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva
or breasts of a female.
9. Waiting area. Means any area
adjacent to the main entrance that is separate
from any area where massages are given.
(b) Penalty. Any person violating any
provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a penalty as
provided in sect. 5.99.
(c) Regulated. It shall be unlawful for
any person, corporation of other legal entity
to suffer, cause or permit the operation of a
massage establishment or for a person to
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 49 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
operate as a massage technician, agent,
manager or employee, except in strict
compliance with this article.
(2) License.
(a) No person, corporation or other legal
entity shall suffer, cause or permit the
conduct of a massage establishment without
having first obtained a license therefor from
the village board. A separate license shall be
acquired for each such establishment.
(b) No license shall be granted for any
establishment, the main entrance to which is
within 75 feet of the main entrance to a
residence or of the common entry hall to
residences, nor for any rooms in any hotel or
motel.
(c) Applications shall be made in
writing on forms supplied by the village
clerk. If application is made for a location
not previously licensed, the village clerk
shall, by regular mail, notify all property
owners and registered electors within 250
feet of the proposed location at least ten
days before the hearing on the granting of
such license.
(d) All applications shall include the
following:
1. A nonrefundable fee of $250.00.
2. The location and mailing address of
the proposed establishment.
3. For an individual or for each person
of a partnership or joint venture or agent of a
corporation, the following:
a. Name and present address.
b. The two immediately previous
addresses and dates of residence at each.
c. Height, weight, color of hair and
eyes, social security number, written proof
of age, full set of fingerprints and two
photographs not more than 30 days old and
at least two inches by two inches.
d. The business or occupation for the
two years immediately preceding the date of
application.
e. Whether a similar license has been
revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason
therefor and the location thereof.
f. Whether convicted of any crime or
ordinance violation other than traffic
offenses within the past three years and, if
so, a listing of the same and the locations
thereof.
4. If the applicant is a corporation, the
names and addresses of each officer and
director and of the stockholders of such
corporation, together with the extent of the
ownership of each, and a statement whether
such officer, director or stockholder holds
office or stock in any other corporation
conducting a similar business in the state.
Such application shall be made by an agent
registered as such who shall have been a
resident of the village for at least 90 days.
5. All telephone numbers of the
proposed establishment.
6. The names, addresses and telephone
numbers of all persons employed by the
applicant at the proposed establishment at
the time of the application.
7. Certification of compliance of the
proposed premises with the building code
and the fire code or, in the alternative,
applicant shall file a bond assuring that any
work required to be done to bring the
premises into compliance therewith shall be
accomplished prior to the opening of
business. Compliance with such codes shall
be conditions precedent to the opening of
business.
8. The application shall contain a
statement signed by the applicant and each
individual of a partnership or joint venture
that all information contained therein is true
and correct.
(e) The issuance of the license shall
allow for the licensing of up to three
additional managers for each establishment.
(3) Massage technician's and
manager's permits.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 50 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) No person shall act or operate for a
consideration as a massage technician or
manager without having first obtained a
permit to do so. Any person who is issued a
license of registration by the state
department of regulation and licensing
pursuant to subchapter XI of chapter 440 of
the Wisconsin Department of Regulation
and Licensing Administrative Code is
exempt from this section.
(b) Applications for permits shall be in
writing on forms supplied by the village
clerk:
1. A nonrefundable fee of $50.00.
2. Applicant's full name and present
address, social security number, written
proof of age in excess of 18 years, height,
weight, color of hair and eyes, full set of
fingerprints and two photographs not more
than 30 days old and at least two inches by
two inches.
3. Applicant's two previous addresses
and dates of residence at each.
4. The applicant's business, occupation
or employment during the two years
immediately preceding date of application.
5. Whether the applicant has had a
similar permit revoked or suspended and, if
so, the reason therefor and the location
thereof.
6. Whether the applicant has been
convicted of any crime or ordinance
violation other than traffic offenses within
the past three years and, if so, a listing of the
same and the locations thereof.
7. For technicians only, a certificate
from a licensed physician that the applicant
has been examined and found to be free of
communicable diseases and showing that
such examination occurred less than 30 days
prior to the date of application.
8. The name and address of the licensed
massage establishment by which the
applicant is employed.
9. A statement signed by the applicant
that all information contained therein is true
and correct.
(4) Granting of licenses and permits.
(a) Licenses and permits may be
granted by the village board after a hearing
at which the applicant may be heard at the
applicant's option. At least ten days' notice
of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant.
(b) The village board shall grant a license or
permit within 30 days of application unless
it is shown, for a massage establishment
license, that the operation, as proposed by
the applicant, does not comply with all
applicable state laws and village ordinances,
and for all licenses and permits, that the
applicant or any partner or any officer,
director or stockholder of a corporate
applicant has been convicted in a court of
competent jurisdiction of an offense under
Wis. Stats. ch. 944 or involving substances
included in Wis. Stats. § 961.11 et seq., or of
an offense against the person or property of
another within the past three years, that the
information required on the application is
incomplete or that any applicant has
knowingly or with the intent to deceive
made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the application or any
document required by the village in
conjunction therewith, or that the applicant
has not resided in the village for at least 90
days prior to the date of the application.
(c) In the event of denial, the applicant
shall receive written notification thereof,
setting forth the reasons for the denial,
within ten days after such denial.
(d) Licenses or permits granted by the
village board shall expire one year from the
date of granting. Reapplication therefor shall
not be less than 60 days prior to such
expiration date and shall be the sole
responsibility of the applicant.
(e) No license or permit shall be
transferred between locations or persons and
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 51 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
no massage establishment license shall be
sold or be subject to transfer of corporate
assets or change of corporate officers or
directors.
(f) The massage technician's permit
does not entitle the holder to operate or
manage a massage establishment unless the
technician is the sole proprietor of the
establishment and employs no other person
in the business.
(5) Regulations of Operations.
(a) Operation regulations - For
establishments. Each establishment shall, at
all times, maintain and comply with the
following general regulations:
1. The establishment shall comply with
all state laws and all ordinances of the
village.
2. Only one nonflashing business sign
clearly identifying the establishment as a
massage establishment shall be posted at the
main entrance. No description of services
shall be permitted on such sign.
3. No establishment shall be open for
business between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
4. Only massage technicians having
permits issued pursuant to this article shall
be employed as massage technicians by the
establishment.
5. The practice of all massage
technicians employed by the establishment
shall be limited to the licensed premises.
6. No person under the age of 18 years
shall be permitted on the premises.
7. No intoxicating beverages or
substance included in Wis. Stats. ch. 161,
subch. II, shall be permitted in the licensed
establishment. Food shall be permitted only
when there is no charge therefor and when a
food preparation area, including a sink with
hot and cold running water, is a part of the
establishment.
8. The establishment shall provide a
waiting area for patrons separate from any
area wherein massages are given. There
shall be direct access to this area from the
main entrance or from the hallway
connected only to the main entrance.
9. The operator or a manager having a
permit shall be present on the premises at all
times during hours of operation and shall be
responsible for the operation of the
establishment.
10. The establishment shall permit
inspections of the premises at any time
during business hours by village building
inspectors, fire inspectors, health inspectors
or personnel of any law enforcement
agency.
11. The establishment shall keep current
records of the names and addresses of its
massage technicians, agents, managers and
employees and the date of employment and
termination of each. Such records shall be
open to inspection by any of the personnel
listed in subsection (10) of this section.
12. The establishment shall report any
change of fact required on the application
form and all personnel changes to the village
clerk within ten days after such change.
(b) Same - For technicians. Each
technician shall at all times comply with the
following regulations:
1. The technician shall practice only on
the premises of a licensed massage
establishment.
2. The technician shall massage only
patrons over the age of 18 years.
3. No technician shall administer a
massage:
a. If said technician believes, knows or
should know that he is not free of any
contagious or communicable disease or
infection.
b. To any massage patron exhibiting any
skin fungus, skin infection, skin
inflammation or skin eruption.
4. The technician shall report any
change of fact required in the application
form to the village clerk within ten days
after such change.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 52 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
5. It shall be unlawful for any person:
a. In a massage establishment to place
his hand upon, to touch with any part of his
body, to fondle in any manner, or to
massage a sexual or genital part of any other
person.
b. In a massage establishment to expose
his sexual or genital parts, or any portion
thereof, to any other person. It shall also be
unlawful for any person in a massage
establishment to expose the sexual or genital
parts, or any portion thereof, of any other
person.
c. While in the presence of any other
person in a massage establishment, to fail to
conceal with a fully opaque covering, the
sexual or genital parts of his body.
d. Owning, operating or managing a
massage establishment, knowingly, to cause,
allow or permit in or about such massage
establishment any agent, employee or any
other person under his control or supervision
to perform such acts prohibited in subsection
(5)a, b or c of this section.
e. In a massage establishment, for a
consideration, to offer to perform or to make
available, permit or in any way participate in
the performance of any act prohibited by
subsection (5)a, b or c of this section.
(6) Revocation or Suspension of
License or Permit.
(a) Grounds. The license or permit
granted herein may be revoked, or
suspended for up to six months, by the
village board for any of the following
reasons:
1. If the applicant has made or recorded
any statement required by this article
knowing it to be false or fraudulent or
intentionally deceptive.
2. For the violation of any provision of
this article.
3. If a technician's or manager's permit,
after one conviction of any offense under
Wis. Stats. ch. 944, or of an offense
involving substances included in Wis. Stats.
ch. 161, subch. II, or of any offense against
the person or property of a patron, whether
such occurred on or off the premises of the
establishment.
4. If an establishment license, after one
conviction of any establishment personnel of
an offense under Wis. Stats. ch. 944, or of
an offense against the person or property of
a patron or of an offense involving
substances in Wis. Stats. ch. 161, subch. II,
where there is shown the participation or
knowledge of any other establishment
personnel or of any individual within the
business structure of the applicant.
(b) Notice and hearing. No license or
permit shall be revoked or suspended by the
village board, except upon due notice and
hearing to determine whether grounds for
such action exist. The notice shall be in
writing and shall state the grounds of the
complaint against the licensee or permittee.
The notice shall be served upon the licensee
or permittee at least 15 days prior to the date
of the hearing and shall state the time and
place thereof. The licensee or permittee shall
be entitled to be heard, to be represented, to
cross examine opposing witnesses, and to
present witnesses in his own behalf under
the subpoena of the village board if such is
required. The hearing shall be
stenographically recorded and a copy of the
transcript shall be available to the licensee
or permittee at the expense of the licensee or
permittee. The village board shall decide the
matter and shall prepare a written decision
which shall be filed with the village clerk
and a copy thereof mailed to the licensee or
permittee within 20 days after the hearing.
(c) Exceptions. This article shall not
apply to the following classes of individuals
while engaged in the duties of their
respective professions:
1. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors,
osteopaths, masseurs, physical therapists
licensed or registered to practice their
respective professions under the laws of the
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 53 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
state, or nurses registered under the laws of
the state acting under their direction and
control, or certified massage therapists
operating out of a physician, surgeon or
chiropractic facility and acting under their
direction and control.
2. Barbershops and beauty parlors,
barbers and beauticians licensed under the
laws of the state, provided that such massage
as is practiced is limited to the head and
scalp.
3. Accredited high schools and colleges
and coaches and trainers therein while acting
within the scope of their employment.
(7) Operation without a license a
public nuisance. The operation of a
massage establishment without a license or
the activity of an individual as a massage
technician without a permit is deemed a
public nuisance and may be enjoined by the
village.
5.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY, AND
ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this ordinance,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation. Failure or refusal to
pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
5-Licenses and Permits Page 54 of 54 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 5
Ordinance 2008-06 Creating Section 5.11 Pawnbrokers
Adopted 5-5-08
Ordinance 2008-17 Amending Section 5.04(12) Alcohol Beverages, Revocation and
Suspension of Licenses
Adopted 6-16-08
Ordinance 2009-21 Amending Section 5.09
Adopted 10-5-09
Ordinance 2010-03 Amending Chapter 5.04 (12) (c) 3 Alcohol Beverage Point Schedule
Adopted 1-4-10
Ordinance 2010-04 Amending Chapter 5 Licensing and Permits
Adopted 1-4-10
Ordinance 2013-06 Adding Chapter 5.13 Escort Service License
Adopted 6-17-13
Ordinance 2015-01 Amending Chapter 5.08 of the Municipal Code
Adopted 3-2-15
Ordinance 2015-06 Amending Chapter 5 Licenses and Permits of the Village Code
Adopted 6-15-15
Ordinance 2017-08 Amending Chapter 5 Licenses and Permits
Adopted 8-7-17
Ordinance 2017-09 Amending Chapter 5 Licenses and Permits
Adopted 8-7-17
Ordinance 2017-15 Creating Chapter 5.14 Massage Establishments
Adopted 12-1-17
Ordinance 2018-08 Creating and Amending Chapter 5 Licenses and Permits
Adopted 7-16-18
Ordinance 2018-13 Amending Chapter 5 Licenses and Permits
Adopted 10-29-18
Ordinance 2018-17 Creating Section 5.04 Online Ordering and Curbside Pick-Up of Alcohol
Beverages
Adopted 11-12-18
Ordinance 2018-18 Repealing Ordinance 2005-20 Establishing an Economic Development
Grant for Reserve Class B Liquor Licenses
Adopted 11-12-18
Ordinance 2019-03 Amending Chapter 5.09 Dog Licensing
Adopted 3-18-19
Village of Suamico
Chapter 6
6-Public Works Page 1 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
PUBLIC WORKS
Subchapter I – Street Regulations ............................................................................................. 1
6.01 Newspaper Box/Mailbox Placement ................................................................................. 1
6.02 Driveways............................................................................................................................ 1
6.03 Road Construction in New Subdivisions.......................................................................... 3
6.04 Storm Drainage and Grading Plan .................................................................................. 3
6.05 Appeal to Board ................................................................................................................. 3
6.06 Road Names ........................................................................................................................ 3
6.07 Noxious Weeds and Lawn Maintenance .......................................................................... 3
6.08 Snow and Ice Removal....................................................................................................... 4
6.09 Illegal Deposit of Snow or Other Substances .................................................................. 5
Subchapter II – Solid Waste Disposal ....................................................................................... 5
6.20 Solid Waste Disposal .......................................................................................................... 5
6.99 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement......................................................................... 17
SUBCHAPTER I - STREET
REGULATIONS
6.01 NEWSPAPER BOX/MAILBOX
PLACEMENT.
(1) Mailboxes. No support for a
mailbox shall be located within two (2) feet
of the pavement when there is no shoulder.
(a) Mailbox supports shall be placed
such that the face of the mailbox is even
with the edge of gravel shoulder in rural
areas and even with the back of curb on
urbanized roadways.
(b) The bottom of the mail box shall be
no greater than forty-eight (48) inches nor
less than forty-two (42) inches above the
traveled pavement surface of the road.
(c) The use of supports such as heavy
metal posts, concrete posts, miscellaneous
items of farm equipment, and milk cans
filled with concrete, is prohibited and
considered a detriment to public safety.
(d) Mail boxes should be located, where
practical, on the far side of the driveway and
should be placed to avoid blind spots or the
creation of poor sight distances.
(2) Newspaper Boxes. All newspaper
boxes within the Village limits shall be
attached, or placed as close as practical to,
residential and commercial mailboxes
specified and utilized by the United States
Postal Service. It is intended by this section
that:
(a) mailboxes shall be attached to the
pole and/or other edifice utilized for
placement of the United States Postal
Service mailboxes;
(b) no newspaper boxes shall exist or be
placed on the side of Village Roads opposite
from the side whereon United States Postal
Service mailboxes are placed.
6.02 DRIVEWAYS.
(1) No driveway shall be constructed in
the Village unless a driveway permit is first
obtained from the Building Inspector for
said construction. The driveway permit
shall be obtained by the contractor or person
performing the work with respect to any
driveway. The fee for said driveway permit
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 2 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
shall be as adopted from time to time by
resolution of the Board.
(a) No more than two (2) driveways
shall be approved for any parcel or property
zoned (RS) Residential Sewered or (RR)
Rural Residential, unless said parcel has
sufficient square footage and frontage to be
divided under current zoning regulation.
(b) (AG) Agricultural or (EA) Exclusive
Agricultural residences are subject to section
6.02 (1) (a) excepting field entrances used to
gain access for field maintenance, planting,
harvesting, or other ag related efforts.
(2) No driveway shall exceed the
following width at the right of way in an
area having curb & gutter or at the point
directly over the culvert or flowline in an
area having ditches. Tapers and radii
implemented to match the road edge shall
conform to the details supplied at the time
application is made.
(a) Single Family Residential. Not less
than twelve (12) feet nor more than twentyfour
(24) feet.
(b) Duplex. Shall be considered as two
(2) single family residential units with no
consideration for additional width. Two (2)
or more contiguous width driveways will not
be considered.
(c) Nonresidential Uses
1. One-way Driveway. Not less than
twelve (12) feet wide or more than twentyfour
(24) feet wide.
2. Two-way driveway. Serving twenty
(20) or fewer parking spaces or one (1)
loading berth (one (1) lane out and one (1)
lane in). Not less than twenty-two (22) feet
wide or more than twenty-five (25) feet
wide.
3. Two-way driveway. Two (2) lanes
out and one (1) lane in without a median.
Not less than twenty-four (24) feet wide or
more than thirty-eight (38) feet wide.
4. Two-way driveway. Two (2) lanes
out and one (1) lane in with a median,
serving more than twenty (20) parking
spaces or two (2) or more loading berths.
Not less than twenty-four (24) feet wide or
more than forty-four (44) feet wide.
(d) Planned Commercial Developments.
(PCD) shall comply with the special
consideration received under the direction of
the Planning Commission and Board.
(e) Pre-existing noncompliant
driveways.
1. Pre-existing noncompliant driveways
may be given special consideration within
the parameters of section 6.02 (2) (c) where
a Planned Commercial District overlay does
not exist.
2. Upon reconstruction of pre-existing
noncompliant driveways they must meet
current driveway regulations at time of
replacement.
(3) Corner Lots.
(a) On a corner lot, no driveway shall be
closer than thirty (30) feet to the point of
curvature or forty-two (42) feet from the two
intersecting property lines on all local
streets.
(b) On a corner lot, no driveway shall be
closer than fifty (50) feet to the point of
curvature or sixty-two (62) feet from the
intersection of the two intersecting property
lines on all collector streets.
(4) In areas where there is not curb and
gutter, concrete driveways will not be
allowed on the village right-of -way. In
areas where there is not curb and gutter, the
property owner may install a concrete
driveway, but only up to the Village rightof-
way. The property owner shall install
only blacktop from the street through the
Village right-of-way.
(5) Where curb and gutter is present
with or without storm sewer, concrete
driveways shall be constructed. Where a
culvert is required, reinforcement will be
utilized within the right-of-way to minimize
heaving and cracking.
(6) Where a culvert is required by the
Department of Public Works on a Village
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 3 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
street, the minimum size shall be fifteen (15)
inches. The Director of Public Works or
Engineer may grant twelve (12) inch culvert
under special consideration.
(a) All culverts must conform to village
approved engineered ditch grades.
(b) All culverts within the village rightof-
way shall be galvanized corrugated metal.
(c) Metal end section shall be required.
(apron end section)
(d) Finished grade shall not exceed a
slope of 3:1 from the edge of the traveled
portion of the driveway to the end of the
culvert end section. Traveled portion of the
driveway is defined as gravel, asphalt,
concrete, etc. This shall include any
decorative and/or landscape features
constructed within the village right-of-way.
(e) If alteration is deemed necessary by
the Village, it shall be done at the owner’s
expense.
6.03 ROAD CONSTRUCTION IN NEW
SUBDIVISIONS.
(1) The developer or person requesting
road construction must submit to the Board
an application in writing and an approved
final plat or certified survey for lands to be
serviced by any street or frontage or by any
public utility. Any and all improvements
will be accomplished as dictated by a
development agreement heretofore set forth
as a requirement of any development or
improvements therein.
6.04 STORM DRAINAGE AND
GRADING PLAN. In order to insure
positive drainage from all lots within each
proposed block so that no surface water will
pond within the block, the sub-divider shall
submit, at the time of final plat review, a
drainage plan for each block within the
proposed subdivision. This drainage plan
shall include the final grade elevations to be
maintained on all lot lines either common or
otherwise, along with the lowest wall
elevation on any wall of a future structure.
(1) Should the approved drainage plan
require grading or the installation of storm
sewer drainage facilities within any block or
blocks, the sub-divider shall cause such
grading or other improvements to be
installed at his expense as provided in the
development agreement.
(2) In order to insure compliance with
the approved drainage plan, a covenant shall
be included on the face of the final plat
referring to the drainage plan and requiring
compliance therewith.
6.05 APPEAL TO BOARD. In case any
applicant for a permit under this chapter
shall be aggrieved by any action in
connection with the issuance of a permit, or
the refund of a deposit, or in connection
with the application of this Chapter, he shall
have a right to appeal to the Board by filing
notice of appeal containing his Post Office
address within ten (10) days after such
action, and outlining the nature of his
grievance and specifying the remedy
requested. The Board, after filing of appeal,
shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days
of said filing.
6.06 ROAD NAMES. In accordance with
Wisconsin State Statutes, which requires the
assignment of names for each road under the
Village's jurisdiction, the road names as
shown on the plat are hereby assigned, and
all future roads will be named when
accepted by the Village.
6.07 NOXIOUS WEEDS AND LAWN
MAINTENANCE.
(1) Noxious Weeds. Pursuant to Wis.
Stats. §66.0407, it shall be the duty of every
owner, occupant, agent or person in charge
of any lot or parcel of land within the Rural
Residential (RR), Residential Sewered (RS),
Public Lands (PL), all Business (B, NB, and
PCD), Highway Business (HB), I-1 & I-2
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 4 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
(Industrial) Zoning Classifications of the
Village to destroy noxious weeds growing in
open spaces of platted lands upon their
premises or on the area adjacent to the
sidewalk or streets upon which the premises
abut. Open spaces are defined as spaces
where trees and shrubs are not present. The
following are considered noxious weeds:
Canada thistle, leafy spurge, ragweed,
English charlock (wild mustard), garlic
mustard, burdock, poison ivy, oxalis, field
bindweed (commonly known as creeping
Jenny), quack or quitch grass, field dodder,
Indian mustard, sow thistle, purple
loosestrife.
(a) The destruction of said thistles or
weeds shall be made at all times before the
same go to seed or at such time as the Weed
Commissioner shall order.
(b) Neglect or failure on the part of the
owner or occupant to obey the provisions of
this section or to comply with the orders of
the Weed Commissioner within the time
stated on any notice he may serve, shall be
deemed a violation of this section and said
Weed Commissioner shall proceed to cut
down or otherwise destroy such thistles,
trees or other noxious weeds.
(c) Annually, the Village shall appoint a
Weed Commissioner who shall keep an
account of such expense and make a report
of the same to the clerk who shall enter the
amount therein charged to each lot or parcel
of land in the next subsequent tax roll as a
special tax against said lot or parcel of land
and the same shall be collected in all
respects like other village taxes upon real
estate.
(d) Lands exempt from these regulations
include Wetlands as designated by Brown
County mapping or other official wetland
delineation and Environmentally Sensitive
Areas (ESA).
(2) Lawn Maintenance. It shall be the
duty of every owner, occupant, agent or
person in charge of any lot or parcel of land
within the Residential Sewered (RS), Rural
Residential (RR), all Business (B, NB, and
PCD), Highway Business (HB), I-1 & I-2
(Industrial) Zoning Classifications of the
Village to not allow, permit, or maintain the
growth of grass and weeds, or combination
thereof, or any unsightly growth, to a height
of over ten (10) inches. Trees and shrubs
are exempt.
(a) For those areas residentially zoned
and larger than one (1) acre, provisions of
this code shall apply to the areas of the lot or
parcel cultivated with turf grass. For the
purposes of this code, turf grass is defined as
grasses which are spreading or stoloniferous
in nature, which endures regular mowing to
form a dense growth of leaf blades and root.
(b) Neglect or failure on the part of the
owner, occupant, agent or person in charge
to obey the provisions of this section or to
comply with the orders of the Weed
Commissioner within the stated time on any
notice he may serve, shall be deemed a
violation of this section and said Weed
Commissioner shall proceed to cut down
and remove or cause to be cut down and
removed all such growths described in
section (a) above.
(c) The Weed Commissioner shall keep
an account of such expense and make a
report to the Clerk who shall enter the
amount therein charged to each lot or parcel
of land in the next subsequent tax roll as a
special tax against said lot or parcel of land
and the same shall be collected in all
respects like other village taxes upon real
estate.
6.08 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL. The
owner/occupant of any property that abuts a
public sidewalk shall be responsible for the
removal of snow, ice and debris from said
sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be clear of snow,
ice or debris within twenty-four (24) hours
of snowfall. If such snow, ice or debris is
not removed, the Village shall cause said
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 5 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
removal and that cost shall be assessed to
the abutting property pursuant to the current
state statutes.
6.09 ILLEGAL DEPOSIT OF SNOW
OR OTHER SUBSTANCES. Property
owners or commercial snow removal
operators are hereby prohibited from the
placing, depositing, plowing onto, or
otherwise putting snow or other substance
onto the traveled portion of a public or
private roadway or other property which
endangers the safety of persons traveling
such roadway or property. Village or county
employees while engaging in snow removal
operations or acting in the performance of
their position are exempt from this section.
It shall be unlawful to throw, deposit or
dump yard waste materials of any kind on
any street, highway or any public place
within the Village of Suamico.
SUBCHAPTER II - SOLID WASTE
DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING
6.20 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AND
RECYCLING.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this
Section is to effectively and efficiently
manage the solid waste and recycling
generation and collection by and of the
Village.
(2) Administration. The provisions of
this section shall be administered by the
Board of the Village or its designee.
(3) Effective Date. These provisions
pursuant to NR 544 Wis. Adm. Code shall
take effect on June 1, 2012.
(4) Definitions. For the purpose of this
ordinance:
(a) "Bi-metal container" means a
container for carbonated malt beverages that
is made primarily of a combination of steel
and aluminum.
(b) "Container board" means corrugated
paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
(c) “Foam polystyrene packaging”
means packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the
following criteria:
1. Is designed for serving food or
beverages.
2. Consists of loose particles intended to fill
space and cushion the packaged article in a
shipping container.
3. Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold
and cushion the packaged article in a
shipping container.
(d) "Green box" recyclable material
facility means recyclable containers placed
by the Village, its agents, or its contractors
to be used by the service recipients in the
Village for the temporary collection of
recyclable material.
(e) "HDPE" means high density
polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2.
(f) "LDPE" means low density
polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4.
(g) "Magazines" means magazines and
other materials printed on similar paper.
(h) "Major appliance" means a
residential or commercial air conditioner,
clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher,
freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator,
furnaces, boiler, dehumidifier, water heater
or stove.
(i) "Multiple-family dwelling" means a
property containing 5 or more residential
units, including those which are occupied
seasonally.
(j) "Newspaper" means a newspaper and
other materials printed on newsprint.
(k) "Non-residential facilities and
properties" means commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional, and governmental
facilities and properties. This term does not
include multiple family dwelling.
(l) "Office paper" means high grade
printing and writing from offices in nonVillage
of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 6 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
residential facilities and properties. Printed
white ledger and computer printout are
examples of office paper generally accepted
as high grade. This term does not include
industrial process waste.
(m) "Other resins or multiple resins"
mean plastic resins labeled by the SPI code
#7.
(n) "Persons" includes any individual,
corporation, partnership, association, local
government unit (as defined in current state
statutes, state agency or authority or federal
agency.
(o) "PETE" means polyethylene
terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1.
(p) “Plastic container” means a rigid
plastic container including those made of
PETE (#1), HDPE (#2), PVC (#3), LDPE
(#4), PP (#5), PS (#6), and any other resin or
multiple resins (#7).
(q) “Postconsumer waste” means solid
waste other that solid waste generated in the
production of goods, hazardous waste, as
defined by current state statutes, waste from
construction and demolition of structures,
scrap automobiles, or high-volume industrial
waste, as defined in the current state
statutes.
(r) "PP" means polypropylene, labeled
by the SPI code #5.
(s) "PS" means polystyrene, labeled by
the SPI code #6.
(t) "PVC" means polyvinyl chloride,
labeled by the SPI code #3.
(u) "Recycling contract" shall refer to
the Cooperative Agreement with rural
municipalities to provide curbside or dropoff
recycling center collection of
commingled or source separated household
recyclables and a materials recovery facility
by and between Brown County, State of
Wisconsin and the Village dated February 7,
1994. (v) "Recyclable materials" includes
lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste
oil, yard waste, aluminum containers,
corrugated paper or other container board,
foam polystyrene packaging, glass
containers, magazines, newspaper, office
paper, rigid plastic containers, including
those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE,
PP, PS and other resins or multiple resins,
steel containers, waste tires and bi-metal
containers, or any other material so
designated by the Village or Brown County
Port and Solid Waste, or Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
(w) “Residential Equivalent Unit
(REU)” means a residential living space
required to house one family regardless of
family size. For example, a duplex would
consist of two (2) residential equivalent
units.
(x) "Solid waste" has the meaning
specified in Wis. Stats.§289.01(33) or their
successor provisions.
(y) "Solid waste facility" has the
meaning specified in Wis. Stats.
§289.01(35) or their successor provisions .
(z) "Solid waste treatment" means any
method, technique or process which is
designed to change the physical, chemical or
biological character or composition of solid
waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
(aa) "Waste tire" means a tire that is no
longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage, or defect.
(bb) "Yard waste" means leaves, grass
clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material
no greater than six (6) inches in diameter.
This term does not include stumps, roots, or
shrubs with intact root balls.
(5) Separation of Recyclable
Materials. Occupants of single family and
two (2) to four (4) unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings and non-residential
facilities and properties shall separate the
following materials from post-consumer
waste:
(a) Lead acid batteries
(b) Major appliances
(c) Waste oil
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 7 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
(d) Yard waste
(e) Aluminum containers
(f) Bi-metal containers
(g) Corrugated paper or other container
board
(h) Foam polystyrene packaging
(i) Glass containers
(j) Magazines
(k) Newspaper
(l) Office paper
(m) Rigid plastic containers made of
PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and
other resins or multiple resins
(n) Steel containers
(o) Waste tires.
(p) Electronics.
The Board reserves the right to designate by
order in writing; additional solid waste as
recyclable materials to be separated by
occupants and to be collected by the Village
or its contractor and to designate, after a
variance has been obtained by the Board
from the DNR under NR 287.11(2m) or its
successor provision, currently separated and
collected recyclable materials as no longer
recyclable material to be separated and/or to
be collected by the Village or by its
contractors in the Village and to add or
delete any of these materials or waste from
any recyclable material collection services
provided for or contracted by the Village.
The Board shall provide written notice to
known occupants affected by these changes
and to any contractor of this written order.
Upon any designation notice to known
occupants forwarded by first class mail, the
Village or its contractor may reject any
recyclable material waste or material
determined to no longer be collected by the
Village or by its contractor. The Board shall
direct whether these recyclable materials not
to be collected shall be separated from postconsumer
waste and how they shall be
managed by any occupant of the Village.
(6) Separation Requirements
Exempted. The separation requirements of
Section 6.20 (5) do not apply to any
occupants of the Village regarding the
following:
(a) Occupants of single family and two
(2) to four (4) unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings and non-residential
facilities and properties that send their postconsumer
waste to a processing facility
licensed by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources that recovers the
materials specified in Section 6.20 (5) from
solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
(b) Solid waste from these occupants
which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a
facility if less than thirty percent (30%) of
heat input to the facility is derived from the
solid waste burned as supplemental fuel.
(c) A recyclable material of these
occupants specified in Section 6.20 (5) E
through N for which a variance has been
granted to the Village by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under
Wis. Stats. §159.11(2m), or NR 544.14 Wis.
Adm. Code or their successor provisions.
(d) A recyclable material for which the
Village has obtained the above variances
from the DNR under Wis. Stats.
§159.11(2m) or its successor provision, and
the Board does not require separation of this
recyclable material from post-consumer
waste.
(7) Care Of Separated Recyclable
Materials. To the greatest extent
practicable, the recyclable materials
separated in accordance with Section 6.20(5)
shall be clean and kept free of contaminants
such as food or product residue, oil or
grease, or other non-recyclable materials,
including but not limited to household
hazardous waste, medical waste and
agricultural chemical containers.
(a) No person may place or deposit any
recyclable material, household hazardous
waste, medical waste, agricultural pesticide,
or any other waste for collection by the
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 8 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
Village or its contractor in violation of
Section 6.20 (18).. Recyclable materials
separated for recyclable material collection
shall be stored by all persons in a manner
which protects them from wind, rain, and
other inclement weather conditions.
(b) No person may place for recyclable
material collection in the Village, by the
Village, its contractors or by permitted
collector, any separated recyclable materials
that are unmarketable or contaminated or
that are placed and stored for collection in a
manner that will cause the material to be
declared unmarketable or to be declared
contaminated by the Village, its contractor,
or by any permittee of the Village, that when
placed or deposited for recyclable material
collection will create a public nuisance or
that will create litter conditions in the
Village.
(8) Management of Lead Acid
Batteries, Major Appliances, Waste Tires,
Waste Oil, Electronics, and Yard Waste.
Occupants of single family and two (2) to
four (4) unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and non-residential facilities and
properties, except as otherwise directed by
order of the Board shall manage lead acid
batteries, major appliances, waste oil, waste
tires, and yard waste as follows:
(a) Lead acid batteries shall not be
collected by the Village at the curbside, but
shall be disposed of by the person or owner
at a processing facility equipped to recycle
in compliance with state laws.
(b) Waste oil, filters, and absorbent
shall not be collected by the Village at
curbside, but may be disposed of by person
or owner at the Municipal Services Center.
(c) Waste tires shall not be collected at
curbside, but shall be disposed of properly
by the person or owner at a processing
facility equipped to recycle in compliance
with current state laws.
(d) Major appliances shall not be
collected by the Village at curbside, but
shall be disposed of by person or owner at a
processing facility equipped to recycle in
compliance with current state laws.
(e) Yard waste shall not be collected by
the Village at curbside, but may be disposed
of by person or owner at the Village Yard
Waste Site. This site is limited to Suamico
residential use only. Commercial dumping
is prohibited.
(f) Electronics shall not be collected by
the village at curbside, but may be disposed
of by person or owner at the Municipal
Services Center, if available, or with an
electronic recycler registered with E-Cycle
Wisconsin.
(9) Preparation and Collection of
Recyclable & Solid Waste Materials. The
Village shall provide solid waste collection
to all residential properties up to and
including four (4) dwelling units, per lot of
record.
(a) Recyclables shall be collected by
the Village for all residential properties up
to and including four (4) dwelling units, per
lot of record, provided such waste is
properly separated, handled, prepared,
contained stored and located in conformance
with this chapter and the rules and
regulations established and publicized by the
Public Works Director. Roadside recycling
is mandatory and residents are required to
comply when they are served by a recycling
route.
1. Recycling Waste Collection shall be
provided once every two weeks to each
household for one container furnished by the
Village or its contractor.
2. Recycling waste shall be placed out
for collection separate from, but next to
other solid waste on the regular refuse
collection day. Solid waste and recyclable
containers shall be placed a minimum of
four(4) feet apart.
(b) All non-residential business
establishments and multiple family dwelling
units shall be responsible for the disposal of
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 9 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
solid waste and recyclable materials in
accordance with Section 6.20 of the Village
Code. The Village shall not provide these
services for any business establishment
including commercial, industrial,
manufacturing or other facilities of a similar
type; multiple family dwelling units (defined
as a dwelling that has more than a four
family dwelling unit per lot of record); nonprofit
organization or other organization.
Those business establishments that also have
a dwelling unit attached to the building will
not be provided with solid waste or
recyclable pick-up service from the village,
as such establishments will be considered
non-residential unit in accordance with this
Section.
(c) Except as otherwise provided by
order of the Board, occupants of single
family and two (2) to three (4) unit
residences shall do the following for the
proper preparation and proper recyclable
material collection of the separated materials
specified in Section 6.20 (5) E through N:
(d) All recyclables (except paper
recyclables shall be rinsed and all shall be
free of certifiable substances).
(e) All other solid waste not restricted
by this Section shall be placed in the
approved trash container supplied by the
Village or its contractor for the explicit
purpose of garbage collection.
(f) Solid waste shall not be placed into
trash container in an unconfined manner but
must be contained within a bag of sufficient
structural integrity and containment value as
to not allow dispersion by wind, accident, or
during the collection process prior to
placement in the trash container. Under no
circumstance are materials to be placed in a
loose manner.
(10) Right to Reject Materials.
(a) The Village or its contractor has the
right to reject and leave at the curb or
roadside, recyclable or solid waste material
where these recyclable materials are not
prepared according to the specifications of
this section as noted in Section 6.20 (9) of
this section.
(b) Right to collect materials. No
person, unless the persons are exempt under
Section 6.20 (6) or unless the persons are
provided written permission from the Board,
may collect for the Village, including any
contractor of the Village, any recyclable or
solid waste materials if:
1. the recyclable or solid waste
materials are not completely and properly
separated from other wastes or other
materials.
2. the recyclable or solid waste
materials are not placed for collection in the
proper containers.
3. the recyclable or solid waste
materials are contaminated with other
wastes or residuals, including those wastes
and materials noted in Section 6.20 (18).
4. the recyclable or solid waste
materials are commingled contrary to
Section 6.20 (9).
5. the recyclable or solid waste
materials are not of a marketable quality or
are not placed for collection in a marketable
or appropriate condition.
6. the recyclable materials or solid
waste are not generated from the proper
sources within the Village.
7. the person, who placed the recyclable
or solid waste materials for collection, is not
eligible to receive collection service from
the Village or its contractor.
8. the recyclable or solid waste
materials are not placed for collection on the
proper dates or times or locations.
9. the recyclable or solid waste
materials are not currently authorized for
collection by the Village or its contractor.
(c) Upon rejection of any of these
materials or waste, the person authorized to
reject the recyclable or solid waste materials
for the Village or its contractor shall provide
to the occupant the reasons for the rejection
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 10 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
of these materials or waste either in writing
or orally. The contractor or any other
person authorized or permitted to operate
any curbside or roadside recyclable material
collection service for the Village or to
operate any "green box" recyclable material
collection facility for the Village shall
provide to the Village, on a monthly basis, a
list of names, in writing, of occupants or
other persons, if known, whose recyclable or
solid waste materials were rejected for
collection and the reason(s) for such
rejection.
(d) No person may place or deposit for
recyclable or solid waste material collection
by the Village or its contractor, unless the
person is exempt under Section 6.20 (6)or
unless provided written permission by the
Board, any recyclable or solid waste
materials where the recyclable or solid waste
materials have not been properly separated
from the waste or other materials as required
by order of the Board, as required by this
NR 544 Wis. Adm. Code, or its successor
chapter, or as required by this section and
where the recyclable or solid waste materials
have not been properly contained in the
bags, bins, or other containers as required by
order of the Board or by this section.
(11) Responsibilities of Owners or
Designated Agents of Multiple-Family
Dwellings.
(a) Owners or designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings shall do all of the
following to recycle the materials specified
in Section 6.20 (5) E through N and to
supply a means for disposal of other solid
waste.:
1. Provide adequate, separate,
containers for the recyclable and solid waste
materials.
2. Notify tenants in writing at the time
of renting or leasing the dwelling and at
least semi-annually thereafter about the
established recycling program.
3. Provide for the recyclable material
collection of the materials separated from
the solid waste by the tenants and the
delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
4. Provide for the solid waste material
collection of all other materials generated by
the tenants.
5. Notify tenants of reasons to reduce
and recycle solid waste, which materials are
collected, how to prepare the materials in
order to meet the processing requirements,
collection methods or sites, locations and
hours of operation, and a contact person or
company, including a name, address and
telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in Section
6.20 (11) (a) 1. do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of multiple-family
dwellings if the post-consumer waste
generated within the dwelling is treated at a
processing facility certified by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
index NR 544.16, Wis. Adm. Code that
recovers for recycling the materials
specified in Section 6.20 (5) E through N
from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
(12) Responsibilities of Owners or
Designated Agents of Non-Residential
Facilities and Properties.
(a) Owners or designated agents of nonresidential
facilities and properties shall do
all of the following to recycle the materials
specified in Section 6.20 (5) E through N
and to supply a means for disposal of other
solid waste.:
1. Provide adequate, separate,
containers for the recyclable and solid waste
materials.
2. Notify tenants in writing at the time
of renting or leasing the dwelling and at
least semi-annually thereafter about the
established recycling program.
3. Provide for the recyclable material
collection of the materials separated from
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 11 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
the solid waste by the tenants and the
delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
4. Provide for the solid waste material
collection of all other materials generated by
the tenants.
5. Provide users, tenants and occupants
the reasons to reduce and recycle, which
materials are collected, how to prepare
materials in order to meet the processing
requirements, collection methods or sites,
locations and hours of operation, and a
contact person or company including a
name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in
Section 6.20 (12) (a) 1. do not apply to the
owners or designated agents of nonresidential
facilities and properties if the
post-consumer waste generated within the
facility or property is treated at a processing
facility certified by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under NR
544.16, Wis. Adm. Code that recovers for
recycling the materials specified in Section
6.20 (5) E through N from solid waste in as
pure a form as is technically feasible.
(13) Prohibitions of Disposal of
Recyclable or Solid Waste Materials
Separated for Recycling. No persons may
dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility
or burn in a solid waste treatment facility
any of the recyclable materials specified in
Section 6.20 (5) E through N which have
been separated in the Village for recycling,
except waste tires may be burned with
energy recovery in a solid waste treatment
facility.
(14) Permitting.
(a) No person may engage in the use
operation or business of collecting solid
waste or recyclable material for
consideration within the Village without
being licensed or permitted by the DNR
under NR 502.06 Wis. Adm. Code or its
successor provision.
(b) No person may engage in the use,
operation or the business of collecting solid
waste, hazardous waste, recyclable material
or other material noted in Section 6.20 (18)
for consideration within the Village without
being permitted by the Village pursuant to
this section. This required Village permit
provision shall include any persons
contracted by the Village to provide for
recyclable material collection services for
the Village and for its occupants.
(15) Anti-Scavenging or Unlawful
Removal of Solid Waste Materials. No
person, unless under contract with the
Village, unless under permit by the Board,
or unless provided written permission by the
Board, may collect or remove any recyclable
material that has been deposited or placed
for material collection.
(16) Recyclable Material/Solid Waste
From Outside the Village. No person,
unless provided written permission by the
Board, may deposit or place for recyclable
or solid waste material collection by the
Village or its contractor at any location in
the Village, any recyclable materials,
wastes, or other materials, where these
materials, wastes, or other materials have
been generated from sources outside the
Village.
This provision shall not apply to any
recyclable or solid waste material properly
placed on public or private land by any
person in any Village authorized recyclable
or solid waste material containers
established for and permitted by the Board
for general public deposit of recyclable or
solid waste material.
(17) No Dumping of Recyclable or
Solid Waste Materials.
(a) No person, unless provided written
permission by the Board, may litter, dispose,
discharge, or dump any recyclable or solid
waste material in any road, highway, road
right-of-way, waters, street, alley, or other
public land or location, within the Village
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 12 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
unless it is deposited or placed properly for
collection in the proper bags, bins,
receptacles or containers in the proper
manner, date, time, and location specified in
this ordinance or as authorized and specified
by the Board.
(b) No person, unless provided
permission by the owner or occupant of the
land, shall litter, dispose, discharge or dump
any recyclable or solid waste material on
private land.
(c) No person shall litter or permit any
recyclable or solid waste material to be
thrown from a vehicle operated by that
person in the Village.
(d) This provision shall not apply to any
recyclable or solid waste material, clean and
not contaminated, placed on public land or
private land in the Village by any person in
any authorized recyclable or solid waste
material containers established for and
permitted by the Board for general public
deposit of recyclable or solid waste material.
(18) Non-Collectable Materials.
(a) No person, unless provided written
permission by the Board, may deposit or
place any recyclable or solid waste material
for collection by the Village or by its
contractor, or recycling location in the
Village, any of the following recyclable
materials, wastes, residuals, and other
materials, such as:
1. hazardous waste, including household
hazardous wastes.
2. toxic wastes.
3. free liquid in any containers,
including paints and solvents.
4. pesticides, excluding non-agricultural
pesticide containers if properly cleaned, not
contaminated, and if approved by the Board
for separation and for recyclable material
collection.
5. medical wastes.
6. asbestos.
7. sludge wastes.
8. industrial or commercial wastes from
any industrial or commercial facility or
operation.
9. waste from pollution control
equipment.
10. residue and debris from clean-up of
a chemical discharge or chemical residue
and debris from any facility or operation
using chemicals in any commercial,
agricultural or industrial processes.
11. ash waste.
12. hazardous and toxic demolition and
construction wastes and demolition and
construction wastes containing asbestos.
13. bio-medical wastes.
14. septage (human or otherwise)
wastes.
15. animal fecal wastes.
16. dead animals.
17. brush or trees.
18. wood treated with chemical
preservatives.
19. explosive material.
20. contaminated recyclable material as
determined by the Board or its contractor.
21. concrete and asphalt debris.
(b) No person may, in any recyclable or
solid waste material collection, knowingly
collect for the Village any of the above
noted wastes, materials, contaminated
recyclable materials and any other
recyclable materials which are not of
marketable quality or which are placed for
recyclable material collection in an
unmarketable condition, unless provided
written permission by the Board. This
prohibition shall apply to any contractor for
the Village.
(19) Reporting Requirements.
(a) Any person permitted by or
contracted by the Village to collect for
consideration, any recyclable material for
the Village or other persons in the Village
shall be required as a provision of the
contract or as a condition of the Village
recyclable collection permit to maintain
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 13 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
appropriate records for the Village and to
report in writing to the Clerk at least
annually by February 28 of each year
sufficient and accurate information and data
related to the amount, weight and type of
recyclable material, waste and other material
collected by the contractor or by the
permitee in the Village for the Village or for
any occupants in the Village in the previous
year. The information and data to be
provided shall be sufficient in detail to allow
the Village to meet the recyclable material
collection, compliance and data
requirements established for the Village in
NR 544 Wis. Adm. Code or its successor
chapter. The annual report may, at a
minimum, specifically require from the
contractor or permitee:
1. the amount, weight and type of
recyclable material, waste and other material
collected in the Village for the Village or for
other occupants in the Village.
2. the amount, weight and type of
recyclable material processed or marketed
for the Village or for other persons and the
amount, weight and type of recyclable
material for the Village or for other
occupants in the Village rejected for
processing or marketing. This shall include
weight slips.
3. the amount, weight, type and final
disposal or treatment location for any
recyclable material, contaminated recyclable
material, waste or other material collected in
the Village for the Village or for other
occupants which was later disposed of or
treated in any solid waste disposal facility or
solid waste treatment facility.
(b) Failure by any contractor of the
Village or any person with a Village
recyclable material collection permit to file
the above noted information, data and
reports with the Clerk in an accurate and
timely manner, shall be cause for the Board
to seek enforcement or penalties, to revoke
any permit and/or terminate any contract
with the contractor or permitee.
(20) Ownership of Material and
Equipment.
(a) Any recyclable or solid waste
material, waste or other material not rejected
by the Village, its employees, agents or by
any of its contractors in its recyclable or
solid waste material collection at any
Village recyclable material collection
facility or curbside collection point, unless
previously rejected by the Village, its
employees, its agents or by any of its
contractors, shall become the property of the
Village, unless the Village has a contract to
the contrary with the contractors.
(b) The recyclable material, waste, or
other material deposited for collection at any
curbside or roadside collection location,
shall, upon its collection by any contractor
of the Village, become the property of the
contractor unless the Village has a contract
to the contrary with the contractor.
(c) Each residential equivalent user shall
be assigned one container for recycling, and
one trash container for garbage. The cost of
the trash and recycling containers will be
set from time to time by resolution of the
Board or as incorporated into the fee
structure for solid waste and recycling
management and pick-up.
(d) Additional trash carts are not
allowed, however residents may request the
largest cart size offered.
(e) Replacement and repairs for normal
wear and tear to the trash containers shall
be the responsibility of the Village. The
Village reserves the right to charge the
resident for repairs or replacement in cases
of loss, negligence, and/or abuse. All
containers which are the property of the
village or its contractor are to remain at the
residence to which they have been assigned
upon transfer of real estate.
(21) Recyclable and Solid Waste
Material Collection Schedule. The Board
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 14 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
may establish the dates and times of
authorized placement and collection for
waste materials, or other materials where
these materials or wastes are to be collected
in the Village, by the Village, by any
contractor of the Village or by any permitted
collector of the Village. The Clerk shall
publish a notice in the official newspaper
and also provide written notice by 1st class
mail to every known occupant in the Village
of the collection schedule.
(22) Specified Containers, Specified
Locations, Times and Dates For
Collection.
(a) No person, unless provided written
permission by the Board, may deposit or
place for collection, at curbside or roadside,
any material that exceeds any requirement as
set forth in the vendor contract and/or any
contractor requirements.
(b) No person may place for collection
any eligible material or collection receptacle
at any collection point prior to thirty-six (36)
hours in advance of the scheduled collection
time. Materials placed after 6 a.m. of the
scheduled pickup day are not guaranteed
collection. Ineligible materials and
receptacles must be removed from plain
view prior to thirty-six (36) hours after
collection occurs unless granted a special
provision by the Village. Such special
provision will be specific to the occupant
and is not transferable.
(c) No person shall place a trash
container within four (4) feet of a recycling
container , street sign, fire number, mailbox,
or any other permanent or non-permanent
object. If feasible, a trash container is to be
placed on one side of the driveway and the
recyclable container on the other side of the
driveway. Containers shall be placed no
greater than four (4) feet from the edge of
the pavement and in no instance shall
placement be on the traveled road surface.
(23) Regulations; Notice to
Occupants. The Board may establish any
orders, permits, rules and regulations
necessary to administer and enforce this
ordinance and to provide a proper, safe and
efficient recyclables and solid waste
collection program for the Village. The
Board shall provide to the known occupants
receiving recyclable and solid waste
material collection services by the Village or
its contractors a written notice of these
orders, permits, rules and regulations by first
class mail to the last known address,
annually on or before January 1 of each year
along with, at a minimum, the following
information:
(a) the type, amount, times and dates for
the recyclable material collection services
and the eligibility requirements for
collection by the Village or its contractor, if
any.
(b) the name, address and phone number
of the person to receive complaints or
concerns for the Village related to recyclable
material collection services and facilities.
(c) the specific requirements for proper
placement, proper separation and proper
containment of recyclable material.
(d) the specific wastes and materials not
to be placed for collection and the reasons
for possible refusal by the Village or its
contractor not to collect certain recyclable
materials, wastes and materials.
(e) the maximum amount in weight or
volume of recyclable materials to be placed
for collection per scheduled collection
period.
(f) any other information deemed
relevant to the occupants by the Board,
including any possible penalties for
violation of this ordinance.
(24) General Regulatory Provisions.
No person in the Village may:
(a) Continue to place for recyclable
material collection at any location in the
Village any unauthorized recyclable
materials, wastes, or other materials after
receipt of written warning notice by certified
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 15 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
mail or personal service from the Board or
its designee, that the specific recyclable
materials, wastes, or other materials will not
be collected by the Village, its contractor,
and/or any permitted collector and the
person therefore may not continue to place
for recyclable material collection in the
Village these unauthorized wastes or
materials.
(b) Place, discharge, litter or deposit in
the Village for collection, storage, treatment,
processing, or disposal any recyclable
materials, any wastes or other materials at
any temporarily closed or permanently
closed "green box" recyclable material
collection facility or other closed recycled
material or waste storage, treatment,
processing or disposal facility. This
provision shall include any placement,
littering, discharge, or deposit by any person
on any public or private land in the Village
of any recyclable materials, wastes or other
materials where the materials or wastes were
not authorized for placement by the owner
or occupant of the land where the materials
or wastes were placed.
(c) Place for solid waste, hazardous
waste or other material collection in the
Village by the Village, its contractor,
permittee collector or any other person any
recyclable material, where the person is not
exempt under Section 6.2(6), where these
recyclable materials should have been
properly separated and where these
recyclable materials should have been
placed for only recyclable material
collection as required under NR 544 Wis.
Adm. Code or its successor chapter or as
required under this section.
(25) Fees and Volume Based Rates.
The Board may establish fee charges for
occupants of the Village for the payment of
recyclable and solid waste material
collection services. Fees may be assessed
on a per occupant basis or Residential
Equivalent Unit (REU), with or without
differential rates for seasonal or full-time
occupant services.
(a) Annually the fee, as established by
resolution of the Board, shall be collected by
placing a special charge on the tax roll for
the coming year.
(b) All ordinances or parts of ordinances
in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
(26) Sharps.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this sharps
section of the municipal code is to outline
those "sharps" materials which are
prohibited from entering the solid waste and
recycling stream and to outline the disposal
methods of "home generated" sharps in the
Village consistent with Ch. NR 526, Wis.
Adm. Code, Wisconsin's Medical Waste
Regulations.
(b) Definitions:
1. "Home Generator of Infectious
Waste" means a person who generates
infectious waste through self-administration
of medication or who receives injected
medication at home from other members of
the household or from employees of a home
care or hospice program under section NR
500.03(102), Wis. Adm. Code.
2. "Infectious Waste" means solid waste
that contains pathogens with sufficient
virulence and in sufficient quantity that
exposure of a susceptible human or animal
to the solid waste could cause the human or
animal to contract an infectious disease
under Wisconsin Statutes.
3. "Sharps" means household sharps,
specifically hypodermic needles, syringes
with needles attached, scalpel blades and
lancets as specified in section NR 526.05
(1)(a) and section NR 500.03 (209), Wis.
Adm. Code.
4. "Sharps Collection Station" means
any clinic, hospital or pharmacy which has
registered with the Department of Natural
Resources. The sharps collection stations
will distribute one (1) gallon sharps
collection containers and education
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 16 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
materials to household sharps users. The
sharps collection stations will accept full
sharps collection containers for disposal.
5. "Solid Waste" means any garbage,
refuse, sludge from a waste water treatment
plant, water supply treatment plan or air
pollution control facility and other discarded
or salvageable materials, including solid,
liquid, semi-liquid, or contained gaseous
material resulting from industrial,
commercial, mining, and agricultural
operations, and from community activities,
but does not include solids or dissolved
materials in irrigation return flows or
industrial discharges which are point sources
subject to permit under Wisconsin Statutes,
or source, special nuclear or by-product
material as defined under Wisconsin
Statutes.
6. "Sterilization" means a process by
which all forms of microbial life, including
spores, viruses and fungi, are destroyed
under NR 500.03(223), Wis. Adm. Code.
(c) Certain Sharps Disposal Methods
Prohibited.
1. Contaminated, unused, or disinfected
sharps which may include hypodermic
needles, syringes with needles, scalpel
blades, lancets, broken glass vials, broken
plastic vials, and laboratory slides shall not
be placed curbside for collection with
normal refuse or placed with recyclables and
no person may deposit sharps in the solid
waste or recycling streams.
2. Business and Agricultural sharps
generators may not use the Brown County
Household Sharps Collection Program.
(d) Required Disposal Methods.
1. Home generators shall package
discarded sharps properly to reduce the risk
to the people who will be treating and
handling those sharps. Ch. NR 526 of the
Wis. Adm. Code provides for the safe,
convenient collection of sharps by enabling
hospitals, pharmacies, municipalities, and
others to collect sharps from people, such as
diabetics, who generate small amounts of
needles, syringes and other sharps and such
disposal complies with these regulations.
2. Brown County's Household Sharps
Collection Program has established "sharps
collection stations" to service household
generators of sharps with a need to dispose
of home generated sharps and such disposal
complies with these regulations.
3. Business and agricultural sharps
generators shall deposit and dispose of
sharps in accordance with applicable state
regulations set forth in Ch. NR 526, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(e) Enforcement and Penalty. As
provided in Section 6.98 (3).
(f) Inspection. For the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with the provisions
of NR 540 Wis. Adm. Code or its successor
chapter and compliance with this ordinance,
any authorized officer, employee, or
representative of the Village, may pursuant
to Wis. Stats. §16.15 and Ch. 287 or its
successor chapters and pursuant to NR 540
Wis. Adm. Code or its successor provisions,
inspect recyclable and solid waste materials
in the Village separated for recycling,
inspect post-consumer waste in the Village
intended for disposal, inspect any recyclable
material collection locations and any other
collection facilities and collection vehicles
in the Village, including any collection areas
for single family, two (2) to four(4)
residential dwelling units, multiple family
dwelling units and non-residential facilities
and properties that are controlled by any
occupants, any contractor of the Village, any
permittee collector, or any other person
participating in any recycling activity in the
Village, any solid waste disposal facilities
and solid waste treatment facilities and, in
addition, inspect any records relating to
recyclable materials activities of any
occupants, any contractor for the Village,
any permitted collectors or other persons in
the Village. These records shall be kept
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 17 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
confidential by the Board when necessary to
protect proprietary information.
(g) No persons who have permits issued
under this section for recyclable and solid
waste material collection may refuse access
to any records or property controlled by that
person related to these recyclable materials
activities in the Village, to any authorized
officer, employee or authorized
representative of the Village who requests
access to the records or property for
purposes of this inspection, and who
presents appropriate credentials. In addition,
no persons with these permits may obstruct,
hamper, or interfere with any such
authorized inspection.
(h) Occupants of the Village and any
person with permits issued by the Village
providing recyclable and solid waste
material collection services in the Village
shall cooperate fully with the Board or its
designees in any inspection of their facilities
or properties. The Board or its designees
shall provide to occupants or other persons
twenty-four (24) hour oral or written notice
prior to inspection of the records, facilities,
or properties unless the Board, by order,
declares that inspections with less or no
notice are necessary to insure compliance by
the occupants or these persons.
6.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY, AND
ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this ordinance,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not
more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) per violation. Failure or refusal
to pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
6-Public Works Page 18 of 18 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 6
Ordinance 2009-15 Amending Section 6
Adopted 6-15-09
Ordinance 2009-23 Amending Section 6.20(17)(a) of the Municipal Code to Add Demolition
Debris to Prohibited Materials for Solid Waste Collection
Adopted 10-5-09
Ordinance 2010-07 Amending 6.20 (4) and 6.01, deleting 6.07 and removing 7.17 and making it
6.07, removing 11.34 (18) and making it 6.08, removing 11.34 (19) and making it 6.09
Adopted 2-1-10
Ordinance 2010-09 Amending Chapter 6 of the Municipal Code Relating to Revising Section
6.08 Snow and Ice Removal and 6.09 Illegal Deposit of Snow and or Other Substances
Adopted 3-15-10
Ordinance 2012-03 Amending Chapter 6 of the Municipal Code
Adopted 6-18-12
Ordinance 2014-07 Amending Chapter 6.20(8)(e) Yard Waste
Adopted 3-17-14
Ordinance 2016-02 Amending Chapter 6.02 Driveways
Adopted 2-1-16
Ordinance 2018-14 Amending Chapter 6 Public Works
Adopted 10-1-18
Ordinance 2020-02 Amending Chapter 6 Public Works
Adopted 2-17-20
Village of Suamico
Chapter 7
7-Natural Resources Page 1 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
NATURAL RESOURCES
7.01 Parks and Recreation Facilities ........................................................................................ 1
7.02 Suamico Harbor Regulations ............................................................................................ 5
7.03 Establishment of 40-Foot Free Zone ................................................................................ 5
7.04 Anchoring ........................................................................................................................... 6
7.05 Mooring Permit Required; Limitations ........................................................................... 6
7.06 Establishment of Pier Head............................................................................................... 7
7.07 Damage to Installations ..................................................................................................... 7
7.08 Duty of Render Aid ............................................................................................................ 7
7.09 Littering and Refuse on Waters........................................................................................ 7
7.10 Mufflers ............................................................................................................................... 7
7.11 Power Launching ............................................................................................................... 7
7.12 Suamico River Speed Restrictions & Postings ................................................................ 7
7.13 Duties ................................................................................................................................... 8
7.14 Water Quality ..................................................................................................................... 8
7.15 Bulkhead ............................................................................................................................. 8
7.16 Regulating the Planting and Maintenance of Suamico’s Urban Forest...................... 10
7.99 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement......................................................................... 16
7.01 PARKS AND RECREATION
FACILITIES.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this
chapter is to regulate the use of the facilities
and property under the jurisdiction of the
Village Park, Forestry, Trails, & Recreation
Committee. The term "park" as used in this
chapter shall include all Village parks,
Village boat ramps, and such other facilities
and property that is presently or may
hereafter be placed under the advisory
jurisdiction of the Village Park, Forestry,
Trails, & Recreation Committee or Harbor
Commission as expressly addressed in Wis.
Stats. §30.38.
(2) General Restrictions. No person or
group using a park shall perform or permit
others under their custody or control to
perform any of the following acts:
(a) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure,
injure, tamper with, displace or remove, any
trees, plants, or other natural features,
buildings, bridges, tables, benches,
fireplaces, railings, signs, monuments,
stakes, posts or other markers, other
structures, equipment, facilities,
improvements, or park property, or parts or
appurtenances thereof whatsoever, either
real or personal.
(b) Throw, discharge, or otherwise place
or cause to be placed in the waters of any
fountain, pond, lake, stream, river, bay, or
other body of water or on the ice thereof in
or adjacent to any park, any substance,
matter, or thing, liquid, or solid which will
or may result in the pollution or alteration of
the environment of said waters.
(c) Engage in violent, abusive, indecent,
profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud, or
otherwise disorderly conduct under
circumstances in which such conduct tends
to cause or provoke a disturbance or would
be offensive or disruptive to other users of
the parks.
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 2 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
(d) Endanger the safety of or damage
the property of any person by any conduct or
act.
(e) Violate any rule for the use of the
park established by the Village Park,
Forestry, Trails, & Recreation Committee.
(f) Prevent any person from using any
park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with
such use which is in compliance with this
section and the rules applicable to such use.
(g) No person shall pluck or cause
injury to any flowers, plants, shrubs, or trees
growing in any park.
(h) No person shall mistreat any bird or
fowl or injure or remove any nests.
(i) No person shall injure, deface,
destroy, steal, take, or carry away any
equipment used in or about the parks.
(3) Hours of Operation.
(a) All parks shall be closed to the
general public from 10 p.m. to 8 a.m. and it
shall be unlawful for any person or group to
occupy or be present in any park during
hours in which the park is not open to the
public, except where a special permit or
permission in writing has been granted by
the Park, Forestry, Trails, & Recreation
Committee or Public Works Director for a
group to conduct an activity or use specific
facilities or buildings for an activity which
extends beyond the regular closing hours.
(b) Any park or part thereof may be
declared closed to the public by the Park,
Forestry, Trails, & Recreation Committee or
Public Works Director at any time and for
any interval of time, either temporarily or at
regular or stated intervals. It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter or be
present in any park or portion thereof, which
has been closed to the public.
(4) Fires.
(a) No person or group shall build or
maintain a fire in any park, except in grills,
fireplaces, or fire rings specifically provided
for that purpose.
(b) No person or group shall leave a fire
unattended, and all fires shall be
extinguished before leaving the area.
(5) Refuse.
(a) No person or group shall bring in,
dump or deposit, any bottles, broken glass,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage, or refuse or other trash in any park
or leave such materials therein except in
receptacles provided for this purpose.
(b) Charcoal residue is to be left in the
fireplace or grill or placed in a charcoal
disposal container when provided.
(c) Where receptacles for rubbish are
not provided, all waste shall be carried away
from the park by the person responsible for
its presence.
(d) Where receptacles for rubbish,
waste, trash, or other refuse are provided for
persons using park facilities, no person shall
leave, deposit, or place any such refuse or
household garbage not generated by use of
the park's facilities, in or near such park
receptacles or anywhere on the premises of
any park. For purposes of this subsection
the term "household garbage" means those
discarded materials resulting from the
handling, processing, storage, and
consumption of food and all other materials
produced from community life which have
not been generated by the use of park
facilities.
(6) Firearms, Bows, Trapping.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to
have in his or her possession or under his or
her control any firearm, air-gun, slingshot,
bows, or spring-loaded device designed for
shooting a projectile unless the same is
unloaded and enclosed in a carrying case, or
any bow unless the same is unstrung or
enclosed in a carrying case, or have in his or
her possession a trap(s) which can be used
for trapping animals. No person shall take,
catch, kill, trap, pursue, or otherwise disturb
any wild animals or birds in any park.
(b) In those parks or portions thereof
designated by official action of the Park,
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 3 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
Forestry, Trails, & Recreation Committee
and properly posted by the Public Works
Director where tree stands are allowed, the
stands must be removed at the end of each
day and no vegetation shall be cut or cleared
when erecting or removing such a stand.
Tree stands shall bear the name and address
of the owner.
(c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit
the use of the aforementioned weapons on
designated target ranges in parks or other
designated areas therein. Further, nothing in
this section shall prohibit deer hunting
during open seasons in such parks or
portions thereof as may be designated by the
Park, Forestry, Trails, & Recreation
Committee.
(7) Pets. Dogs, cats, and other similar
domestic pets and exotic animals shall not
be permitted in any park area in the Village.
No pets shall be allowed in buildings or
picnic areas. Certified service animals and
police authorized animals are exempt from
this section.
(8) Horses. No person shall bring a
horse into or ride a horse in any park except
that horseback riding shall be permitted in
areas specially designed for horses.
(9) Motor Vehicles.
(a) No person shall drive or park a
motor vehicle, including snowmobiles and
ATVs, in any park, except on such roads or
parking lots specially designated for the use
of motor vehicles.
(b) No person shall operate a motor
vehicle at a speed in excess of fifteen (15)
miles per hour or in excess of any other
posted speed limit while in a park.
(c) No person shall operate a motor
vehicle in a reckless or imprudent manner or
in any manner which may tend to create a
disturbance or endanger the safety of
persons using the parks or property therein.
(10) Snowmobiles.
(a) Snowmobiles shall not be operated in
any park except on trails specially marked,
opened, and designated for snowmobile use.
(b) Snowmobiles shall not be operated
in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour
except where other speed limits are posted.
(c) On trails that have been marked and
designated for one-way traffic snowmobiles
shall be operated only in the direction so
designated.
(11) Off-the-Road Vehicles. No
person shall ride or operate, or permit a
child to operate, any bicycle, mini-bike, trail
bike, all-terrain vehicle or other vehicle
except in areas specially designated for their
use.
(12) Hunting and Fishing.
(a) Except as herein provided, no
hunting shall be permitted in any park.
(b) Fishing shall be permitted, except in
such areas as are specially posted as being
closed to fishing.
(c) No person shall discard any fish,
animal, or part thereof on any park property
or in any receptacle located in any park.
(13) Molesting Animals. No person
shall molest, disturb, chase, or throw objects
at any animal or bird within any park.
(14) Food and Beverages.
(a) No person or group shall use any
portion of the picnic areas or the buildings
or structures therein for the purpose of
holding picnics to the exclusion of other
persons without a written permit.
(b) Employees shall be authorized to
regulate the activities in such areas when
necessary to prevent congestion and to
secure the maximum use and enjoyment by
the public of such facilities.
(c) Excessive use of alcoholic beverages
shall be prohibited in all parks, and any
person or group who, in the opinion of
authorized park personnel or law
enforcement officer, has become intoxicated
or has consumed alcoholic beverages to the
extent that the person or group interferes
with the use of the park by others shall be
required to leave the park.
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 4 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
(15) Group Activities. Groups and
organizations shall obtain a permit from the
Clerk to use specific park facilities or
buildings for a particular event. The Clerk
shall establish such rules and regulations as
it deems necessary for the issuance of such
permits and may charge a fee or require a
deposit as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board to ensure the
premises are left in good order.
(16) Other Activities. No person or
group shall engage in ball games or other
sport activities, except in such areas as are
designed for those purposes or in such areas
where such activity will not interfere with
the use and enjoyment of the park by others.
(17) Sales. No person or group shall
vend, sell, or offer for sale any food,
beverage, or other commodity or article
within any park to the public without written
authorization from the Park, Forestry, Trails,
& Recreation Committee or the Park
Director.
(18) Signs. No person or group shall
paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign,
placard, or advertisement, or distribute any
handbills, pamphlets or other materials, or
solicit business of any nature in any park
without written authorization from the Park,
Forestry, Trails, & Recreation Committee or
Park Director.
(19) Camping. No camping shall be
permitted in any park, except as specifically
approved by the Park, Forestry, Trails, &
Recreation Committee for special events. A
fee as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board may be associated with the special
event to be determined by the needs of the
event. The Park, Forestry, Trails, &
Recreation Committee shall adopt
regulations for the camp ground, and any
camper who disobeys these regulations may
be required to leave the park.
(20) Metal Detectors. No person shall
operate a metal detector in any park without
a written permit from the Park, Forestry,
Trails & Recreation Committee or Park
Director.
(21) Noise. No person shall make or
assist in making any noise tending to
unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of
persons in the vicinity thereof unless the
making and continuing of the same cannot
be prevented and is necessary for the
protection or preservation of property or of
the health, safety, life, or limb of some
person.
(22) Additional Rules and
Regulations. The Park, Forestry, Trails, &
Recreation Committee is authorized to
enforce the rules, regulations, and policies of
the Board as may be necessary for the
management of parks and the uses thereof.
It shall also be the duty of the Park,
Forestry, Trails, & Recreation Committee to
develop and recommend additional rules,
regulations, and policies to the Board as may
be necessary for the improved management
of parks and the uses thereof.
(23) Trespass.
(a) The Park, Forestry, Trails, &
Recreation Committee, Park Director, or
Police Department may eject a person from
all Village parks for a period of time if that
person violates park rules, Village Code, or
state laws in a Village park. Appeals can be
made to the Board or its designee.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a person to
enter a Village park during the period of
ejection under Sub. (a) above.
(24) Parental Violation. A parent,
guardian, or other person having custody of
an un-emancipated minor child, who has
been advised of the child’s ejection from the
Village parks, may be cited if the child
trespasses in a Village park in violation of
Sub. 23(b) above. Citations may be issued
under this subsection regardless of whether
the child is cited. “Custody” has the same
meaning as in Wis. Stats. §895.035(1)(a)
and (b).
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 5 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
7.02 SUAMICO HARBOR
REGULATIONS.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Board. The Village Board of the
Village of Suamico.
(b) Harbor. Suamico River Harbor.
(c) Harbor Commission. The body
appointed under the Village Charter
Ordinance holding all of the powers
authorized to Park, Forestry, Trails, &
Recreation Committee pursuant to the
Village Charter Ordinance.
(d) Mooring. Means a mooring anchor
and mooring buoy together with attached
chains, cables, ropes, and pennants and
related equipment, unless the term is
qualified or restricted.
(e) Mooring anchor. Any anchor or
weight which is designed to rest on the bed
or to be buried in the bed of navigable water,
which is designed to be attached by a chain,
cable, rope, or other mechanism to a
mooring buoy and which is designed to be
left in position permanently or on a seasonal
basis.
(f) Nuisance. Any mooring, mooring
anchor, or mooring buoy which is placed or
used in violation of this ordinance
constitutes a public nuisance. The Village
shall remove unlawful moorings as provided
under and pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0495.
(g) Pier. A raised walkway over water
supported by piles or floats.
(h) Power loading. The practice of
putting on or taking off, from a trailer,
carriage, or device, a watercraft while under
motor power, whether by main, auxiliary, or
trolling power devices.
(i) Suamico River Harbor. That portion
of the Suamico River from the Side Street
railroad trestle east to the end of the Federal
Channel in the Bay of Green Bay as
determined by the U.S. Coastguard Buoy #1.
The Inner Harbor is defined as: that portion
of the Suamico River from the Side Street
railroad trestle east to its confluence with the
Bay of Green Bay as defined by U.S. Coast
Guard Buoy #1. The Outer Harbor is
defined as: that portion of the Suamico
River in the Federal Channel from its
confluence with the Bay of Green Bay at
U.S. Coastguard Buoy #1, east to the end of
the Federal Channel in the Bay of Green
Bay as determined by the U.S. Coastguard
Buoy #1.
(j) Unsafe loading practice. The
practice of launching or loading a watercraft
that is done in such a manner as to either put
participants or others, or the property of
participants or others, at risk of injury or
damage, and/or such loading procedure is
done in such a way that the actions tend to
create a disturbance in a public place as is
prohibited by appropriate sections of the
Suamico Municipal Code.
(k) Watercraft. All motorized and
non-motorized boats, personal watercraft,
hydroplanes, amphibious vehicles, jet skis,
sailboats, hovercraft, or any other craft or
vehicle used upon the water.
(l) Wharf. Is defined as a fixed platform
roughly parallel to and alongside navigable
water used for mooring and loading
purposes.
(2) Applicability. This section shall
apply to the Suamico River Harbor in its
entirety and as authorized by Wis. Stats.
§30.772-30.773.
(3) State Boating and Safety Laws
Adopted. State boating and mooring laws
as found in Wis. Stats. §30.50, through and
including §30.71 and Wis. Stats. §30.772 are
hereby adopted by reference.
7.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF 40-FOOT
FREE ZONE.
(a) Policy. Wis. Stats. §30.772 (3)
allows the governing body of a municipality
with jurisdiction over navigable waters to
adopt local regulations relative to the
placement and use of moorings including the
distance between moorings, properly
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 6 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
marked and established traffic lanes, the safe
distance of moored boats from any other
moored boat or structures including piers,
rafts, docks, and wharves.
The Board finds that to ensure the
freedom of river traffic and navigation a
width of forty feet (40’), an area equal in
distance from both river banks as defined by
the bulkhead line shall remain free of
obstructions, both permanent and temporary.
However, the width and alignment of said
forty-foot (40’) free zone may be modified
as deemed appropriate by the Harbor
Commission.
(b) Prohibition and Exceptions.
1. Boats, rafts, and barges affixed to
structures abutting the free zone may not
extend beyond the end of said structure.
2. Boats, rafts, and barges affixed to the
river bank may not extend into the free zone.
3. The free zone may be used for fishing
providing the navigation of the river is not
blocked.
7.04 ANCHORING.
(1) Dragging Anchors. No person
while operating a boat in the Harbor limits
shall permit the boat anchor to drag on the
bottom of the Harbor.
(2) Anchoring in Traffic Lanes. No
person shall anchor any boat in the fortyfoot
(40’) free zone of the Harbor so as to
prevent, impede, or interfere with the safe
passage of any boat through the anchoring.
7.05 MOORING PERMIT REQUIRED;
LIMITATIONS. The intent of the Village
in establishing an authorized mooring area is
to provide safe and healthful beneficial
conditions for the enjoyment of aquatic
recreation consistent with public rights and
interest within the capabilities of the water
resource.
(1) Any person erecting, installing,
maintaining, or exercising control over a
freestanding mooring within the Harbor
shall obtain a mooring permit in accordance
with Wis. Stats. §30.772-30.773.
(2) Any person applying for a mooring
permit shall also:
(a) Demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Harbor Commission that a need for the
mooring exists by:
1. Furnishing the Harbor Commission
with proof of boat registration for each
mooring requested, or
2. For persons owning boats not
requiring registration, proof of boat
ownership for each mooring requested; or
3. By showing that circumstances exist
which require that a mooring be available
for intermittent or temporary use; and
4. By verifying that no other viable and
safe alternative exists for securing the boat
in question; and
5. Show to the satisfaction of Park,
Forestry, Trails, & Recreation Committee
that the petitioner has legal access over land
to such mooring; and
6. Show to the satisfaction of Park,
Forestry, Trails, & Recreation Committee
that such mooring will not be sold or leased.
(b) Furnish any additional information
required by the Harbor Commission to
determine that a proposed mooring meets
the requirements of this section.
(c) Duration. No mooring shall be
placed prior to the third (3rd) Saturday in
April. Moorings must be removed by
November 15 of each year, and all moorings
not so removed, and any other illegal
moorings at any time, will be removed in
accordance with Wis. Stats. §30.13(5m).
(d) It shall be illegal for a permittee,
without approval of the Harbor Commission,
to move or cause to be moved a mooring
that has been approved in a particular
location.
(e) The Harbor Commission shall not
deny a mooring permit to any person, or
place any limitations on the type of craft
permitted at a mooring, when reasonable
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 7 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
need exists, there is no opposition from
abutters, and there is no evidence that the
mooring will not unreasonably obstruct
navigation or interfere with the public rights
and interests in the navigable waters or with
the rights of other riparian owners.
(3) Prohibited Moorings. Mooring
shall not be permitted:
(a) Within the confines of the Suamico
River;
(b) In such a manner that would
impinge on the lawful rights or ability of
adjacent riparian owners to pursue or engage
in activities related to riparian ownership;
(c) To a public wharf or pier for reasons
other than loading or unloading.
7.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF PIER
HEAD. In areas where the channel is near
one (1) shoreline where boatlifts, piers,
docks, or similar structures extend into the
channel, the Suamico Harbor Commission
shall retain the ability and authority to
establish a pier head line(s) in the event that
navigation is compromised due to extended
periods of low water or as deemed
appropriate.
7.07 DAMAGE TO INSTALLATIONS.
No person shall carelessly, willfully, or
negligently operate a boat or permit a boat to
be so operated so as to cause it to run into
any bridge or bridge abutments, piers, signs,
buoys, or docks of the Harbor and
waterways of the Village. Any violator of
this section, in addition to the penalty
imposed for violation in Section 7.99, shall
be liable for all resulting damages to such
installations.
7.08 DUTY OF RENDER AID. Insofar as
he or she can do without serious danger to
his or her own boat or persons on board, the
operator of a boat involved in a boating
accident shall stop his or her boat and shall
render to other persons affected thereby such
assistance as may be practicable and
necessary to save them from or minimize
any danger caused by the accident. The boat
operator shall give his name and address and
identification of his or her boat to any
person injured and to the owner of any
property damaged in the accident.
7.09 LITTERING AND REFUSE ON
WATERS. No person shall throw or
deposit any type of debris or waste material
into any portion of the Inner Harbor, Outer
Harbor, marina, or any other water of the
state.
7.10 MUFFLERS. The engine of every
motorboat propelled by an internal
combustion engine shall be equipped with a
muffler which meets Wis. Stats. §30.62(2).
7.11 POWER LAUNCHING.
(1) It shall be unlawful for anyone to
launch, load, or embark a watercraft with
either an unsafe loading practice or in using
a power loading method of loading or
launching the watercraft at any launch site
under the jurisdiction of the Harbor
Commission.
7.12 SUAMICO RIVER SPEED
RESTRICTIONS & POSTINGS.
Watercraft shall be operated in a manner
consistent with the slow no wake and speed
regulations as defined and regulated in the
most current edition of the Wisconsin State
Boating Regulations. Slow no wake means
that speed at which a boat moves as slowly
as possible while still maintaining steerage
control. Watercraft speed shall be such that
the wake created does not cause undue
endangerment to other watercraft nor shall
the wake have an unnecessary negative
impact on the shoreline, piers, or moorings.
Speed shall also be so controlled as to avoid
colliding with any object, person, or
conveyance lawfully in or on the water.
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 8 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
7.13 DUTIES. It shall be the responsibility
of the Harbor Commission to maintain a
navigable channel free from debris and
unauthorized traffic, mooring, dockage, and
anchorage. The Harbor Commission shall
have the ability to request and utilize
assistance and expertise from any other
Village department or law enforcement body
to aid in upholding the duties described
herein.
7.14 WATER QUALITY. The Board and
Harbor Commission hereby adopt NR 215,
Wisconsin Administrative Code
283.13(2)(b) and (c), and 283.21(1)(b) and
(d) as well as United States Code 33, 1251 –
1376 to protect the water quality of the
Suamico River, Lake Michigan, and Bay of
Green Bay.
(1) Fertilizers, pesticides, or any other
chemical or substance designated a pollutant
by NR 215 shall be utilized within the
parameters of current best practices and
current technology.
(2) Chemical use by governmental
bodies pursuing elimination of invasive
species shall be exempt from this section.
7.15 BULKHEAD.
(1) Establishment. The Village elects
to exercise its authority under Wis. Stats.
§30.11 (1) and establish a bulkhead line as
described;
1. A bulkhead line along the northerly
shore of the Suamico River, said bulkhead
line being in the Village, Brown County,
Wisconsin, more particularly described as
follows:
The bulkhead line is located in part of
Sections 14, 22, 23, and 24, Township 25
North, Range 20 East, Village, Brown
County, Wisconsin described as follows:
Commencing at an existing Brown
County monument marking a meander
corner on the North line of Section 24,
Township 25 North, Range 20 East, thence
S 7Deg-21'-56" E 1,099.95 feet; thence S
68Deg-42'-56" E 193.13 feet to a 2" Iron
Pipe; thence continuing S 68Deg-42'-56" E.
31.00 feet to the point of beginning of said
Bulkhead Line; thence S 38Deg-57'-19" W
40.68 feet; thence N 74Deg-35'-40" W
172.45 feet; thence N 3Deg-55'-36" W 29.83
feet; thence N 73Deg-49'-00" W 75.36 feet
thence; N 56Deg-09'-30" W 64.56 feet;
thence N 70Deg-57'-59" W 311.42 feet;
thence N 85Deg-08'-53" W 76.40 feet;
thence S 82Deg-49'-50" W 234.90 feet;
thence S 88Deg-04'-58" W 183.99 feet to a
chiseled cross in a limestone rock marking a
break point in the Bulkhead Line; thence N
83Deg-42'-30" W 58.54 feet to a chiseled
cross in a limestone rock marking the
resumption of the Bulkhead Line; thence S
57Deg-17'-37" W 239.90 feet; thence S
40Deg-55'-04" W 237.16 feet; thence S
64Deg-30'-03" W 151.03 feet; thence N
85Deg-32'-45" W 85.82 feet; thence N
75Deg-11'-41" W 31.83 feet to a 1" Iron
Pipe marking a break point in the Bulkhead
Line; thence N 77Deg-27'-28" W 2,020.17
feet to a 1" Iron Pipe marking the
resumption of the Bulkhead Line; thence N
75Deg-25'-16" W 165.21 feet; thence N
65Deg-36'-50" W 99.21 feet; thence N
55Deg-53'-59" W 253.96 feet; thence N
47Deg-18'-52" W 262.98 feet; thence N
47Deg-33'-37" W 96.58 feet; thence N
48Deg-47'-08" W 145.60 feet; thence N
54Deg-33'-46" W 83.16 feet; thence N
56Deg-31'-46" W 110.77 feet; thence N
72Deg-28'-08" W 35.63 feet; thence N
57Deg-29'-07" W 192.39 feet; thence N
70Deg-55'-46" W 110.94 feet; thence S
88Deg-31'-32" W 102.63 feet; thence S
68Deg-36'-11" W 141.63 feet; thence S
52Deg-50'-55" W 166.82 feet; thence S
48Deg-48'-26" W 135.79 feet; thence S
82Deg-37'-11" W 43.65 feet; thence N
19Deg-09'-16" W 61.43 feet; thence N
00Deg-47'-42" W 99.07 feet; thence N
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 9 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
07Deg-16'-42" E 161.46 feet; thence N
27Deg-53'-25" W 40.33 feet; thence N
57Deg-16'-52" W 111.21 feet; thence S
79Deg-22'-49" W 119.71 feet to a 1-1/2"
Iron Pipe marking a break point in the
Bulkhead Line; thence S 84Deg-46'-30" W
2,005.06 feet to a 1" Iron pipe marking the
resumption of the Bulkhead Line; thence N
46Deg-31'-11" W 161.83 feet; thence N
64Deg-42'-23" W 70.95 feet to a 1" Iron
Pipe marking a break point in the Bulkhead
Line; thence S 43Deg-43'-49" W 1,776.23
feet to a 1" Iron Pipe marking the
resumption of the Bulkhead Line; thence S
30Deg-24'-42" W 158.97 feet; thence S
30Deg-58'-41" W 104.08 feet; thence S
45Deg-59'-42" W 67.79 feet; thence S
70Deg-09'-26" W 79.31 feet; thence S
76Deg-19'-28" W 92.45 feet; thence S
85Deg-39'-50" W 86.50 feet; thence N
85Deg-53'-54" W 98.76 feet; thence N
73Deg-58'-43" W 108.13 feet; thence N
62Deg-09'-20" W 107.60 feet; thence N
60Deg-14'-22" W 104.35 feet; thence N
57Deg-01'-15" W 201.01 feet; thence N
49Deg-41'-14" W 56.48 feet; thence N
42Deg-09'-18" W 111.38 feet; thence N
33Deg-01'-16" W 54.12 feet; thence N
36Deg-12'-58" W 71.04 feet; thence N
32Deg-34'-51" W 87.25 feet; thence N
57Deg-28'-28" W 74.10 feet; thence S
80Deg-00'-28" W 80.81 feet; thence N
81deg-02'-26" W 95.85 feet; thence S
75Deg-59'-18" W 44.48 feet; thence N
85Deg-21'-52" W 43.72 feet; thence S
73Deg-13'-30" W 81.40 feet; thence N
88Deg-51'-45" W 94.93 feet to a point
which is S 27Deg-34'-37" W 27.00 feet from
a 2" Iron Pipe marking the end of this
Bulkhead Line.
2. A bulkhead line along the southerly
shore of the Suamico River, said bulkhead
line being in the Village, Brown County,
Wisconsin, more particularly described as
follows:
The bulkhead line is located in part of
Sections 14, 22, 23 and 24, Township 25
North, Range 20 East, Village, Brown
County, Wisconsin described as follows:
Commencing at an existing Brown
County monument marking a meander
corner on the North Line of Section 24,
Township 25 North, Range 20 East; thence
S 7Deg-21'-56" E 1,099.95 feet; thence N
49Deg-03'-31" E 129.85 feet to a 2" Iron
Pipe; thence continuing N 49Deg-03'-31" E
36.87 feet to the point of beginning of said
Bulkhead Line; thence N 32Deg-50'-33" W
62.45 feet; thence N 56Deg-37'-46" W
177.35 feet; thence N 64Deg-02'-53" W
151.13 feet to the start of an existing
established Bulkhead Line; thence N 63Deg-
03'-49" W 50.00 feet to the end of the
existing Bulkhead Line; thence N 64Deg-
09'-56" W 56.28 feet; thence N 78Deg-22'-
14" W 63.98 feet; thence S 59Deg-44'-57"
W 7.51 feet; thence N 86Deg-09'-43" W
168.43 feet; thence S 87Deg-14'-13" W
218.41 feet; thence N 83Deg-42'-44" W
75.22 feet; thence S 81Deg-00'-17" W
127.45 feet; thence S 43Deg-23'-15" W
197.97 feet; thence S 42deg-34'-27" W
109.90 feet; thence S 50Deg-20'-06" W
84.37 feet; thence S 58Deg-41'-00" W
109.05 Feet; thence S 71Deg-37'-42" W
75.43 feet; thence S 83Deg-31'-55" W
177.42 feet; thence N 79Deg-06'-58" W
67.73 feet; thence N 67Deg-25'-00" W
130.00 feet; thence N 67Deg-17'-58" W
109.59 feet; thence N 39Deg-41'-32" W
101.08 feet; thence N 76Deg-06'-41" W
84.68 feet; thence N 60Deg-30'-42" W
318.47 feet; thence N 73Deg-10'-50" W
193.77 feet; thence N 85Deg-46'-37" W
349.12 feet; thence S 80Deg-06'-50" W
254.24 feet; thence N 82Deg-15'-55" W
180.99 feet; thence N 80Deg-44'-36" W
188.81 feet; thence N 73Deg-48'-29" W
308.32 feet; thence N 58Deg-06'-00" W
379.82 feet to a 1" Iron Pipe marking a
break point in the Bulkhead Line; thence N
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 10 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
47Deg-08'-31" W 509.21 feet to a 1" Iron
Pipe marking the resumption of the
Bulkhead Line; thence N 48Deg-14'-11" W
127.99 feet; thence N 59Deg-16'-00" W
144.18 feet to the start of an existing
established Bulkhead Line; thence N 44Deg-
14'-38" W 55.08 feet; thence N 51Deg-51'-
54" W 15.00 feet; thence N 76Deg-50'-25"
W 105.00 feet to the end of the existing
Bulkhead Line; thence S 89Deg-49'-00" W
60.38 feet; thence S 68deg-05'-33" W
199.59 feet; thence S 52deg-44'-48" W
232.40 feet; thence S 76Deg-12'-10" W
148.43 feet; thence N 60Deg-22'-55" W
58.52 feet; thence N 21Deg-01'-27" W
114.61 feet; thence N 10Deg-02'-38" E
47.82 feet; thence N 8Deg-56'-20" E 86.11
feet; thence N 17Deg-27'-13" E 101.03 feet;
thence n 62deg-19'-47" W 35.90 feet; thence
S 82Deg-41'-32" W 37.47 feet; thence S
58Deg-13'-19" W 175.42 feet; thence S
64Deg-02'-33" W 65.00 feet; thence S
54deg-35'-17" W 94.55 feet; thence S
51deg-11'-26" W 32.98 feet; thence S
77Deg-28'-49" W 60.81 feet; thence N
59deg-54'-47" W 22.53 feet; thence S
73Deg-40'-07" W 59.92 feet; thence S
53Deg-03'-53" W 38.47 feet; thence S
85Deg-04'-53" W 77.12 feet; thence N
77Deg-38'-17" W 190.38 feet; thence S
80deg-33'-31" W 41.38 feet; thence N
71Deg-59'-06" W 116.05 feet; thence N
30Deg-47'-50" W 34.59 feet; thence N
87Deg-11'-00" W 58.27 feet; thence S
18Deg-36'-52" W 76.16 feet; thence S
36Deg-45'-09" W 86.12 feet; thence S
44Deg-31'-02" W 146.71 feet; thence S
50Deg-43'-41" W 99.19 feet to the start of
an existing established Bulkhead Line;
thence S 58Deg-47'-35" W 87.35 feet;
thence S 47Deg-56'-55" W 119.04 feet;
thence S 63Deg-53'-26" W 152.00 feet to
the end of the existing Bulkhead Line;
thence S 59Deg-05'-36" W 36.19 feet to a 1"
Iron Pipe marking a break point in the
Bulkhead Line; thence S 79deg-56'-06" W
1,068.04 feet to a 1" Iron Pipe marking the
resumption of the Bulkhead Line; thence S
48Deg-54'-33" E 156.30 feet; thence S
18Deg-04'-31" E 60.21 feet; thence S
26Deg-46'-41" W 58.31 feet to a 1" Iron
Pipe marking a break point in the Bulkhead
Line; thence S 71Deg-44'-27" W 1,073.75
feet to a 1" Iron Pipe marking the
resumption of the Bulkhead Line; thence S
27Deg-57'-39" W 92.98 feet; thence S
41Deg-24'-26" W 48.67 feet; thence S
65Deg-17'-00" W 127.78 feet; thence S
76Deg-44'-24" W 113.42 feet; thence S
76Deg-41'-45" W 115.86 feet; thence N
78Deg-01'-59" W 198.31 feet; thence N
62Deg-43'-37" W 119.72 feet; thence N
54Deg-25'-30" W 75.56 feet; thence N
56Deg-45'-51" W 238.82 feet; thence N
53Deg-03'-43" W 136.78 feet; thence N
38Deg-20'-35" W 133.22 feet; thence N
40Deg-01'-53" W 122.02 feet; thence N
60Deg-12'-21" W 99.90 feet; thence N
75Deg-22'-11" W 54.60 feet; thence S
85Deg-52'-28" W 140.98 feet; thence S
73Deg-00'-55" W 87.51 feet; thence N
87Deg-52'-26" W 102.88 feet to a point
which is N 27Deg-34'-37" E 24.00 feet from
a 2" Iron Pipe marking the end of this
Bulkhead Line.
(2) Procedure. The above described
bulkhead line has been established pursuant
to the procedure set forth in Wis. Stats.
§30.11 (3) which is hereby made a part of
this section and is incorporated herein by
reference as though fully set forth herein.
7.16 REGULATING THE PLANTING
AND MAINTENANCE OF SUAMICO’S
URBAN FOREST.
(1) Intent. It is the intent of this section
to exercise jurisdiction in regard to the
planting, maintenance and removal of trees,
shrubs and vegetation growing in public
places in the Village, and to define public
nuisances and provide for the abatement of
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 11 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
such nuisances as they would pertain to
parks, rights-of-way and forestry.
(2) Definitions. For purposes of this
section;
(a) Public Trees, Shrubs, or Vegetation.
Trees, shrubs, or vegetation on or in that part
of every street, the grade of which has been
established, lying between the lot line and
the curb, or in the center or side lots in all
boulevards, tree banks and parkways, and in
all public parks or grounds belonging to the
Village or on any other public right-of-way,
property, land lease for public use, or
easement of any kind.
(b) Village. The Village.
(c) Forester. The designated Village
Official assigned to carry out the
enforcement of this section.
(d) Clear Vision Triangle. A triangularshaped
parcel of land established at street
intersections wherein no object which
exceeds thirty inches (30”) above the
engineered elevation of the centerline of the
road shall be erected, placed, planted, or
allowed to exist in such a manner as to limit
or obstruct the site distance of motorists,
bicyclists, and/or pedestrians entering or
leaving the intersection.
(e) Public Area. That part of every
street, highway, roadway, or alley between
the lot line and the curb also known as the
right-of-way (ROW) and any other land
owned or controlled by the Village.
(f) Street Tree. Any tree located in a
terrace.
(g) Terrace. That part of every street
between the lot line and the curb line or
paved travel surface.
(h) Committee. The Park, Forestry,
Trails & Recreation Committee.
(i) Trunk Diameter. Tree diameter
measured fifty-four inches (54”) above the
ground level commonly referred to as
diameter at breast height (DBH).
(3) Public Nuisances Defined.
(a) All trees, hedges, or any other
obstruction which prevent persons driving
vehicles on public streets, alleys or
highways from obtaining a clear view of
traffic when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk.
(b) All tree limbs which project over
and less than nine feet (9’) above any public
sidewalk, fourteen feet (14’) above any
street, or impose on the visibility of traffic
signage.
(c) All trees which are a menace to
public safety or are the cause of substantial
annoyance to the general public.
(d) Noxious weeds as defined in Wis.
Stat. §66.0407(1)(b) and or Section 6.07(1)
relating to weed control in the Village.
(e) Any pest or disease which causes or
has the potential to cause damage to any
group or species of tree.
(f) Invasive and undesirable tree species
shall include buckthorn, box elder, and
cottonwood. The same shall not be sold,
distributed, planted or cultivated however
existing trees of greater than six inch (6”)
truck diameter will be grandfathered. Trunk
diameter shall be measured fifty-four inches
(54”) above the ground.
(g) The Director of Public Works,
Forester, or Police Department is hereby
empowered to enter upon private property
within the Village for the purpose of
inspecting all trees thereon to determine
whether any of such trees are infected or
diseased or in need of preventative
measures; and is further empowered to
inspect such private premises to determine
the presence of any infected logs, firewood
or stumps or the presence of any dead elm
trees, elm logs, elm firewood or elm stumps.
(4) Designation of Authority. Park,
Forestry, Trails, & Recreation Committee,
together with the Forester, as appointed by
the Board, is granted the authority to
administer this code under Wis. Stat. §27.09.
The Forester under the auspice of the
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 12 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
Suamico Park, Forestry, Trails, &
Recreation Committee shall be responsible
for the enforcement of this section and shall
have the duty to carry out all of the
provisions of this section.
(a) Village Forester, Powers and
Duties. The Forester is hereby directed and
given the right to maintain any tree or shrub
in any public place to preserve a function or
beauty of such public place in accordance
with the art of good arboriculture. The
Forester shall have the authority to trim,
remove, prune, spray, fertilize or otherwise
treat any tree or shrub on any public place
when in the opinion of the Forester such
treatment will promote the general welfare,
improve the appearance of the Village or
alleviate unsafe conditions.
(b) The Forester shall have jurisdiction,
authority, control and supervision over all
trees, shrubs and vegetation growing in
public areas to include, but not be limited to,
planting, removal, maintenance and
protection.
(c) The Forester shall have the authority
to grant permits relating to Section 7.04 (5)
and Section 7.04 (7), under the provisions of
this section and rules and work standards
adopted hereunder. He or she shall
supervise all work done under any permit
issued under the provisions of this section
and may void any permit if the provisions of
this section are not complied with.
(d) The Forester shall have the authority
to cause any public nuisance applicable to
Section 7.16 to be abated in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
(e) The Forester shall perform such
other duties as are provided by the laws,
rules or regulations of the state, particularly
Wis. Stats. §27.09, and revisions thereof.
(5) Tree Planting Requirements.
(a) Permit Required. No person shall
plant any tree, shrub, or vegetation in a
public area without the written permission of
the Forester. The permit fee shall be set
from time to time by resolution of the
Board.
(b) Master Street Tree List. The Park,
Forestry, Trails, & Recreation Committee
shall prepare a master street tree list
consisting of those trees approved for
planting in and on public areas along with a
determination of site factors to be
considered in selecting trees and placement
of such trees for planting on a particular
street.
(c) Improper Planting a Public
Nuisance. Any tree planted in violation of
this section shall be deemed a public
nuisance and subject to immediate removal.
(6) Tree Planting in New
Development. Residential development
shall establish a planting plan requiring the
following:
(a) In the event that green space is
dedicated it shall require a minimum of
eight (8) trees per acre having a minimum
trunk diameter of two inches (2”) at the time
of planting. A density of less than eight (8)
trees per acre may be considered if site
conditions or planting plans show public
equivalent benefit. Location and species of
planting shall be specified and or approved
by the Forester. The Village reserves the
right to increase the planting density or alter
the planting plan as deemed appropriate to
the development.
(b) Each subdivision shall include in the
covenants thereof a requirement of the
property owner to plant within one (1) year
of occupancy, a minimum of six (6) trees
per acre or a minimum of two (2) trees per
parcel, whichever is greater. Said trees shall
have a minimum trunk diameter of one inch
(1”) at the time of planting. Credit shall
apply for trees existing on a property.
(c) Planting density shall be maintained
by the property owner of record by
replacement of dead or diseased trees within
the seasonal parameters of standard arborist
practices.
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 13 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
(7) Tree Maintenance.
(a) No permit is required to cultivate,
water, fertilize, trim, or prune any public
tree or shrub as a means to attain compliance
with the provisions of this section. All work
shall be in compliance with standard arborist
practices relating to pruning and trimming.
(b) Action to guard the public safety or
clear the public way in the event of a storm,
accident or other emergency shall be
considered community service and is to be
commended.
(c) Any person desiring to remove any
street tree shall apply, in writing, to the
Forester for a permit or permission to do
such work. The application shall specify the
location and description of the proposed
work. If the Forester determines that the
proposed work is necessary and in
compliance with the purposes of this
section, the Forester shall issue the permit or
grant permission to proceed or cause the
work to be done. Any work done under
such permit shall be performed in strict
compliance with the terms thereof. The
Forester shall inspect all work performed.
Permits shall expire three (3) months after
issuance.
(d) Whenever a public utility, its
contractors, or any contractor for the Village
must perform work on or about any public
tree or shrub necessitating the alteration
above or below ground, trimming or
removal of such tree or shrub, a written
permit from the Forester is required, as
provided above. Any person performing
work on a tree in a public place, by permit,
contract or otherwise, shall assume full
responsibility for damage to property and to
any person, and shall save the Village
harmless from any liability thereof.
(e) All trees and shrubs located upon
any public way, or upon any private
premises adjacent to the public way, or any
private road serviced by the Village or a
contractor of the Village shall be kept
trimmed by the property owner so that the
lowest projecting branches provide a
clearance height of not less than nine feet
(9’) above any public sidewalk or fourteen
feet (14’) above any street. The Forester
may waive the provisions of this section for
newly planted or naturally low-profile trees
if the Forester determines that such trees do
not interfere with municipal services, public
travel, obstruction of light from any street
light, obstruct the view of any traffic sign or
signal, or endanger public safety. Each year
a Class 1 notice shall be published in the
Green Bay Press-Gazette informing Village
property owners of the requirements of this
paragraph. Property owners who do not
comply shall be given ten (10) days written
notice to trim the offending trees or the
Village may perform the work and bill the
property owner pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§66.0627.
(8) Protection of Trees. Except as
authorized by written permission from the
Forester, it shall be a violation of this
section to perform or cause to be performed
the following acts in any public place within
the Village:
(a) to attach any sign, poster, handbill,
electrical installation wire or other device or
material to, around or through a tree. This is
not to include recommended measures for
protection against insects, disease, or
deformity.
(b) to permit or cause fire to burn where
it may kill or injure any tree or shrub.
(c) to allow any toxic chemical, smoke,
oil, gas or other substance that may kill or
damage any tree or shrub to come in contact
with its leaves or roots.
(d) to use tree spurs or climbers when
working on or scaling any healthy tree for
any reason or any device which would cause
serious injury to a tree to include screw type
foot pegs and tree stands of a design which
would cause such injury.
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 14 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
(e) to remove any guard, stake, pole or
other device intended for the protection or
stabilization of a public tree, or close or
obstruct any open space around the base of a
public tree designed to permit access to air,
water, and fertilizer.
(f) to erect, alter, repair, raze, or move
any building, structure, or other large object
without placing suitable guards around
public trees which may be injured by such
operations. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner thereof to repair or replace any
tree injured or killed by such operations.
(g) if it is found that the moving of any
tree is necessary to allow for such
operations, the cost of the moving or
replacement shall be borne by the owner of
the project.
(h) to excavate any ditch, tunnel, hole,
trench, or place any drive within the radius
of five feet (5”) from any tree in a public
area except by written permit from the
Forester or when an emergency or
exceptional situation exists.
(i) the Forester may require the posting
of an adequate surety bond or other
sufficient security by any person proposing
to make any such excavation to cover the
cost of replacement of any tree destroyed as
the direct result of the excavation; as
reasonably determined by the Forester.
(j) to damage, injure, remove, or
appropriate for one's own personal or private
use any tree, shrub, or vegetation procured
in whole or in part with public funds, or
planted or growing in a public area unless
scheduled construction work will destroy the
tree, shrub, or vegetation in a project area.
Any resident may request permission to
remove items from a project area prior to
destruction. Rescued items must be utilized
by the individual for personal use and not
for barter or resale.
(k) to prune, cut, or injure oak trees
from April 15 to July 15 as a preventative
measure against the oak wilt disease. If an
oak tree is wounded during this time,
notification of injury must be made to the
Forester immediately.
(l) Topping of trees shall not be
considered an acceptable means of pruning
or maintenance.
(9) Obstruction of View at
Intersections. No person shall plant, grow,
or maintain any tree, shrub, or other
vegetation on any Village street corner lot
within the clear vision triangle which may
obstruct the vision of the operator of any
motor vehicle or pedestrian approaching
such intersection. Any tree, shrub, or other
vegetation obstructing such view between
the heights of two and a half feet (2½’) and
ten feet (10’) above street grade shall be
deemed a public nuisance. Special
conditions shall not restrict the Forester
from deeming a public nuisance for a
condition meeting the parameters of this
subsection.
(a) The Village adopts Wis. Stats.
§195.29(6) to properly and consistently
address view restrictions at railroad
crossings caused by trees and brush.
(10) As a Public Nuisance. Any tree or
shrub or vegetation which is specifically
designated a public nuisance in this section
or part of which is on public property which,
by reason of its condition, interferes with the
use of any public place; is detrimental to the
construction of public improvements; or
endangers the life, health, safety, or welfare
of the public, or properties thereof. Any
tree, or shrub or vegetation which is
diseased, infested, considered invasive, or
deemed undesirable shall be considered a
public nuisance whether publicly or
privately owned and is subject to the
conditions set forth.
(a) No person shall permit any public
nuisance enumerated in this section to
remain on any property owned or controlled
by them, including public areas.
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 15 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
(b) Notice of Public Nuisance.
Whenever the Forester shall find and declare
any tree or shrub a public nuisance, he or
she shall notify the property owner or his or
her agent in writing that the nuisance must
be abated and the procedure required for the
abatement.
(11) Abatement of Public Nuisances.
(a) Enforcement. The Police
Department, Public Works Director, Zoning
Administrator, Fire Chief, Building
Inspector, and Health Officer shall enforce
those provisions of this chapter that come
within the jurisdiction of their offices; they
shall make periodic inspections upon
complaint to insure that such provisions are
not violated. No actions shall be taken
under this section to abate a public nuisance
unless the officer has inspected or caused to
be inspected, the premises where the
nuisance is alleged to exist and has satisfied
himself or herself that a nuisance does in
fact exist. Whenever practicable, the
inspecting officer shall cause photographs to
be made of the premises and shall file the
same in the office of the Clerk.
(b) Summary Abatement. If the
inspecting officer determines that a public
nuisance exists within the Village and that
there is great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals, or
decency, the Administrator may direct the
proper officer to cause the same to be abated
or to remove such nuisance within twentyfour
(24) hours and shall state that unless
such nuisance is so abated, the Village will
cause the same to be abated and will charge
the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or
person causing, permitting, or maintaining
the nuisance, as the case may be.
(c) Abatement by Village. If the
nuisance is not abated within the time
provided, or if the owner, occupant, or
person causing the nuisance cannot be
found, the Administrator shall direct the
proper officer to cause the abatement or
removal of such nuisance.
(d) The charge for the abatement or
removal shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board. If such charges are
not paid by November 1 of the year in which
they are billed, such charges, together with
an additional administrative fee for
collection equal to ten percent (10%) of the
total of such charges and fees, shall be
extended on the next succeeding tax roll as a
tax charged against the property affected,
and collected in the same manner as are
other taxes pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.98.
(e) Abatement after Notice. If the
inspecting officer determines that a public
nuisance exists on private premises but that
such nuisance does not threaten immediate
danger to the public health, safety, peace,
morals, or decency, he or she shall serve
notice on the person causing or maintaining
the nuisance to remove the same within ten
(10) days. If such nuisance is not removed
within ten (10) days, the proper officer shall
cause the nuisance to be removed as
provided in Sub. (3).
(f) Other Methods Not Excluded.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the abatement of public
nuisances by the Village or its officials in
accordance with the laws of the State of
Wisconsin.
(g) Court Order. Except when
necessary under Sub. (3), an officer
hereunder shall not use force to obtain
access to private property to abate a public
nuisance, but shall request permission to
enter upon private property if such premises
are occupied and if such permission is
denied, shall apply to any court having
jurisdiction for an order assisting the
abatement of the public nuisance.
(12) Cost of Abatement. In addition to
any other penalty imposed by this chapter
for the erection, contrivance, creation,
continuance, or maintenance of a public
Village of Suamico
7-Natural Resources Page 16 of 16 Adopted 1-21-08
nuisance, the cost of abating a public
nuisance by the Village shall be collected as
a debt from the owner, occupant, or person
causing, permitting, or maintaining the
nuisance; and if notice to abate the nuisance
has been given to the owner, such costs shall
be assessed against the real estate as a
special charge.
(a) No damages shall be paid to any
owner for the destruction or removal of any
tree or part thereof or of any shrub, hedge,
or plant.
7.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY, AND
ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates
any provision of this chapter or any order,
rule, or regulation made hereunder shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25) nor more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any penalty
for violation of Wis. Stats. §30.772 is
subject to forfeiture not to exceed fifty
dollars ($50) for each violation. In addition,
the person shall be responsible for the costs
of prosecution and in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs of prosecution; he
or she may be imprisoned in the Brown
County Jail until said forfeiture and costs are
paid, but not to exceed ninety (90) days for
each violation. Each day that the violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
Chapter 8
8-Water Utility Page 1 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
WATER UTILITY
Subchapter I – Water Utility ..................................................................................................... 1
8.01 General ................................................................................................................................ 1
8.02 Intent and Purpose ............................................................................................................. 1
8.03 Definitions ........................................................................................................................... 1
8.04 Water Rules and Regulations ........................................................................................... 2
8.05 Water Service Charge System .......................................................................................... 7
8.06 Interpretation ..................................................................................................................... 8
Subchapter II – Wellhead Protection ........................................................................................ 8
8.10 Wellhead Protection........................................................................................................... 8
8.99 Violations and Enforcement............................................................................................ 12
SUBCHAPTER I – WATER UTILITY
8.01 GENERAL.
The Village has determined that it is in the
best interest of the community to provide
municipal water to existing developed areas
and newly developing areas of the Village to
promote the health, safety, and convenience
of its people and to safeguard the water
resources common to all. When considering
the installation of municipal water into
existing developed areas, the Village Board
shall order the installation and assessment
against adjacent property owners only if one
(1) or more of the following criteria apply:
(1) There is a need to feed a larger area
of a major development;
(2) On a needs-only basis (i.e., failing
onsite systems);
(3) When fifty-one percent (51%) of the
residents of that area want public utilities; or
(4) There is a regulatory requirement.
The Board has determined that it is the
obligation of the water users to defray the
cost of providing potable water in an
equitable manner, and insofar as it is
practical, in proportion to the cost of
providing such services to respective users.
8.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
(1) Establish rules regulating
connections to the Village water system.
(2) Identify the procedures used by the
Village in billing.
(3) Properly identify, monitor, and bill
all users in compliance with applicable state
and federal law guidelines.
(4) Provide penalties for the violations
of these rules including violations of any
orders, permits, or notices issued pursuant to
them.
8.03 DEFINITIONS.
(1) Backflow. The undesirable flow of
water or mixtures of water and other liquids,
gases, or other substances under positive or
reduced pressure into the utility distribution
pipes of the potable supply of water from
any source.
(2) Backflow Preventer. A device or
means designed to prevent backflow caused
by backpressure or back-siphonage; most
commonly categorized as air gap, reduced
pressure principle backflow preventer,
double check valve assembly, pressure
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 2 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum
breaker, hose connection vacuum breaker,
hose connection backflow preventer,
backflow preventer with intermediate
atmospheric vent, and barometric loop.
(3) Backpressure. An elevation of
pressure in the downstream piping system
(i.e., pump, elevation of piping, or steam
and/or air pressure) above the utility supply
pressure, which would cause or tend to
cause a reversal of the normal direction of
flow.
(4) Clerk. Clerk of the Village.
(5) Cross Connection. Means any
connection between two (2) otherwise
separate systems, one (1) of which contains
potable water from a public water system
and the other water from a private source.
(6) Director. Means the Director of
Public Works or his or her designee.
(7) Lateral. That portion of a water
line serving a property which is located
between the curb stop and the building
served.
(8) Operation and Maintenance
Costs. All costs associated with the
operation and maintenance of the water
system, including administration and
replacement costs.
(9) Person. Any person, natural or
artificial, including any individual, firm,
company, municipality, private corporation,
association, society, institution, enterprise,
governmental agency, or other entity
connected to the municipal water system.
(10) Private Water System. Means a
privately-owned water main serving two (2)
or more buildings and not directly controlled
by the Village Utility.
(11) PSC. Means Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin.
(12) Public Water System. A series of
wells, storage tanks, piping, and all related
appurtenances for supplying potable water,
provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of
the Village Utility.
(13) Replacement Costs. Expenditures
for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are
necessary during the useful life of the water
system to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such systems were
designed and constructed.
(14) REU. Residential Equivalent Unit.
As defined in the 2004 Utility Rate Study, an
REU is a residential living space required to
house one (1) family regardless of size.
(15) Utility. The Suamico Water and
Sewer Utility.
(16) Village. The Village of Suamico.
(17) Water Service Charge. A charge
levied on users of the public water system
for the user's proportional share of the cost
of operation, maintenance, debt service, and
replacement of said system.
8.04 WATER RULES AND
REGULATIONS.
(1) User Rules and Regulations. The
rules, regulations, and water rates
hereinafter set forth in this chapter shall be
considered a contract with every person,
who is connected to the water system and
every such person by connection to the
Public Water System shall be considered as
expressing his or their agreement to be
bound thereby. Whenever any of said rules
and regulations, or such others as the Village
may hereafter adopt are violated, the service
shall be shut off from the building or place
of such violation (even though two (2) or
more parties are receiving service through
the same connection) and shall not be reestablished
except by order of the Director
on payment of all arrears, the expenses and
established charges of shutting off and
turning on, and such other terms as the
Director may determine, and a satisfactory
understanding with the party that no further
cause for complaint shall arise. The right is
reserved by the Village to change the said
rules, regulations, and the water rates from
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 3 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
time to time as they may deem advisable;
and to make special rates and contracts in all
proper cases, all subject to the authority of
the Wisconsin Public Service Commission.
(2) PSC Rate File. In addition to the
rules and regulations contained herein, the
Utility adopts and fully incorporates the
most recent version of the PSC rate file,
which is kept on file in the office of the
Clerk.
(3) Utility Responsibility. It is
expressly stipulated that no claim shall be
made against the Village or its officers or
duly authorized representatives by reason of
breaking, clogging, stoppage, or freezing of
any service pipe; nor from any damage
arising from repairing mains, making
connections or extensions or any other work
that may be deemed necessary.
(4) Control of Water Service. Except
for duly authorized Village personnel, and
the persons, firms and corporations working
under the direct supervision of the Village,
no person shall, and no person shall allow or
permit any employee, representative or other
person under his or her supervision, control
or direction to:
(a) Turn water on or off at any water
service curb stop, unless previously
authorized to do so by the Director.
(b) Use water for construction purposes
without first obtaining written approval from
the Director and obtaining a meter from the
Village to monitor usage.
(c) Break, tamper with, or remove any
meter seal.
(d) Remove, relocate, disconnect, or
alter any water meter or remote meter
register head.
(e) Open, use water from, or tamper
with any fire hydrant or valve, or use any
fire hydrant for a purpose other than fire
containment except that authorized Village
employees may use such hydrants for the
cleaning and flushing of streets or sewers,
except as authorized by the Director.
(5) Tapping of Water Mains. No
persons, except those having a permit from
the Director, will be permitted, under any
circumstances to tap the water mains or
distribution pipes. The kind and size of the
connection with the pipe shall be that
specified in the permit or order from the
Director. All taps shall be made on the top
half of the pipe, and not within eighteen
inches (18”) of a joint, or within twenty-four
inches (24”) of another connection. A
department representative shall be onsite to
observe all connections to the municipal
system.
(6) Installation of Water Service
Lines and Laterals.
(a) No person shall install any water
service line or lateral without first having
obtained a permit from the Director.
(b) During all lateral installations, a
department representative shall be onsite to
observe all connections to the municipal
system.
(7) Cross-Connection Prohibited. No
person shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be
maintained any cross connection.
(8) Inspections. It shall be the duty of
the Utility to cause inspection to be made of
all properties serviced by the Utility where
cross connection with the Public Water
System is deemed possible.
(a) Residential properties serviced by
the Utility shall be inspected on a maximum
ten (10) year interval.
(b) All non-residential properties
serviced by the Utility shall be required to
have a private inspection for cross
connection as required by NR 810 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code. Proof of
inspection must be completed by a licensed
plumber/certified inspector and the results
submitted to the Village.
(c) The Utility may, but is not required
to, perform the cross-connection inspection
of the owner’s property.
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 4 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
(d) If, in the opinion of the Director, the
Utility is not able to perform the inspection,
the property owner must, at his or her own
expense, have the plumbing inspected for
cross-connections by a State of Wisconsin
Certified Cross-Connection
Inspector/Surveyor or by a State of
Wisconsin licensed plumber.
(e) The frequency of required
inspections and re-inspections, based on
potential health hazards involved, may be
shortened by the Utility. The Utility shall
charge fees as approved by the State of
Wisconsin Public Service Commission for
on-premises follow-up visits by Utility
personnel for re-inspection due to customer
non-compliance and for after-hours
inspections or re-inspections.
(9) Right of Entry. Upon presentation
of credentials, representatives of the Utility
shall have the right to request entry at any
reasonable time to examine any property
served by a connection to the Public Water
System of the Utility for cross connection.
If entry is refused, such representatives shall
obtain a special inspection warrant under
Wis. Stats. §66.0119.
(a) The Utility shall charge the property
owner a fee of twenty dollars ($20) per day
for refusal to allow entry to examine any
property.
(b) Upon request, the owner, lessor, or
occupant of any property so served shall
furnish to the inspection agency any
pertinent information regarding the piping
system on such property.
(10) Authority to Discontinue Service.
The Utility is hereby authorized and directed
to discontinue water service to any property
wherein any connection in violation of this
section exists and to take such other
precautionary measures deemed necessary to
eliminate any damage of contamination of
the Public Water System.
(a) Water service shall be discontinued
if the means of backflow prevention
required by the Utility is not installed,
tested, maintained, and repaired in
compliance with this ordinance and Wis.
Adm. Code NR 811 or if it is found that the
means of backflow prevention required by
this chapter has been removed or bypassed.
(b) Water service shall be discontinued
only after reasonable notice and opportunity
for hearing under Wis. Stats. Ch. 68 in front
of the Board, except as provided in
Subsection (7) of this section.
(11) Reconnection of Service. Water
service to any property discontinued under
the provisions of this chapter shall not be
restored until the cross connection has been
eliminated or a backflow prevention device
approved by the Director has been installed
in compliance with the provisions of this
section. The Utility shall charge fees as
approved by the State of Wisconsin Public
Service Commission for the reconnection of
the water service.
(12) Emergency Discontinuance of
Service. If it is determined by the Director
that a cross connection or an emergency
endangers public health, safety, or welfare
and requires immediate action, service may
be immediately discontinued. The owner,
lessee, or occupant shall have an opportunity
for hearing under Wis. Stats. Ch. 68, within
ten (10) days of such emergency
discontinuance. Such hearing shall be
before the Village Board of Appeals, and
shall conform to all existing due process
requirements.
(13) Owner Responsibility. The
property owner shall be responsible for the
elimination of or protection from all cross
connections on his or her premises.
(a) The owner shall, at his or her
expense:
1. have installed, maintained, and tested
any and all backflow preventers on his or
her premises in compliance with Wis. Adm.
Code NR 811 and Comm 82.
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 5 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
2. have corrected any malfunction,
revealed by periodic testing, of any
backflow preventer on his or her premises.
3. inform the Utility of any proposed or
modified cross connections and also any
existing cross connections that are not
protected by an approved backflow
prevention device.
(b) The property owner shall not:
1. install a bypass around any backflow
preventer unless there is a backflow
preventer of the same type on the bypass.
Property owners who cannot shut down
operation for testing of the backflow
prevention device must supply additional
devices necessary to allow testing to take
place.
(c) In the event the property owner
installs plumbing upstream of the backflow
preventer, such plumbing must have its own
approved backflow preventer. The property
owner is required to follow the protection
practices described in the American Water
Works Association publication AWWA
M14 titled “Recommended Practice for
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection
Control”, unless the Director requires or
authorizes other means of protecting the
Public Water System. These requirements
or authorizations will be at the discretion of
the Director.
(14) Additional Protection. In the case
of premises having internal cross
connections that cannot be permanently
corrected or controlled, or intricate
plumbing and piping arrangements or where
entry to all portions of the premises is not
readily accessible for inspection purposes,
making it impracticable or impossible to
ascertain whether or not dangerous cross
connections exist, the Public Water System
shall be protected against backflow from the
premises by installing an approved backflow
preventer in the service line.
(a) In the case of any premises where
there is any material dangerous to health that
is handled in such a manner that, in the
opinion of the Director, could create an
actual or potential hazard to the Public
Water System, the Public Water System
shall be protected by an approved air-gap
separation or an approved reduced-pressure
principle backflow preventer. Examples of
premises where these conditions will exist
include sewage treatment plants, hospitals,
mortuaries, plating plants, and car wash
establishments.
(b) In the case of any premises where, in
the opinion of the Director, an undue health
threat is posed because of the presence of
toxic substances, the Director may require
an approved air gap at the service
connection to protect the Public Water
System. This requirement will be at the
discretion of the Director.
(15) Wis. Adm. Code. Wisconsin
Administrative Comm. 82 is hereby
adopted, except any penalty provisions
therein. Wis. Adm. Codes NR 810 and 812
is hereby adopted. Wisconsin Public
Service Code 185 is hereby adopted in its
entirety.
(16) Plumbing Code. This section does
not supersede the State of Wisconsin
Plumbing Code, Comm. 81–87, but is
supplementary thereto.
(17) Well Abandonment and Well
Operation Permit. NR 810, Wis. Adm.
Code, directs suppliers of water for
municipal water systems to require the
abandonment of all unused, unsafe or noncomplying
wells located on the premises
served by their system, and to provide a
permit system to allow retention of safe and
code compliant wells, by local ordinance or
water utility rule, to eliminate sources of
unsafe water and to prevent such wells from
becoming channels for vertical movement of
contaminated water and to eliminate all
existing cross connections and prevent all
future cross connections.
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 6 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) To protect public health, safety, and
welfare and to prevent contamination of
groundwater by assuring that unused,
unsafe, or non-complying wells or wells
which may act as conduits for contamination
of groundwater or wells which may be
illegally cross connected to the municipal
water system, are properly maintained or
abandoned, all wells on premises served by
the municipal water system shall be properly
abandoned in accordance with Section 8.04
(6) of this chapter not later than one hundred
eighty (180) days from the date of
connection to the municipal water system,
unless a valid well operation permit has
been issued to the well owner by the Village
under terms of Section 8.04 (17) (b) herein.
(b) Owners of wells on premises served
by the municipal water system wishing to
retain their wells for any use shall make
applications for a well operation permit for
each well at the time of connection to the
municipal water system.
1. The Public Works Director or his or
her designee shall grant a permit to a well
owner to operate a well for a period not to
exceed five (5) years providing all
conditions of this section are met.
2. A well operation permit may be
renewed by submitting an application
verifying that the conditions of this section
are met.
3. The Village, or its agent, may
conduct inspections and water quality tests
or require inspections and water quality tests
to be conducted at the applicant's expense to
obtain or verify information necessary for
consideration of permit application or
renewal.
4. Permit applications and renewals
shall be made on forms provided by the
Clerk. All initial and renewal applications
must be accompanied by a fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board. The
following conditions must be met for
issuance or renewal of a well operation
permit:
a. The well and pump installation shall
meet the standards described in NR 812
Wis. Adm. Code. (Complete WDNR well
inspection form, currently #3300-233.)
b. The well and pump shall have a
history of producing safe water evidenced
by no less than one (1) Coliform bacteria
sample. In areas where the Department of
Natural Resources has determined that
groundwater aquifers are contaminated with
substances other than bacteria, additional
chemical tests may be required to document
the safety of the water.
c. There shall be no cross connections
between the well's pump installation or
distribution piping and the municipal water
system.
d. The water from the private well shall
not discharge into a drain leading directly to
a public sewer utility unless properly
metered and authorized by the sewer utility.
e. The private well shall have a
functional pumping system.
f. The proposed use of the private well
shall be justified as reasonable outside use.
(18) Abandonment Procedures.
(a) All wells abandoned under the
jurisdiction of this chapter shall be done
according to the procedures and methods of
s. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code. (Complete
WDNR form for well abandonment,
currently #3300-5b.) All debris, pumps,
piping, unsealed liners, and any other
obstructions which may interfere with
sealing operations shall be removed prior to
abandonment.
(b) The owner of the well, or the
owner's agent shall be required to obtain a
well abandonment permit from the Village
prior to any well abandonment and shall
notify the Director at least forty-eight (48)
hours in advance of any well abandonment
activities. The abandonment of the well
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 7 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
may be observed or verified by personnel of
the municipal system.
(c) An abandonment report form,
supplied by the Department of Natural
Resources, shall be submitted by the well
owner to the Director and the Department of
Natural Resources Private Water Supply
Section, Green Bay, Wisconsin, within thirty
(30) days of the completion of the well
abandonment.
(19) Mandatory Hookup.
(a) The owner of each parcel of land
adjacent to a water main on which there
exists a building usable for human habitation
or in a block through which such system is
extended located within the corporate limits
of the Village shall connect to such system
within six (6) months of notice in writing
from Village.
1. Upon failure to do so, the Village
may cause such connection to be made and
bill the property owner for such costs.
2. If such costs are not paid within thirty
(30) days, such notice shall be assessed as a
special tax lien against the property, all
pursuant to Wis. Stats. §281.45, provided,
however, that the owner may, within thirty
(30) days after the completion of the work,
file a written request with the Village stating
that he or she cannot pay such amount in
one (1) sum and ask that there be levied in
not to exceed ten (10) equal annual
installments and that the amount shall be so
collected with interest at the rate of twelve
percent (12%) per annum from the
completion of the work, the unpaid balance
being a special tax lien, all pursuant to Wis.
Stats. §281.45.
(b) This chapter ordains that the failure
to connect to the water system is contrary to
the minimum health standards of the Utility
and fails to assure preservation of public
health, utility comfort and safety of said
Utility.
8.05 WATER SERVICE CHARGE
SYSTEM.
(1) General Policy. It shall be the
policy of the Village to obtain sufficient
revenues to pay the costs of the operation
and maintenance of the public water supply
system, including debt service and
replacement costs, through a system of
water service charges as defined in this
section. The system shall assure that each
user of the water system pays their fair and
proportionate share of the cost of such
facilities.
(2) Rate Orders Adopted. The current
applicable Public Service Commission Rate
Orders governing the Village water utility
are hereby incorporated by reference.
(3) Payment. Users billed by the
Suamico Sewer and Water Utility shall
make payment in accordance with the
current rules and regulations of the Utility in
accordance with PSC 185 for payment of
bills. Such payments shall be made at the
office of the Water Utility or any other
officially designated location at the same
time that the bills become due.
(4) Delinquency. Bills for sewer
service charges and water charges levied and
assessed in accordance with this chapter and
resolutions adopted pursuant hereto and the
rules and regulations of the Suamico Sewer
and Water Utility shall become due and
payable within twenty (20) days after the
date of billing. All overdue accounts in
excess of twenty (20) days after the due date
shall be charged a penalty of three percent
(3%) for unpaid balances. Schedule Mg-1
(5) Ownership and Occupancy.
Change of ownership or occupancy of
premises under provisions of this section
shall not be cause for reducing or
eliminating charges due and penalties.
(6) Designation. The Administrator or
his or her designee is hereby designated the
employee to respond to any Public Service
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 8 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
Commission issues in accordance with Wis.
Adm. Code Section 185.39.
8.06 INTERPRETATION. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to the minimum
requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power
granted by the Wisconsin statutes or Wis.
Adm. Code. Where any terms or
requirements of this chapter may be
inconsistent or conflicting, the state statute
or administrative code provision shall apply.
Where a provision of this chapter is required
by Wisconsin statutes, or by standards in
Chapter PSC 185, Wis. Adm. Code, or its
successor chapters and where this ordinance
provision is unclear, the provision shall be
interpreted in light of the Wisconsin statutes
and Chapter PSC 185, Wis. Adm. Code
standards or its successor chapter in effect
on the date of the adoption of this ordinance,
or in effect on the date of the most recent
text amendment to this chapter.
SUBCHAPTER II – WELLHEAD
PROTECTION
8.10 WELLHEAD PROTECTION.
(1) Title of Ordinance. This ordinance
shall be known, cited and referred to as the
"Wellhead Protection Ordinance"
(hereinafter referred to as "WHP
Ordinance".)
(2) Purpose, Authority, and
Application.
(1) Residents in the Village depend
exclusively on groundwater for a safe
drinking water supply. Certain land use
practices and activities can seriously
threaten or degrade groundwater quality.
The purpose of this WHP ordinance is to
institute land use regulations and restrictions
to protect the Village's municipal water
supply and well fields, and to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the Village.
(2) Statutory authority of the Village to
enact these regulations was established by
the Wisconsin Legislature in Wis. Stats.
§62.23(7)(a) and (c). Under these statutes,
the Village has the authority to enact this
ordinance, effective in the incorporated
areas of the Village, to encourage the
protection of groundwater resources.
(3) The regulations specified in this
WHP ordinance shall apply within the
Village's corporate limits.
(3) Definitions.
(a) Aquifer. A saturated, permeable,
geologic formation that contains, and will
yield, significant quantities of water.
(b) Existing Facilities. Current
facilities, practices and activities which may
cause or threaten to cause environmental
pollution within that portion of the Village’s
wellhead protection area that lies within the
corporate limits of the Village. Existing
facilities include but are not limited to the
type listed in the Department of Natural
Resources’ form 3300-215, Public Water
Supply Potential Contaminant Use Inventory
Form which is incorporated herein as if fully
set forth [consult your municipal attorney
regarding incorporation by reference Form
3300-215.].
(c) Recharge Area. The land area
which contributes water to a well by
infiltration of water into the subsurface and
movement with groundwater toward the
well. This area extends beyond the
corporate limits of the Village.
(d) Groundwater Protection Overlay
District. That portion of the recharge area
for the Village wells that lies within the
Village limits as shown in the map attached
hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated
herein as if fully set forth.
(e) Well Field. A piece of land used
primarily for the purpose of supplying a
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 9 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
location for construction of wells to supply a
municipal water system.
(f) Zone A. An area within four hundred
feet (400’) of a municipal well.
(g) Zone B. An area lying between four
hundred feet (400’) and one thousand feet
(1,000’) of a municipal well.
(h) Zone C. An area lying between one
thousand feet (1,000’) and one thousand two
hundred feet (1,200’) feet of a municipal
well.
(4) Groundwater Protection Overlay
District.
(a) Separation Distances. The
following minimum separation distances
shall be maintained within the Groundwater
Protection Overlay District.
1. Fifty feet (50’) between a well and
storm sewer main.
2. Two hundred feet (200’) between a
well and any sanitary sewer main, sanitary
sewer manhole, lift station or single family
residential fuel oil tank. A lesser separation
distance may be allowed for sanitary sewer
mains where the sanitary sewer main is
constructed of water main materials and
joints and pressure tested in place to meet
current American Waterworks Association
(AWWA) C600 specifications. In no case
may the separation distance between a well
and sanitary sewer main be less than fifty
feet (50’).
3. Four hundred feet (400’) between a
well and a septic tank or soil adsorption unit
receiving less than eight thousand (8,000)
gallons per day, a cemetery or a storm water
drainage pond.
4. Six hundred feet (600’) between a
well and any gasoline or fuel oil storage tank
installation that has received written
approval from the Wisconsin Department of
Commerce (hereafter Commerce) or its
designated agent under s. Comm 10.10, Wis.
Adm. Code.
5. One thousand feet (1,000’) between a
well and land application of municipal,
commercial or industrial waste; boundaries
of a land spreading facility for spreading of
petroleum-contaminated soil regulated under
Ch. NR 718 while that facility is in
operation; industrial, commercial or
municipal waste water lagoons or storage
structures; manure stacks or storage
structures; and septic tanks or soil
adsorption units receiving eight thousand
(8,000) gallons per day or more.
6. One thousand two hundred feet
(1,200’) between a well and any solid waste
storage, transportation, transfer,
incineration, air curtain destructor,
processing, wood burning, one time disposal
or small demolition facility; sanitary
landfill; any property with residual
groundwater contamination that exceeds Ch.
NR 140 enforcement standards that is shown
on the Department of Natural Resources’
geographic information system registry of
closed remediation sites; coal storage area;
salt or deicing material storage area;
gasoline or fuel oil storage tanks that have
not received written approval from
Commerce or its designated agent under S.
Comm 10.10, Wis. Adm. Code; bulk fuel
storage facilities; and pesticide or fertilizer
handling or storage facilities.
(b) Three (3) Overlay District Zones.
This District is hereby divided into Zones A,
B, and C.
1. Zone A. Identified as the primary
source of water for the municipal well
aquifer and as the area most likely to
transmit groundwater contamination to the
municipal wells. Zone A is more restrictive
than Zones B or C.
2. Permitted Uses - Zone A. The
following uses are permitted uses within the
groundwater protection Zone A. Uses not
listed shall be considered prohibited uses:
a. Parks, provided there is no onsite
waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities
associated with this use.
b. Playgrounds.
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 10 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
c. Wildlife areas.
d. Non-motorized trails, such as bike,
skiing, nature and fitness trails.
e. Residential, commercial and
industrial property, which is municipally
sewered, and free of flammable and
combustible liquid and underground storage
tanks (USTs).
3. Zone B. Identified as a secondary
source of water for the municipal wells
because of the large cone of depression and
a greater time of travel. Zone B is less
restrictive than Zone A, but more restrictive
than Zone C.
4. Permitted Uses - Zone B. The
following uses are permitted uses within the
groundwater protection Zone B. Uses not
listed shall be considered prohibited uses:
a. All uses listed as permitted uses in
Zone A.
b. Above-ground petroleum product
storage tanks less than six hundred sixty
(660) gallons. All new or replaced tanks
shall be installed in compliance with Ch.
Comm 10, Wis. Adm. Code.
c. Residential, commercial and
industrial property which is municipally
sewered or has a state-approved sewer and
septic system.
5. Zone C. Identified as the
Groundwater Protection Overlay District,
excluding those areas within Zone A and
Zone B.
6. Permitted Uses - Zone C. All uses
listed as permitted in Zone A and Zone B.
Individuals and/or facilities may make a
request to the Utilities Commission to
permit additional land uses in Zone C.
7. Mapping. The location and
boundaries of the zoning districts
established by this ordinance are set forth on
the attached Exhibit "A" which is
incorporated herein and hereby made a part
of this ordinance. Said map, together with
everything shown thereon and all
amendments thereto, shall be as much a part
of this ordinance as though fully set forth
and described herein.
(5) Review of Permit Application.
(a) The Village shall review all requests
for approval of permits for land uses in the
Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
All determinations shall be made by the
Village within sixty (60) days of any request
for approval, provided however, that this
sixty (60) day period of limitation may be
extended by the Village for "good cause", as
determined in the sole and absolute
discretion of the Village.
(b) Upon reviewing all requests for
approval, the Village shall consider all of the
following factors:
1. The Village's responsibility, as a
public water supplier, to protect and
preserve the health, safety and welfare of its
citizens.
2. The degree to which the proposed
land use practice, activity or facility may
seriously threaten or degrade groundwater
quality in the Village or the Village’s
recharge area.
3. The economic hardship which may be
faced by the landowner if the application is
denied.
4. The availability of alternative options
to the applicant, and the cost, effect and
extent of availability of such alternative
options.
5. The proximity of the applicant's
property to other potential sources of
contamination.
6. The existing condition of the
Village's groundwater public water wells
and well fields, and the vulnerability to
further contamination.
7. The direction of flow of groundwater
and other factors in the area of the
applicant's property which may affect the
speed of the groundwater flow, including
topography, depth of soil, extent of aquifer,
depth to water table and location of private
wells.
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 11 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
8. Any other hydro geological data or
information which is available from any
public or private agency or organization.
9. The potential benefit, both economic
and social, from the approval of the
applicant's request for a permit.
(c) Any exemptions granted will be
made conditional and may include
environmental and/or safety monitoring
which indicates whether the facility may be
emitting any releases or harmful
contaminants to the surrounding
environment. The facility will be held
financially responsible for all environmental
cleanup costs. The Village may require that
a bond be posted for future monitoring and
cleanup costs if deemed necessary at the
time of granting an exemption.
(d) The applicant shall be solely and
exclusively responsible for any and all costs
associated with the application, including all
of the following:
1. The cost of an environmental impact
study if so required by the Village or its
designee.
2. The cost of groundwater monitoring
or groundwater wells if required by the
Village or its designee.
3. The costs of an appraisal for the
property or other property evaluation
expense if required by the Village or its
designee.
4. The costs of Village's employee's
time associated in any way with the
application based on the hourly rate paid to
the employee multiplied by a factor,
determined by the Village, representing the
Village's costs for expenses, benefits,
insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime,
vacation and other similar benefits.
5. The cost of Village equipment
employed.
6. The cost of mileage reimbursed to the
Village employees.
(6) Requirements for Existing
Facilities and Land Uses.
(a) Existing facilities shall provide
copies of all federal, state and local facility
operation approvals or certificates and
ongoing environmental monitoring results to
the Village.
(b) Existing facilities shall provide
additional environmental or safety
monitoring as deemed necessary by the
Village, specifically including the
production of any and all environmental
statements detailing the extent of chemical
use and storage on the property.
(c) Existing facilities shall replace
equipment or expand in a manner that
improves the existing environmental and
safety technologies already in existence.
(d) Existing facilities shall have the
responsibility of divising and/or filing with
the Village, a contingency plan satisfactory
to the Utility Commission for the immediate
notification of the appropriate Village
officers in the event of an emergency.
(e) Property owners with an existing
agricultural use shall be exempt from
requirements of this ordinance as they relate
to restrictions on agricultural uses, provided
however, that such exemption shall only
apply to the property owners in existence at
the time of passage of the ordinance and this
exemption shall not constitute a covenant
running with the land.
(7) Enforcement and Penalties.
(a) In the event an individual and/or
facility causes the release of any
contaminants which endanger the
Groundwater Protection Overlay District,
the individual/facility causing said release
shall immediately cease and desist, and
provide cleanup satisfactory to the Village.
(b) The individual/facility shall be
responsible for all costs of cleanup and the
Village consultant fees at the invoice
amount plus administrative costs for
oversight, review and documentation,
including all of the following:
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 12 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
1. The cost of Village employees' time
associated in any way with the cleanup
based on the hourly rate paid to the
employee multiplied by a factor determined
by the Village, representing the Village's
cost for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick
leave, holidays, overtime, vacation, and
similar benefits.
2. The cost of Village equipment
employed.
3. The cost of mileage reimbursed to the
Village employees attributed to the cleanup.
(c) Following any such discharge, the
Village may require additional test
monitoring or other requirements as outlined
in Sections 6 and 7 herein.
(d) Violations. It shall be unlawful to
construct or use any structure, land or water
in violation of this ordinance. Any person
who is specifically damaged by such
violations may institute appropriate action or
proceeding to enjoin a violation of this
ordinance.
(8) Severability Clause. The
provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed
severable and it is expressly declared that
Board would have passed the other
provisions of this ordinance irrespective of
whether or not one or more provisions may
be declared invalid. If any provision of this
ordinance or the application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the reminder of
the ordinance or the application of such
other provisions to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected.
8.99 VIOLATIONS AND
ENFORCEMENT. Any person violating
any of the provisions of this section or
tampering with metering or sampling shall
be liable to the Village for any expense, loss,
or damage occasioned by such violation and
upon conviction of any violation of this
section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100) or more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation, plus damages. Each
day a condition is allowed to exist which is
contrary to all or any part of this section
shall constitute a new violation.
(1) Appeal Procedures. Any user
affected by any decision, action, or
determination, including cease and desist
orders, made by the interpreting or
implementing provisions of this chapter may
file with the Director a written request for
reconsideration within ten (10) days of the
date of such decision, action, or
determination, setting forth in detail the
facts supporting the user's request for
reconsideration. The Director shall render a
decision on the request for reconsideration
to the user in writing within fifteen (15) days
of receipt of request. The person requesting
reconsideration may, within ten (10) days
after notification on the action, file a written
appeal with the Board in accordance with
Wis. Stats. Ch. 68.
Village of Suamico
8-Water Utility Page 13 of 13 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 8
Ordinance 2008-02 Creating Subchapter II, Wellhead Protection (WHP)
Adopted 3-3-08
Ordinance 2008-25 Amendment to Chapter 8.04
Adopted 9-15-08
Ordinance 2009-12 Amending Section 8.04 (8) (b)
Adopted 5-18-09
Ordinance 2009-16 Amending Section 8
Adopted 6-15-09
Ordinance 2010-10 Amending Chapter 8.05(3), 8.05(5), & 8.05(6) Water Utility
Adopted 3-29-10
Ordinance 2011-02 Amending Chapter 8 Water Utility
Adopted 3-21-11
Ordinance 2012-02 Amending Chapter 8 Water Utility of the Village Code
Adopted 4-16-12
Village of Suamico
Chapter 9
9-Sewer Utility Page 1 of 8 Adopted 1-21-08
SEWER UTILITY
9.01 General ................................................................................................................................ 1
9.02 Intent and Purpose ............................................................................................................. 1
9.03 Administration ................................................................................................................... 2
9.04 Definition ............................................................................................................................ 2
9.05 Wastewater Rules and Regulations .................................................................................. 3
9.06 Sewer Service Charge System ........................................................................................... 5
9.07 Sewer Service Area/Development Costs .......................................................................... 6
9.08 Interpretation ..................................................................................................................... 6
9.99 Violations and Enforcement.............................................................................................. 7
9.01 GENERAL.
(1) The Village has determined that it is
in the best interest of the community to
provide public sewer to higher density and
newly developing areas within the Village
sanitary sewer service area. When
considering the installation of municipal
wastewater into existing developed areas,
the Village Board shall order the installation
and assessment against adjacent property
owners only if one (1) or more of the
following criteria apply:
(a) There is a need to feed a larger area
of a major development;
(b) On a needs-only basis (i.e., failing
onsite systems);
(c) When fifty-one percent (51%) of the
residents of that area want public utilities; or
(d) There is a regulatory requirement.
The Village, in cooperation with the Green
Bay Metropolitan Sewerage District, has
also provided facilities for collection,
transmission, and treatment of sewage to
promote the health, safety, and convenience
of its people and to safeguard the water
resources common to all.
(2) The Board has determined that it is
the obligation of the sewer users and
producers of domestic and industrial wastes
to defray the cost incurred in the collection,
transmission, and treatment of sewerage
wastes in an equitable manner, and insofar
as it is practicable, in proportion to the cost
of providing such services to respective
users.
(3) Proper protection and operation of
the municipal sewerage collection and
treatment facilities may require either the
exclusion, pretreatment, or controlled
discharge, at point of origin, of certain types
or quantities of domestic and industrial
wastes.
9.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
(1) Establish rules regulating
connections to the Village Sewerage
System.
(2) Establish rules limiting or
prohibiting the discharge of wastewater by
users into the Village Sewerage System
which may cause or actually causes any of
the following:
(a) Injury to Village employees or any
person.
(b) Interference with the normal
operation of the Village Sewerage System or
any part thereof.
(c) Unreasonable maintenance,
attention, and expense to Village.
Village of Suamico
9-Sewer Utility Page 2 of 8 Adopted 1-21-08
(3) Identify the procedures used by the
Village in billing.
(4) Properly identify, monitor, and bill
all users in compliance with applicable state
and federal laws, guidelines.
(5) Provide penalties for the violations
of these rules including violations of any
orders, permits, or notices issued pursuant to
them.
9.03 ADMINISTRATION. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the Director shall
administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
9.04 DEFINITION.
(1) Commercial User. Any user whose
premises are used primarily for the conduct
of a profit oriented enterprise and who
primarily discharges normal domestic
wastewater. This definition shall also
include multi-family residences having three
(3) or more units served by a single service.
(2) Department. Department of Public
Works and Utilities.
(3) Director. The Director of Public
Works or his or her designee.
(4) District. The Village sewer service
area.
(5) GBMSD. Green Bay Metropolitan
Sewerage District.
(6) Industrial User. A user discharging
more than the equivalent of twenty-five
thousand (25,000) gallons per day (gpd) of
sanitary wastes and which is identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
1972, Office of Management and Budget as
amended and supplemented.
(7) Industrial Waste. Any solid or
liquid substance discharged, permitted to
flow, or escaping from any industrial
manufacturing, commercial, or business
establishment or process or from the
development, recovery, or processing of any
natural resources.
(8) Monitored Users. Monitored users
shall consist of those users determined by
the Director to be producers of sewage that
is, in the Director's judgment, abnormal
sewage and requiring monitoring.
(9) Non-Monitored Users. Nonmonitored
users shall consist of those users
determined by the Director to be dischargers
of normal strength sewage.
(10) Normal Sewage. Domestic and
industrial wastes in which the daily average
concentrations for BOD, suspended solids,
phosphorous, and TKN are not more than
the daily average concentrations established
by resolution by the GBMSD.
(11) Operation and Maintenance
Costs. All costs associated with the
operation and maintenance of the sewerage
system, including administration and
replacement costs.
(12) Person. Any person, natural or
artificial, including any individual, firm,
company, municipality, private corporation,
association, society, institution, enterprise,
governmental agency, or other entity
discharging sewerage to the municipal
system.
(13) Public Sewer. A sewer provided
by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
Village or GBMSD.
(14) Replacement Costs. Expenditures
for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are
necessary during the useful life of the
sewerage system to maintain the capacity
and performance for which such systems
were designed and constructed. Operation
and maintenance costs include replacement
costs.
(15) REU. Residential Equivalent Unit.
As defined in the 2004 Utility Rate study, an
REU is a residential living space required to
house one (1) family regardless of size.
(16) Residential User. A user
discharging domestic wastes from a single
family dwelling or duplex.
Village of Suamico
9-Sewer Utility Page 3 of 8 Adopted 1-21-08
(17) Sanitary Sewer. A sewer that
conveys sewage and into which storm,
surface, and ground waters or unpolluted
industrial wastes are not admitted
intentionally.
(18) Sewer Service Area. The area
designated by Brown County Regional
Planning as being appropriate for sanitary
sewer development.
(19) Sewage. Domestic and industrial
wastes.
(20) Sewer Service Charge. A charge
levied on users of the sewerage system for
the user's proportional share of the cost of
operation, maintenance, debt service, and
replacement of said system.
(21) Sewerage System and Sewer
System. Interchangeable and shall mean all
facilities for collecting, pumping, treating,
and disposing of sewage.
(22) Village. The Village of Suamico.
9.05 WASTEWATER RULES AND
REGULATIONS.
(1) General.
(a) GBMSD Regulations. Sewer Use
Ordinance 78-1, as established or amended
by the GBMSD relating to the regulation of
sewage discharges is hereby adopted and
made a part hereof as though fully set forth
herein. Sewage discharge regulations
received from the GBMSD shall be kept on
file in the office of the Clerk and the office
of the Director.
(b) State and Federal Regulations. In
addition to complying with this article, users
shall comply with all applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements
established by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency and the Department of
Natural Resources that supplement or
supersede this article.
(c) Lateral Service. Each village lot
shall be served by one lateral. In the event
that there are two laterals serving a lot, and a
duplex is built on that lot, both laterals shall
be connected with each serving one address
of the duplex. In the event that a home or
duplex is built on a lot not serviced by a
lateral, one new lateral shall be installed for
a single family home and two new laterals
shall be installed for a duplex from the main
and connected to each dwelling.
(d) Lateral Hook Up. All persons
connecting to the municipal sewerage
system must first receive a connection
permit from the department. A department
representative shall be onsite to observe all
connections to the municipal system.
(e) Submission of Plans. Plans,
specifications, and other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary
treatment or processing facilities shall be
submitted for approval to the Engineer and
the Director prior to the start of construction.
(f) Compliance Monitoring. The
Director shall have the right to enter the
premises of any user to determine whether
the user is complying with all the
requirements of this article and any waste
water discharge permit or order issued
hereunder. Users shall allow the Director
ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination, and copying and the
performance of any additional duties.
(g) Clear Water Discharges Prohibited.
The discharge of clear water from sump
pumps, storm drains or other sources into
the Village Sewer System is strictly
prohibited.
(h) Mandatory Hook-up. The owner of
each parcel of land adjacent to a sanitary
sewer main on which there exists a building
usable for human habitation shall connect to
the system within six (6) months of notice in
writing from the Village.
(i) In areas where water meters are
absent due to the lack of water service but
sewer service is available, the quarterly
charge for unmetered sewer customers shall
be billed to developed lots beginning ninety
Village of Suamico
9-Sewer Utility Page 4 of 8 Adopted 1-21-08
(90) days after inspection of the sewer
lateral installation or upon occupancy
permit, whichever is first.
(2) Control and Measurement of
Admissible Industrial Wastes.
(a) System Connection and Submission
of Basic Data.
1. Persons discharging abnormal sewage
to a public sewer shall prepare and file with
the Director, a report that shall include
pertinent data relating to the quantity and
characteristics of their wastes in accordance
with Wisconsin DNR Permit No. WI-0020-
001, Part II, Section D-Paragraph 7, within
ninety (90) days after being so notified by
the Director.
2. Similarly, each person desiring to
make a new connection to the public sewers
for the purpose of discharging industrial
wastes shall prepare and file with the
Director, a report that shall include actual or
predicted data relating to the quantity and
characteristics of the waste to be discharged
in accordance with Permit No. WI-0020-
001. A building permit shall not be issued
until such report has been submitted and
approved by the Director.
(b) Control Manholes.
1. All monitored users, when directed
by the Director, shall construct and maintain
needed control manholes to facilitate
observations, measurement, and sampling of
the wastes. Control manholes shall be
located and built in a manner approved by
the Director. If measuring devices are to be
permanently installed, they shall be of a type
approved by the Director.
2. Control manholes and related
equipment shall be installed at the expense
of the person discharging the waste, and
shall be maintained by said person in safe
condition, accessible, and in proper
operating condition at all times.
(3) Metering of Waste.
(a) Devices for metering the volume of
waste discharged may be required by the
Director if those volumes cannot otherwise
be determined from the metered water
consumption records. Metering devices for
determining the volume of waste shall be
owned and maintained by the person.
Following approval and installation, such
meters may not be removed without the
consent of the Director.
(b) If installed metering devices
malfunction or if metering devices are
impractical, the person shall provide the
department with documented and certified
material as required by the Director so that
the Village can accurately determine the
volume of waste discharged for billing
purposes. Devices shall be calibrated yearly
or as required. The calibration shall be
made by a testing laboratory approved by
the Director. The Village reserves the right
to have the devices calibrated and the cost of
such calibration billed to the person.
(4) Compliance. Within ninety (90)
days after receiving notice from the
Director, each person who discharges
industrial wastes into a public sewer shall
have complied with this section.
(5) Extension of Time. When it can be
demonstrated that circumstances exist which
could create an unreasonable burden on the
person to comply with the time schedule
imposed, a request for an extension may be
presented to the Director who may grant an
extension.
(6) Waste Sampling. Industrial wastes
discharged into the public sewers shall be
subject to periodic sampling and testing to
determine character and concentration. All
sampling and testing cost is to be at the
expense of the person. The determination
shall be made as often as deemed necessary
by the Director. If any testing by the Village
shall show a changed degree of pollutional
load in the sewage or waste discharged, such
new test results shall be used in computing
the subsequent billings, but no reduction
shall be made unless at least a full day of
Village of Suamico
9-Sewer Utility Page 5 of 8 Adopted 1-21-08
operation of the person's plant has
undergone the test. Any person may request
the Village to make new tests; such tests to
be of a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours
duration. Such test shall be made when the
plant is operating under normal conditions,
and the burden shall be on the person
requesting the testing to establish that such
normal conditions prevail. Upon a
determination by the Director that such test
was made when the plant was operating
under normal conditions, the results of these
tests shall be used in computing the
subsequent billing in the manner previously
prescribed.
(7) Analysis. Laboratory test
procedures used in the examination of
industrial wastes shall be those set forth in
Ch. NR 219, Wis. Adm. Code, and shall be
made by the Village at the cost of the
person.
(8) Pre-Treatment. Where required or
when, in the opinion of the Director,
constituents that are harmful to the sewer
system, processes, or operation of the
pollution control works are present in the
wastes discharged to the sewer system, the
person shall provide, at his or her expense,
such preliminary treatment or processing
facilities as may be necessary to render the
wastes acceptable for admission to the
public sewers. When a determination is
made by the Director, the Director shall
forthwith notify the person required to
provide such preliminary treatment stating
the specific reasons that such determination
has been made.
9.06 SEWER SERVICE CHARGE
SYSTEM.
(1) Policy. It shall be the policy of the
Village to obtain sufficient revenues to pay
the costs of the operation and maintenance
of the sewerage system, including debt
service and replacement costs, through a
system of sewer service charges as defined
in this section. The system shall assure that
each user of the sewerage system pays their
fair and proportionate share of the cost of
such facilities.
(2) Sewer Service Charges Generally.
The Village shall annually or from time to
time as the Board deems necessary,
determine the cost of operating and
maintaining the Village's public sewer
system. A service charge shall be the sum
of the Village's cost of operation and
maintenance of the collection system and the
treatment charge from GBMSD. The sewer
service charge shall consist of a volume
charge, or quantity charge, which represents
treatment and transportation of waste water
and a customer charge which includes the
cost of infiltration/inflow and billing
preparation. These costs shall be charged
proportionally to all users of the sewer
system. There shall also be a fixed charge
for the reduction of debt related to the
installation of the interceptor construction
needed for the GBMSD hook-up.
(a) Sewer Service Charge. A sewer
service charge is hereby levied and assessed
upon each lot, parcel of land, building, or
premises having a connection to the public
sewer system. The sewer service rates will
be included in each year’s fee schedule. The
Board shall have the authority to amend
such charges by resolution from time to time
as may be deemed necessary.
1. All charges for sewerage service shall
be made quarterly and shall be payable on
the first day of January, April, July and
October in each year. An eighteen percent
(18%) APR penalty will be added to those
bills not paid on or before the twentieth
(20th) day after the due date of the bill with a
minimum penalty charge of fifty cents
($0.50) applied to the bills. Failure to
receive a bill shall not excuse non-payment.
Delinquent charges shall be collected in
accordance with Wis. Stats. §66.0821(4)(d).
Village of Suamico
9-Sewer Utility Page 6 of 8 Adopted 1-21-08
2. Third (3rd) quarter charges for
residential metered customers will be based
upon the average of the previous three (3)
quarters of usage. Where a customer of the
utility has no history or an incomplete
history for the previous three (3) quarters, a
charge equal to the unmetered quarterly
sewer use charge as defined above will be
applied if the usage for the third (3rd) quarter
will exceed forty-four dollars ($44).
3. Any excess revenues collected from a
user class will be applied to that class for the
following year.
(3) Penalties for Late Payment of
Sewer Service Charges.
(a) Delinquency. Bills for sewer service
charges levied and assessed in accordance
with this chapter and resolutions adopted
pursuant hereto and the rules and regulations
of the Suamico Sewer and Water Utility
shall become due and payable within twenty
(20) days after the date of billing.
(b) Legal Basis. Each sewer service
charge levied by or pursuant to this section
shall constitute a lien upon the
corresponding premises serviced by the
sewer system as provided for in Wis. Stats.
§66.0821 and the Clerk shall record such
lien in accordance with applicable statutes.
(c) Ownership and Occupancy. Change
of ownership or occupancy of premises
under provisions of this section shall not be
cause for reducing or eliminating charges
due and penalties.
9.07 SEWER SERVICE
AREA/DEVELOPMENT COSTS.
(1) There shall be one (1) sewer district,
known as the Suamico Sewer Service Area.
A map of the area which may be amended
from time to time is available at the Clerk’s
office.
(a) Amendments as adopted are on file
in the office of the Clerk.
(2) All sanitary sewers within the
district, including street and alley
intersections and manholes, shall be paid for
by a developer initiating the project or
through special assessments on the basis of
benefits and damages except the following,
which shall be paid for out of the General
Sanitary District Fund:
(a) The cleaning, repairing, and
replacement of any public sewer mains, and
manholes in connection therewith.
(b) The cleaning, repairing, and
replacement, including relocation and
substitution, of any sanitary sewer lateral
located within street and alley boundaries.
9.08 INTERPRETATION. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to the minimum
requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power
granted by the Wisconsin statutes, Wis.
Adm. Code or Green Bay Metropolitan
Sewer District. Where any terms or
requirements of this chapter may be
inconsistent or conflicting, the state statute,
administrative code provision or Green Bay
Metropolitan Sewer District ordinance shall
apply. Where a provision of this section is
required by Wisconsin statutes, Wis. Adm.
Code, or by a standard in Green Bay
Metropolitan Sewer District Sewer Use
Ordinance and where this section provision
is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted
in light of the Wisconsin statutes, Wis. Adm.
Code and Green Bay Metropolitan Sewer
District Sewer Use Ordinance in effect on
the date of the adoption of this section, or in
effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this chapter.
9.99 VIOLATIONS AND
ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Violations. Any person violating
any of the provisions of this section or
tampering with metering or sampling shall
be liable to the Village for any expense, loss,
or damage occasioned by such violation and
Village of Suamico
9-Sewer Utility Page 7 of 8 Adopted 1-21-08
upon conviction of any violation of this
section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor
more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation plus damages. Each
day a condition is allowed to exist which is
contrary to all or any part of this section
shall constitute a new violation and be
subject to further citations.
(2) Appeal Procedures. Any user
affected by any decision, action, or
determination, including cease and desist
orders, made by the interpreting or
implementing provisions of this chapter may
file with the Director a written request for
reconsideration within ten (10) days of the
date of such decision, action, or
determination, setting forth in detail the
facts supporting the user's request for
reconsideration. The Director shall render a
decision on the request for reconsideration
to the user in writing within fifteen (15) days
of receipt of request. The person requesting
reconsideration may, within ten (10) days
after notification on the action, file a written
appeal with the Board in accordance with
Wis. Stats. Ch. 68.
Village of Suamico
9-Sewer Utility Page 8 of 8 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 9
Ordinance 2009-04 Adjusting the Sewer Utility Rates for 2009
Adopted 3-16-09
Ordinance 2009-12 Amending Section 9.05 (1) (g)
Adopted 5-18-09
Ordinance 2011-03 Amending Chapter 9 Sewer Utility
Adopted 3-21-11
Ordinance 2014-06 Adjusting the Sewer Service Utility Charges
Adopted 3-17-14
Ordinance 2015-03 Amending Chapter 9 Regarding Payment of Sewer Utility Fees
Adopted 4-6-15
Ordinance 2017-05 Amending Chapter 9 Sewer Utility
Adopted 6-19-17
Village of Suamico
Chapter 10
10-Stormwater Utility Page 1 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
STORMWATER ORDINANCE
10.01 Authority ........................................................................................................................... 2
10.02 Findings of Fact ................................................................................................................ 2
10.03 Purpose and Intent ........................................................................................................... 2
10.04 Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 3
Subchapter I – Construction Site Erosion Control Zoning Ordinance ................................. 9
10.05 Applicability and Jurisdiction ........................................................................................ 9
10.06 Technical Standards ...................................................................................................... 10
10.07 Performance Standards ................................................................................................. 10
10.08 Permitting Requirements, Procedures, and Fees ........................................................ 11
10.09 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Statement, and Amendments ......................... 13
10.10 Inspection ........................................................................................................................ 14
Subchapter II – Suamico Post-Construction Stormwater Management Zoning Ordinance
..................................................................................................................................................... 14
10.15 Applicability and Jurisdiction ...................................................................................... 14
10.16 Technical Standards ...................................................................................................... 14
10.17 Performance Standards ................................................................................................. 15
10.18 Permitting Requirements, Procedures, and Fees ........................................................ 22
10.19 Stormwater Management Plan ..................................................................................... 24
10.20 Maintenance Agreement ............................................................................................... 25
10.21 Financial Guarantee ...................................................................................................... 25
Subchapter III – Illicit Discharge and Connection Ordinance ............................................. 26
10.25 General ............................................................................................................................ 26
10.26 Applicability ................................................................................................................... 26
10.27 Administration ............................................................................................................... 26
10.28 Compatibility with Other Regulations ......................................................................... 26
10.29 Discharge Prohibitions .................................................................................................. 27
10.30 Watercourse Protection ................................................................................................. 27
10.31 Compliance Monitoring................................................................................................. 28
10.32 Requirement to Prevent, Control, and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the Use of
Best Management Practices ..................................................................................................... 28
10.33 Notification of Spills ....................................................................................................... 29
10.34 Violations ........................................................................................................................ 29
10.35 Suspension of MS4 Access ............................................................................................. 30
10.36 Cost of Abatement of the Violation .............................................................................. 31
10.37 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance .......................................................................... 31
10.38 Remedies not Exclusive ................................................................................................. 31
10.39 Fee Schedule ................................................................................................................... 31
10.99 Penalty, Severability, Enforcement, and Appeals ....................................................... 31
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 2 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
10.01 AUTHORITY.
(1) This chapter is adopted under the
authority granted by Wis. Stats. §61.354, for
villages. This chapter supersedes all
provisions of any ordinance previously
enacted under Wis. Stats. §59.69, §60.62,
§61.35, or §62.23, that relate to Chapter 10.
Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats.
§59.693, §60.627, §61.354, or §62.234, Wis.
Stats. §59.69, §60.62, §61.35, or §62.23,
applies to this chapter and to any
amendments to this chapter.
(2) The provisions of this chapter are
deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the same governing
body.
(3) The Board hereby designates the
Director to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) The requirements of this chapter do
not preempt more stringent requirements
that may be imposed by any of the
following:
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources administrative rules, permits or
approvals including those authorized under
Wis. Stats. §281.16 and §283.33.
(b) Targeted non-agricultural
performance standards promulgated in rules
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources under s. NR 151.004, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(c) 61.354 of the Wisconsin State
Statutes.
10.02 FINDINGS OF FACT. The Board
finds that runoff from land disturbing
construction activity carries a significant
amount of sediment and other pollutants to
the waters of the state located within the
Village.
The Board also finds that
uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a
significant impact upon water resources and
the health, safety and general welfare of the
community and diminishes the public
enjoyment and use of natural resources.
Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction
runoff can:
(1) Degrade physical stream habitat by
increasing stream bank erosion, increasing
streambed scour, diminishing groundwater
recharge, diminishing stream base flows and
increasing stream temperature.
(2) Diminish the capacity of lakes and
streams to support fish, aquatic life,
recreational and water supply uses by
increasing pollutant loading of sediment,
suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals,
bacteria, pathogens and other urban
pollutants.
(3) Alter wetland communities by
changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads.
(4) Reduce the quality of groundwater
by increasing pollutant loading.
(5) Threaten public health, safety,
property and general welfare by overtaxing
storm sewers, drainage ways, and other
minor drainage facilities.
(6) Threaten public health, safety,
property and general welfare by increasing
major flood peaks and volumes.
(7) Undermine floodplain management
efforts by increasing the incidence and
levels of flooding.
10.03 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(1) Purpose. The general purpose of
this chapter is to establish runoff
management requirements that will diminish
the threats to public health, safety, welfare
and the aquatic environment. Specific
purposes are to:
(a) Further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions.
(b) Prevent and control the adverse
effects of stormwater; prevent and control
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 3 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
soil erosion; prevent and control water
pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish
and aquatic life; control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses;
preserve ground cover and scenic beauty;
and promote sound economic growth.
(c) Control exceedance of the safe
capacity of existing drainage facilities and
receiving water bodies; prevent undue
channel erosion; control increases in the
scouring and transportation of particulate
matter; and prevent conditions that endanger
downstream property.
(2) Intent. It is the intent of the
Board that this chapter regulates stormwater
discharges to waters of the state. This
chapter may be applied on a site-by-site
basis. The Board recognizes, however, that
the preferred method of achieving the
stormwater performance standards set forth
in this chapter is through the preparation and
implementation of comprehensive, systemslevel
stormwater management plans that
cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds,
on a municipal and regional scale. Such
plans may prescribe regional stormwater
devices, practices or systems, any of which
may be designed to treat or prevent runoff
from more than one (1) site prior to
discharge to waters of the state. Where such
plans are in conformance with the
performance standards developed under
Wis. Stats. §281.16 for regional stormwater
management measures and have been
approved by the Village, it is the intent of
this chapter that the approved plan be used
to identify measures acceptable for the
community.
10.04 DEFINITIONS.
(1) Administering Authority. A
governmental employee empowered under
Wis. Stats. §59.693, §60.627, §61.354,
§62.234, that is designated by the Board to
administer this chapter.
(2) Agriculture Activity Area. The
part of the farm where there is planting,
growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops
for human or livestock consumption and
pasturing or outside yarding of livestock,
including sod farms and silviculture.
Practices in this area may include
waterways, drainage ditches, diversions,
terraces, farm lanes, excavation, filling and
similar practices. The agricultural activity
area does not include the agricultural
production area.
(3) Agricultural Production Area.
The part of the farm where there is
concentrated production activity or
impervious surfaces. Agricultural
production areas include buildings,
driveways, parking areas, feed storage
structures, manure storage structures, and
other impervious surfaces. The agricultural
production area does not include the
agricultural activity area.
(4) An Individual. Any owner,
operator, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality, interstate agency,
state agency, or federal agency.
(5) Authorized Enforcement Agency.
Employees or designees of the Director are
hereby designated to enforce this chapter.
(6) Average Annual Rainfall. A
calendar year of precipitation, excluding
snow, which is considered typical. For
purposes of this chapter, average annual
rainfall means measured precipitation in
Green Bay, Wisconsin between March 29
and November 25, 1969.
(7) Best Management Practice or
BMP. Structural or non-structural
measures, practices, techniques or devices
employed to avoid or minimize soil,
sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to
waters of the state.
(8) Business Day. A day the office of
the Director that is routinely and customarily
open for business.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 4 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
(9) Cease and Desist Order. A courtissued
order to halt land disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted
without the required permit.
(10) Combined Sewer System. A
system for conveying both sanitary sewage
and stormwater runoff.
(11) Common Plan of Development or
Sale. A development or sale where multiple
separate and distinct land disturbing
construction activities may be taking place
at different times on different schedules but
under one (1) plan. A common plan of
development or sale includes, but is not
limited to, subdivision plats, certified survey
maps, and other developments.
(12) Connected Imperviousness. An
impervious surface that is directly connected
to a separate storm sewer or water of the
state via an impervious flow path.
(13) Construction Site. An area upon
which one (1) or more land disturbing
construction activities occur, including areas
that are part of a larger common plan of
development.
(14) Contaminated Stormwater.
Stormwater that comes into contact with
material handling equipment or activities,
raw materials, intermediate products, final
products, waste materials, byproducts or
industrial machinery in the source areas
listed in NR 216 (effective August 1, 2004).
(15) Department (DNR). The
Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
(16) Design Storm. A hypothetical
discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution,
rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total
depth of rainfall. The TR-55, Type II, 24-
hour design storms for Village are: one (1)
year, two point two inches (2.2”); two (2)
year, two point five inches (2.5”); five (5)
year, three point two inches (3.2”); ten (10)
year, three point seven inches (3.7”);
twenty-five (25) year, four point three
inches (4.3”); and one hundred (100) year,
five point one inches (5.1”).
(17) Development. Residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional, or other
land uses and associated roads.
(18) Director. The Director of Public
Works or his or her designee.
(19) Discharge. As defined in Wis.
Stats. Ch 283 (most current edition) when
used without qualification includes a
discharge of any pollutant. Discharge of
pollutant or discharge of pollutants. As
defined in Wis. Stats. Ch 283 (most current
edition), means any addition of any pollutant
to the waters of this state from any point
source.
(20) Effective Infiltration Area. The
area of the infiltration system that is used to
infiltrate runoff and does not include the
area used for site access, berms or
pretreatment.
(21) Erosion. The process by which the
land’s surface is worn away by the action of
wind, water, ice, or gravity.
(22) Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan. A comprehensive plan developed to
address pollution caused by erosion and
sedimentation of soil particles or rock
fragments during construction.
(23) Exceptional Resource Waters.
Waters listed in s. NR 102.11, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(24) Extraterritorial. The
unincorporated area within three (3) miles of
the corporate limits of a first (1st), second
(2nd), or third (3rd) class city, or within one
and a half (1½) miles of a fourth (4th) class
city or village.
(25) Financial Guarantee. A
performance bond, maintenance bond,
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or
similar guarantees submitted to the Director
by the responsible party to assure that
requirements of the chapter are carried out
in compliance with the stormwater
management plan.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 5 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
(26) Final Stabilization. That all land
disturbing construction activities at the
construction site have been completed and
that a uniform perennial vegetative cover
has been established, with a density of at
least seventy percent (70%) of the cover, for
the unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures, or that employ
equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(27) Governing Body. The Board of
the Village of Suamico, Brown County,
State of Wisconsin.
(28) Hazardous Materials. Any
material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may
cause, or significantly contribute to, a
substantial present or potential hazard to
human health, safety, property, or the
environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise
managed.
(29) Highway. As found in Wis. Stats.
§340.01 (22).
(30) Highway Reconditioning. As
found in Wis. Stats. §84.013 (1)(b).
(31) Highway Reconstruction. As
found in Wis. Stats. §84.013(1)(c).
(32) Highway Resurfacing. As found
in Wis. Stats. §84.013(1)(d).
(33) Illicit Discharge. Any discharge
to a municipal separate storm sewer system
that is not composed entirely of stormwater
except discharges authorized by a WPDES
permit or other discharge not requiring a
WPDES permit such as landscape irrigation,
individual residential car washing, fire
fighting, diverted stream flows,
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
discharges from potable water sources,
foundation drains, air conditioning
condensation, irrigation water, lawn
watering, flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands, and similar discharges.
(34) Illicit Connections. An illicit
connection is defined as either of the
following:
(a) Any drain or conveyance, whether
on the surface or subsurface that allows an
illicit discharge to enter the MS4 including
but not limited to any conveyances that
allow any non-stormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and
wash water to enter the MS4 and any
connections to the MS4 from indoor drains
and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency or,
(b) Any drain or conveyance connected
from a commercial or industrial land use to
the MS4 which has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by an authorized enforcement
agency.
(35) Impervious Surface. An area that
releases as runoff all or a large portion of the
precipitation that falls on it, except for
frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways,
parking lots and streets are examples of
areas that typically are impervious. Gravel
surfaces are considered impervious, unless
specifically designed to encourage
infiltration.
(36) Industrial Activity. Activities
subject to WPDES industrial permits per NR
216 (effective August 1, 2004) and Wis.
Stats. Ch 283 (most current edition).
(37) In-Fill Area. A new development
area less than five (5) acres in size that is
located within existing urban sewer service
areas, surrounded by already existing
development or existing development and
natural or man-made features where
development cannot occur.
(38) Infiltration. The entry of
precipitation or runoff into or through the
soil.
(39) Infiltration System. A device or
practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 6 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
or swale designed specifically to encourage
infiltration, but does not include natural
infiltration in pervious surfaces such as
lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts
onto lawns or minimal infiltration from
practices, such as swales or road side
channels designed for conveyance and
pollutant removal only.
(40) Karst Feature. An area or
surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a
conduit to groundwater, and may include
caves, enlarged fractures, mine features,
exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes,
springs, seeps, or swallets.
(41) Land Disturbing Construction
Activity (or Disturbance). Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a
change in the topography or existing
vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that
may result in runoff and lead to an increase
in soil erosion and movement of sediment
into waters of the state. Land disturbing
construction activity includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench
dewatering, filling and grading activities,
and soil stockpiling.
(42) Maintenance Agreement. A legal
document that provides for long-term
maintenance of stormwater management and
best management practices.
(43) MEP or Maximum Extent
Practicable. A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a
performance standard specified in this
chapter which takes into account the best
available technology, cost effectiveness and
other competing issues such as human safety
and welfare, endangered and threatened
resources, historic properties and geographic
features. MEP allows flexibility in the way
to meet the performance standards and may
vary based on the performance standard and
site conditions.
(44) Minor Reconstruction of a
Highway. Reconstruction of a highway that
is limited to one and a half (1½) miles in
continuous or aggregate total length of
realignment and that does not exceed one
hundred feet (100’) in width of roadbed
widening.
(45) Municipality. Any city, town,
village, county, county utility district, town
sanitary district, town utility district, school
district or metropolitan sewage district or
any other public entity created pursuant to
law and having authority to collect, treat or
dispose of sewage, industrial wastes,
stormwater or other wastes.
(46) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4). As defined in Wisconsin
Administrative Code NR 216 (effective
August 1, 2004), means a conveyance or
system of conveyances including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed
channels or storm drains, which meets all
the following criteria:
(a) Owned or operated by a
municipality.
(b) Designed or used for collecting or
conveying stormwater.
(c) Is not a combined sewer conveying
both sanitary and stormwater.
(d) Is not part of a publicly owned
wastewater treatment works that provides
secondary or more stringent treatment.
(47) New Development. That portion
of a post-construction site where impervious
surfaces are being created or expanded. Any
disturbance where the amount of impervious
area for the post-development condition is
greater than the pre-development condition
is classified as new development. For
purposes of this chapter, a post-construction
site is classified as new development,
redevelopment, routine maintenance, or
some combination of these three (3)
classifications as appropriate.
(48) Non-Stormwater Discharge. Any
discharge to the MS4 that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 7 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
(49) Off-Site. Located outside the
property boundary described in the permit
application.
(50) On-Site. Located within the
property boundary described in the permit
application.
(51) Ordinary High-Water Mark. As
found in s. NR 115.03(6), Wis. Adm. Code.
(52) Outfall. The point at which
stormwater is discharged to waters of the
state or to a storm sewer.
(53) Outstanding Resource Waters.
As found in s. NR 102.10, Wis. Adm. Code.
(54) Owner. Any person holding fee
title, an easement or other interest in
property.
(55) Percent Fines. The percentage of
a given sample of soil, which passes through
a # 200 sieve.
(56) Performance Standard. A
narrative or measurable number specifying
the minimum acceptable outcome for a
facility or practice.
(57) Permit. A written authorization
made by the Director to the applicant to
conduct land disturbing construction activity
or to discharge post-construction runoff to
waters of the state.
(58) Permit Administration Fee. A
sum of money paid to the Director by the
permit applicant for the purpose of
recouping the expenses incurred by the
authority in administering the permit.
(59) Pervious Surface. An area that
releases as runoff a small portion of the
precipitation that falls on it. Lawns,
gardens, parks, forests or other similar
vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that
typically are pervious.
(60) Pollutant. As found in Wis. Stats.
§283.01 (13).
(61) Pollution. As found in Wis. Stats.
§281.01 (10).
(62) Pollution Prevention. Taking
measures to eliminate or reduce pollution.
(63) Post-Construction Site. A
construction site following the completion
of land disturbing construction activity and
final site stabilization.
(64) Post-Development. The extent
and distribution of land cover types present
after the completion of land disturbing
construction activity and final site
stabilization.
(65) Pre-Development. The extent and
distribution of land cover types present
before the initiation of land disturbing
construction activity, assuming that all land
uses prior to development activity are
managed in an environmentally sound
manner.
(66) Premises. Any building, lot,
parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent
sidewalks and parking strips.
(67) Prevention Action Limit. As
found in s. NR 140.05(17), Wis. Adm.
Code.
(68) Protective Area. As found in
Section 10.17 (3) (d) of the Village postconstruction
stormwater management
ordinance.
(69) Redevelopment. That portion of a
post-construction site where impervious
surfaces are being reconstructed, replaced,
or reconfigured. Any disturbance where the
amount of impervious area for the postdevelopment
condition is equal to or less
than the pre-development condition is
classified as redevelopment. For purposes
of this chapter, a post-construction site is
classified as new development,
redevelopment, routine maintenance, or
some combination of these three
classifications as appropriate.
(70) Responsible Party. Any entity
holding fee title to the property or
performing services to meet the performance
standards of this chapter through a contract
or other agreement.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 8 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
(71) Routine Maintenance. That
portion of a post-construction site where
pre-development impervious surfaces are
being maintained to preserve the original
line and grade, hydraulic capacity, drainage
pattern, configuration, or purpose of the
facility. Remodeling of buildings and
resurfacing of parking lots, streets,
driveways, and sidewalks are examples of
routine maintenance, provided the lower half
(½) of the impervious surface’s granular
base is not disturbed. The disturbance shall
be classified as redevelopment if the lower
half (½) of the granular base associated with
the pre-development impervious surface is
disturbed or if the soil located beneath the
impervious surface is exposed. For
purposes of this chapter, a post-construction
site is classified as new development,
redevelopment, routine maintenance, or
some combination of these three (3)
classifications as appropriate.
(72) Runoff. Stormwater or
precipitation including rain, snow or ice
melt or similar water that moves on the land
surface via sheet or channelized flow.
(73) Sediment. Settleable solid
material that is transported by runoff,
suspended within runoff or deposited by
runoff away from its original location.
(74) Separate Storm Sewer. A
conveyance or system of conveyances
including roads with drainage systems,
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
constructed channels or storm drains, which
meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Is designed or used for collecting
water or conveying runoff.
(b) Discharges directly or indirectly to
waters of the state.
(c) Is not part of a combined sewer
system.
(d) Is not draining to a stormwater
treatment device or system.
(75) Site. The entire area included in
the legal description of the land on which
the land disturbing construction activity is
proposed in the permit application.
(76) Stop Work Order. An order
issued by the Director which requires that all
construction activity on the site be stopped.
(77) Stormwater. Runoff from
precipitation including rain, snow, ice melt
or similar water that moves on the land
surface via sheet or channelized flow.
(78) Stormwater Management Plan.
A comprehensive plan designed to reduce
the discharge of pollutants from stormwater
after the site has under gone final
stabilization following completion of the
construction activity.
(79) Stormwater Management
Plan/Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Plan. A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be
implemented by a person or business to
identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent
practicable.
(80) Stormwater Management System
Plan. A comprehensive plan designed to
reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants
from hydrologic units on a regional or
municipal scale.
(81) Technical Standard. A document
that specifies design, predicted performance
and operation and maintenance
specifications for a material, device or
method.
(82) Top of the Channel. An edge, or
point on the landscape, landward from the
ordinary high-water mark of a surface water
of the state, where the slope of the land
begins to be less than twelve percent (12%)
continually for at least fifty feet (50’). If the
slope of the land is twelve percent (12%) or
less continually for the initial fifty feet (50’),
landward from the ordinary high-water
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 9 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary
high-water mark.
(83) TR-55. The United States
Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service (previously
Soil Conservation Service), Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second
Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986.
(84) Transportation Facility. A public
street, a public road, a public highway, a
public mass transit facility, a public-use
airport, a public trail, or any other public
work for transportation purposes such as
harbor improvements under Wis. Stats.
§85.095(1)(b).
(85) Type II Distribution. A rainfall
type curve as established in the “United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149,
published 1973”. The Type II curve is
applicable to all of Wisconsin and represents
the most intense storm pattern.
(86) The Village. The Village of
Suamico.
(87) Village Stormwater Reference
Guide. The most current edition of the
Village of Suamico Stormwater Reference
Guide for Post-Construction Stormwater
Management and Construction Site Erosion
Control is available at the Village Hall and
online at www.suamico.org.
(88) Wastewater. Any water or other
liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
(89) Watercourse. A natural or
artificial channel through which water flows.
These channels include all blue and dashed
blue lines on the USGS quadrangle maps, all
channels shown on the soils maps in the
NRCS soils book for Brown County, all
channels identified on the site, and new
channels that are created as part of a
development. The term watercourse
includes waters of the state as herein
defined.
(90) Waters of the State. As found in
Wis. Stats. §281.01 (18).
(91) (WPDES) Wisconsin Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System
Stormwater Discharge Permit. A
Wisconsin pollutant discharge elimination
system permit issued pursuant to Wis. Stats.
Ch. 283. (most current edition).
SUBCHAPTER I – CONSTRUCTION
SITE EROSION CONTROL ZONING
ORDINANCE
10.05 APPLICABILITY AND
JURISDICTION.
(1) Applicability.
(a) This chapter applies to the following
land disturbing construction activities except
as provided under Sub. (b):
1. A construction site, which has four
thousand (4,000) square feet or greater of
land disturbing construction activity.
2. A construction site, which has one
hundred (100) cubic yards or greater of
excavation volume, filling volume, or some
combination of excavation and filling
volume.
3. A construction site, which has fifty
(50) linear feet or greater of land disturbance
to a highway, street, driveway, swale, ditch,
waters of the state, wetland, protective area,
or other non-agricultural drainage facility
which conveys concentrated flow. Wetlands
shall be delineated in accordance with S. NR
103.08(1m).
(b) This chapter does not apply to the
following:
1. A construction project that is
exempted by federal statutes or regulations
from the requirement to have a national
pollutant discharge elimination system
permit issued under Chapter 40, Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 122, for land
disturbing construction activity.
2. Nonpoint Discharges from
Agricultural Activity Areas.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 10 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
3. Nonpoint Discharges from
silviculture activities.
4. Roadway milling operations.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability
requirements in Paragraph (a), this chapter
applies to construction sites of any size that,
in the opinion of the Director, are likely to
result in runoff that exceeds the safe
capacity of the existing drainage facilities or
receiving body of water, that causes undue
channel erosion, that increases water
pollution by scouring or the transportation of
particulate matter or that endangers property
or public safety.
(2) Jurisdiction. This chapter applies
to land disturbing construction activity on
construction sites located within the
boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village.
(3) Exclusions. This chapter is not
applicable to activities conducted by a state
agency, as defined under Wis. Stats.
§227.01(1), but also including the office of
district attorney, which is subject to the state
plan promulgated or a memorandum of
understanding entered into under Wis. Stats.
§281.33(2).
10.06 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
(1) Design Criteria, Standards, and
Specifications. All BMPs required to
comply with this chapter shall meet the
design criteria, standards and specifications
based on any of the following:
(a) Design guidance and technical
standards identified or developed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
under Subchapter V of Chapter NR 151,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) Technical standards and other
guidance identified within the Village
Stormwater Reference Guide.
(c) For this chapter, average annual
basis is calculated using the appropriate
annual rainfall or runoff factor, also referred
to as the R factor, or an equivalent design
storm using a Type II distribution, with
consideration given to the geographic
location of the site and the period of
disturbance.
(2) Other Standards. Other technical
standards not identified or developed in Sub.
(1), may be used provided that the methods
have been approved by the Director.
10.07 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(1) Responsible Party. The
responsible party shall implement an erosion
and sediment control plan developed in
accordance with Section 10.09 that
incorporates the requirements of this section.
(2) Plan. A written erosion and
sediment control plan shall be developed in
accordance with Section 10.09 and
implemented for each construction site.
(3) Requirements. The erosion and
sediment control plan required shall meet
the following minimum requirements to the
maximum extent practicable:
(a) BMPs shall be designed, installed
and maintained to control total suspended
solids carried in runoff from the construction
site as follows.
1. For construction sites with one (1)
acre or greater of land disturbing
construction activity, BMPs that, by design,
discharge no more than 5 tons per acre per
year, or to the maximum extent practicable,
of the sediment load carried in runoff from
initial grading to final stabilization. No
person shall be required to exceed sediment
reduction to meet the requirements of this
paragraph. Erosion and sediment control
BMPs may be used alone or in combination
to meet the requirements of this paragraph.
Credit toward meeting the sediment
reduction shall be given for limiting the
duration or area, or both, of land disturbing
construction activity, or other appropriate
mechanism.
2. For construction sites with less than
one (1) acre of land disturbing construction
activity, reduce the total suspended solids
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 11 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
load using BMPs from the Village
Stormwater Reference Guide. These sites
are not required to satisfy a numeric
performance standard.
(b) Notwithstanding Par. (a), if BMPs
cannot be designed and implemented to
reduce the sediment load, on an average
annual basis, the plan shall include a written
and site-specific explanation as to why the
reduction goal is not attainable and the
sediment load shall be reduced to the
maximum extent practicable.
(c) Where appropriate, the plan shall
include sediment controls to do all of the
following to the maximum extent
practicable:
1. The deposition of soil from being
tracked onto streets by vehicles.
2. The discharge of sediment from
disturbed areas into on-site storm water
inlets.
3. The discharge of sediment from
disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the
state.
4. The discharge of sediment from
drainage ways that flow off the site.
5. The discharge of sediment by
dewatering activities.
6. The discharge of sediment eroding
from soil stockpiles existing for more than 7
days.
7. The discharge of sediment from
erosive flows at outlets and in downstream
channels.
8. The transport by runoff into waters of
the state of chemicals, cement, and other
building compounds and materials on the
construction site during the construction
period. However, projects that require the
placement of these materials in waters of the
state, such as constructing bridge footings or
BMP installations, are not prohibited by this
subdivision.
9. The transport by runoff into waters of
the state of untreated wash water from
vehicle and wheel washing.
(d) The erosion and sediment control
plan shall incorporate all the following:
1. Maintenance of existing vegetation,
especially adjacent to surface waters
whenever possible.
2. Minimization of soil compaction and
preservation of topsoil.
3. Minimization of land disturbing
construction activity on slopes of 20 percent
or more.
4. Development of spill prevention and
response procedures.
(4) Location. The BMPs used to
comply with this section shall be located
prior to runoff entering waters of the state.
(5) Alternate Requirements. The
Director may establish requirements more
stringent than those set forth in this section
if the Director determines that an added
level of protection is needed for sensitive
resources.
10.08 PERMITTING
REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES,
AND FEES.
(1) Permit Required. No responsible
party may commence a land disturbing
construction activity subject to this chapter
without receiving prior approval of an
erosion and sediment control plan for the
site and a permit from the Director.
(2) Permit Application and Fees. At
least one (1) responsible party desiring to
undertake a land disturbing construction
activity subject to this chapter shall submit
an application for a permit and an erosion
and sediment control plan that meets the
requirements of Section 10.09 and shall pay
an application fee to the Director. By
submitting an application, the applicant is
authorizing the Director to enter the site to
obtain information required for the review of
the erosion and sediment control plan. Fees
shall be set from time to time by resolution
by the Board.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 12 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
(3) Review and Approval of Permit
Application. The Director shall review any
permit application that is submitted with an
erosion and sediment control plan and the
required fee. The following approval
procedure shall be used:
(a) Within ten (10) business days of the
receipt of a complete permit application, as
required by Sub. (2), the Director shall
inform the applicant whether the application
and plan are approved or disapproved based
on the requirements of this chapter.
(b) If the permit application and plan are
approved, the Director shall issue the permit.
(c) If the permit application or plan is
disapproved, the Director shall state in
writing the reasons for disapproval.
(d) The Director may request additional
information from the applicant. If additional
information is submitted, the Director shall
have ten (10) business days from the date
the additional information is received to
inform the applicant that the plan is either
approved or disapproved.
(e) Failure by the Director to inform the
permit applicant of a decision within ten
(10) business days of a required submittal
shall be deemed to mean approval of the
submittal and the applicant may proceed as
if a permit had been issued.
(f) Any decision of the Director may be
appealed by written request by the applicant
to the Village Board of Appeals pursuant to
Section 18.24 (3). Said written notice of
appeal must be filed with the Board of
Appeals within thirty (30) days of the
Director’s decision or be barred.
(4) Financial Guarantee. As a
condition of approval and issuance of the
permit, the Director may require the
applicant to deposit a surety bond, cash
escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit to
guarantee a good faith execution of the
approved erosion control plan and any
permit conditions.
(5) Permit Requirements. All permits
shall require the responsible party to:
(a) Notify the Director within fortyeight
(48) hours of commencing any land
disturbing construction activity.
(b) Obtain permission in writing from
the Director prior to any modification
pursuant to Section 10.09 (3) of the erosion
and sediment control plan.
(c) Install all BMPs as identified in the
approved erosion and sediment control plan.
(d) Maintain all road drainage systems,
stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and
other facilities identified in the erosion and
sediment control plan.
(e) Immediately repair any siltation or
erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and
drainage ways resulting from land disturbing
construction activities and document repairs
in weekly inspection reports.
(f) Conduct construction site inspections
at least once per week and within twentyfour
(24) hours after a precipitation event of
a half inch (½”)or greater. Repair or replace
erosion and sediment control BMPs as
necessary within twenty-four (24) hours of
an inspection or notification that repair or
replacement is needed. Maintain, at the
construction site, weekly written reports of
all inspections. Weekly inspection reports
shall include all of the following: date, time
and location of the construction site
inspection; the name of individual who
performed the inspection; an assessment of
the condition of erosion and sediment
controls; a description of any erosion and
sediment control BMP implementation and
maintenance performed; and a description of
the present phase of land disturbing
construction activity at the construction site.
(g) Allow the Director to enter the site
for the purpose of inspecting compliance
with the erosion and sediment control plan
or for performing any work necessary to
bring the site into compliance with the
control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 13 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
sediment control plan, stormwater
management plan, amendments, weekly
inspection reports, and permit at the
construction site until permit coverage is
terminated.
(h) The permit applicant shall post the
“Certificate of Permit Coverage” in a
conspicuous location at the construction site.
(6) Permit Conditions. Permits issued
under this section may include conditions
established by Director in addition to the
requirements set forth in Sub. (5), where
needed to assure compliance with the
performance standards in Section 10.07.
(7) Permit Duration. Permits issued
under this section shall be valid for a period
of one hundred eighty (180) days, or the
length of the building permit or other
construction authorizations, whichever is
longer, from the date of issuance. The
Director may extend the period one (1) or
more times for up to an additional one
hundred eighty (180) days. The Director
may require additional BMPs as a condition
of the extension if they are necessary to
meet the requirements of this chapter.
(8) Maintenance. The responsible
party throughout the duration of the
construction activities shall maintain all
BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of
this chapter until the site has undergone final
stabilization.
10.09 EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL PLAN, STATEMENT, AND
AMENDMENTS.
(1) Plan Requirements. The erosion
and sediment control plan required under
Section 10.07 (2) shall comply with the
Village Stormwater Reference Guide and
contain at a minimum the following
information:
(a) Name, address, and telephone
number of the landowner and responsible
parties.
(b) A legal description of the property
proposed to be developed.
(c) A site map with property lines,
disturbed limits, and drainage patterns.
(d) Total area of the site and total area
of the construction site that is expected to be
disturbed by construction activities.
(e) Performance standards applicable to
site.
(f) Proposed best management practices.
1. The deposition of soil from being
tracked onto streets by vehicles.
2. The discharge of sediment from
disturbed areas into on-site storm water
inlets.
3. The discharge of sediment from
disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the
state.
4. The discharge of sediment from
drainage ways that flow off the site.
5. The discharge of sediment by
dewatering activities.
6. The discharge of sediment eroding
from soil stockpiles existing for more than 7
days.
7. The discharge of sediment from
erosive flows at outlets and in downstream
channels.
8. The transport by runoff into waters of
the state of chemicals, cement, and other
building compounds and materials on the
construction site during the construction
period. However, projects that require the
placement of these materials in waters of the
state, such as constructing bridge footings or
BMP installations, are not prohibited by this
subdivision.
9. The transport by runoff into waters of
the state of untreated wash water from
vehicle and wheel washing.
(2) Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan Statement. For each construction site
identified under Section 10.05 (1) (c), an
erosion and sediment control plan statement
shall be prepared. This statement shall be
submitted to the Director. The control plan
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 14 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
statement shall briefly describe the site,
including a site map. Further, it shall also
include the best management practices that
will be used to meet the requirements of the
chapter, including the site development
schedule.
(3) Amendments. The applicant shall
amend the plan if any of the following
occur:
(a) There is a change in design,
construction, operation or maintenance at
the site which has the reasonable potential
for the discharge of pollutants to waters of
the state and which has not otherwise been
addressed in the plan.
(b) The actions required by the plan fail
to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried
by construction site runoff.
(c) The Director notifies the applicant of
changes needed in the plan.
10.10 INSPECTION. If land disturbing
construction activities are being carried out
without a permit required by this chapter,
the Director may enter the land pursuant to
the provisions of Wis. Stats. §66.0119(1),
(2), and (3).
SUBCHAPTER II – SUAMICO POSTCONSTRUCTION
STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT ZONING
ORDINANCE
10.15 APPLICABILITY AND
JURISDICTION.
(1) Applicability.
(a) Where not otherwise limited by law,
this chapter applies to all post-construction
sites, unless the site is otherwise exempt
under Paragraph (b).
(b) A post-construction site that meets
any of the criteria in this paragraph is
exempt from the requirements of this
chapter.
1. One (1) and two (2) family residential
dwellings that are not part of a larger
common plan of development or sale and
that result in less than one (1) acre of
disturbance.
2. Non-point discharges from
agricultural activity areas.
3. Non-point discharges from
silviculture activities.
4. Mill and crush operations.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability
requirements in Paragraph (a), this chapter
applies to post-construction sites of any size
that, in the opinion of the Director, is likely
to result in runoff that exceeds the safe
capacity of the existing drainage facilities or
receiving body of water, that causes undue
channel erosion, that increases water
pollution by scouring or the transportation of
particulate matter or that endangers property
or public safety.
(2) Jurisdiction. This chapter applies
to post-construction sites within the
boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village.
(3) Exclusions. This chapter is not
applicable to activities conducted by a state
agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. §227.01
(1), but also including the office of district
attorney, which is subject to the state plan
promulgated or a memorandum of
understanding entered into under Wis. Stats.
§281.33 (2).
10.16 TECHNICAL STANDARDS. The
following methods shall be used in
designing and maintaining the water quality,
peak discharge, infiltration, protective area,
and fueling/vehicle maintenance
components of stormwater practices needed
to meet the water quality standards of this
chapter:
(1) Technical standards identified,
developed or disseminated by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under
Subchapter V of Chapter NR 151, Wis.
Adm. Code.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 15 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
(2) Technical standards and guidance
identified within the Village Stormwater
Reference Guide.
(3) Where technical standards have not
been identified or developed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources, other technical standards may be
used provided that the methods have been
approved by the Director.
(4) In this chapter, the following year
and location has been selected as average
annual rainfall. Green Bay, 1969 (Mar. 29-
Nov. 25).
10.17 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(1) Responsible Party. The
responsible party shall implement a postconstruction
stormwater management plan
that incorporates the requirements of this
section.
(2) Plan. A written stormwater
management plan in accordance with
Section 10.19 shall be developed and
implemented for each post-construction site.
(3) Maintenance of Effort. For
redevelopment sites where the
redevelopment will be replacing older
development that was subject to postconstruction
performance standards of NR
151 in effect on or after October 1, 2004, the
responsible party shall meet the total
suspended solids reduction, peak flow
control, infiltration, and protective areas
standards applicable to the older
development or meet the redevelopment
standards of this ordinance, whichever is
more stringent.
(4) Requirements. The stormwater
management plan shall meet the following
minimum requirements to the maximum
extent practicable:
(a) Total Suspended Solids. BMPs shall
be designed, installed and maintained to
control total suspended solids carried in
runoff from the post-construction site as
follows. The total suspended solids
reduction shall be based on the average
annual rainfall as compared to no runoff
management controls.
1. For post-construction sites with
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or
more of proposed impervious surface and/or
post-construction sites with one (1) acre or
more of land disturbance, the following is
required:
a. Reduce the total suspended solids
load by eighty percent (80%) for new
development.
b. Reduce the total suspended solids
load from parking areas and roads by forty
percent (40%) for redevelopment.
c. No total suspended solids load
reduction is required for routine
maintenance areas unless runoff from the
routine maintenance area discharges into a
proposed water quality BMP.
d. Off-Site Drainage. When designing
BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from offsite
shall be taken into account in
determining the treatment efficiency of the
practice. Any impact on the efficiency shall
be compensated for by increasing the size of
the BMP accordingly.
2. For post-construction sites with less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
proposed impervious surface, reduce the
total suspended solids load using BMPs
from the Village Stormwater Reference
Guide. These sites are not required to
satisfy a numeric performance standard.
3. The amount of total suspended solids
control previously required for the site shall
not be reduced as a result of the proposed
development or disturbance.
4. Notwithstanding Subds. 1. to 4., if the
design cannot achieve the applicable total
suspended solids reduction specified, the
stormwater management plan shall include a
written and site-specific explanation why
that level of reduction is not attained and the
total suspended solids load shall be reduced
to the maximum extent practicable.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 16 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
(b) Peak Discharge. BMPs shall be
designed, installed and maintained to control
peak discharges from the post-construction
site as follows:
1. For post-construction sites with
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or
more of impervious surface and/or postconstruction
sites with one (1) acre or more
of land disturbance, the following is
required:
a. The peak post-development discharge
rate shall not exceed the peak predevelopment
discharge rate for the two (2)
year, ten (10) year, and one hundred (100)
year, twenty-four (24) hour design storms.
These peak discharge requirements apply to
new development and redevelopment areas.
No peak discharge control is required for
routine maintenance areas, unless runoff
from the routine maintenance area
discharges into a proposed peak flow control
facility.
b. TR-55 methodology shall be used for
peak discharge calculations, unless the
administering authority approves an
equivalent methodology. The meaning of
“hydrologic soil group” and “runoff curve
number” are as determined in TR-55. Peak
pre-development discharge rates shall be
determined using the following runoff curve
numbers:
Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers
Runoff Curve
Number
Hydrologic Soil Group
A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 55 69 78 83
2. For post-construction sites with less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
impervious surface disturbance, reduce peak
post-development discharge rates using
BMPs from the Village Stormwater
Reference Guide. These sites are not
required to satisfy a numeric performance
standard.
3. The amount of peak discharge control
previously required for the site shall not be
reduced as a result of the proposed
development or disturbance.
4. An adequate outfall shall be provided
for each point of concentrated discharge
from the post-construction site. An
adequate outfall consists of non-erosive
discharge velocities and reasonable
downstream conveyance.
5. Exemptions. The following
transportation facilities are not required to
meet the peak discharge requirements of this
Paragraph (b) provided the transportation
facility is not part of a larger common plan
of development or sale:
a. A transportation facility where the
change in hydrology due to development
does not increase the existing surface water
elevation at any point within the
downstream receiving surface water by
more than one hundredth (0.01) of a foot for
the two (2) year, twenty-four (24) hour
storm event.
b. A Highway reconstruction site.
6. This subsection of the ordinance does
not apply to any of the following:
a. A post-construction site where the
discharge is directly into a lake over five
thousand (5,000) acres or a stream or river
segment draining more than five hundred
(500) square miles.
b. Except as provided under 10.17(3), a
redevelopment post-construction site.
c. An in-fill development area less than
five (5) acres.
(c) Infiltration. BMPs shall be
designed, installed, and maintained to
infiltrate runoff in accordance with the
following, except as provided in Subds. 8.
through 11.
1. For developments with twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet or more of
impervious surface disturbance and
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 17 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
development with one (1) acre or more of
land disturbance, one (1) of the following
shall be met:
a. Low imperviousness. For
development up to forty (40) percent
connected imperviousness, such as parks,
cemeteries, and low density residential
development, infiltrate sufficient runoff
volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least ninety
(90) percent of the pre-development
infiltration volume, based on an average
annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than one percent of
the post-construction site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
b. Moderate imperviousness. For
development with more than forty (40)
percent and up to eighty (80) percent
connected imperviousness, such as medium
and high density residential, multi-family
development, industrial and institutional
development, and office parks, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at
least seventy-five (75) percent of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on
an average annual rainfall. However, when
designing appropriate infiltration systems to
meet this requirement, no more than two (2)
percent of the post-construction site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
c. High imperviousness. For
development with more than eighty (80)
percent connected imperviousness, such as
commercial strip malls, shopping centers,
and commercial downtowns, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at
least sixty (60) percent of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on
an average annual rainfall. However, when
designing appropriate infiltration systems to
meet this requirement, no more than two (2)
percent of the post-construction site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
2. Pre-development condition shall
assume “good hydrologic conditions” for
appropriate land covers as identified in TR-
55 or an equivalent methodology approved
by the administering authority. The
meaning of “hydrologic soil group” and
“runoff curve number” are as determined in
TR-55. However, when pre-development
land cover is cropland, rather than using TR-
55 values for cropland, the following runoff
curve numbers shall be used:
Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve #s – Cropland
Hydraulic Soil Group A B C D
Runoff Curve # 56 70 79 83
3. For residential and non-residential
developments with less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet of new
impervious surfaces, infiltrate runoff volume
using BMPs from the Village Stormwater
Reference Guide. These sites are not
required to satisfy a numeric performance
standard.
4. The amount of infiltration previously
required for the site shall not be reduced as a
result of the proposed development or
disturbance.
5. Before infiltrating runoff,
pretreatment shall be required for parking lot
runoff and for runoff from new road
construction in commercial, industrial and
institutional areas that will enter an
infiltration system. The pretreatment shall
be designed to protect the infiltration system
from clogging prior to scheduled
maintenance and to protect groundwater
quality in accordance with Subd. 11.
Pretreatment options may include, but are
not limited to, oil/grease separation,
sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration,
swales or filter strips.
6. Exclusions. Infiltration of runoff
from the following areas are prohibited from
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 18 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
meeting the infiltration requirements of this
Paragraph (c):
a. Areas associated with tier one (1)
industrial facilities identified in S. NR
216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including
storage, loading, rooftop and parking.
b. Storage and loading areas of tier two
(2) industrial facilities identified in S. NR
216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
c. Fueling and vehicle maintenance
areas.
d. Areas within one thousand feet
(1,000’) upgradient or within one hundred
feet (100’) downgradient of Karst features.
e. Areas with less than three feet (3’)
separation distance from the bottom of the
infiltration system to the elevation of
seasonal high groundwater or the top of
bedrock, except this Subd. 8.e. does not
prohibit infiltration of roof runoff.
f. Areas with runoff from industrial,
commercial and institutional parking lots
and roads and residential arterial roads with
less than five feet (5’) separation distance
from the bottom of the infiltration system to
the elevation of seasonal high groundwater
or the top of bedrock.
g. Areas within four hundred feet (400’)
of a community water system well as
specified in S. NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm.
Code, or within one hundred feet (100’) of a
private well as specified in S. NR 812.08(4),
Wis. Adm. Code, for runoff infiltrated from
commercial, industrial and institutional land
uses or regional devices for residential
development.
h. Areas where contaminants of
concern, as defined in S. NR 720.03(2), Wis.
Adm. Code are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
Any area where the soil does not
exhibit one (1) of the following soil
characteristics between the bottom of the
infiltration system and the seasonal high
groundwater and top of bedrock: at least a
three foot (3’) soil layer with twenty percent
(20%) fines or greater; or at least a five foot
(5’) soil layer with ten percent (10%) fines
or greater. This does not apply where the
soil medium within the infiltration system
provides an equivalent level of protection.
This Subd. 8.i. does not prohibit infiltration
of roof runoff.
7. Exemptions. Infiltration of runoff
from the following areas are not required to
meet the infiltration requirements of this
Paragraph (c):
a. Areas where the infiltration rate of
the soil is less than six-tenths inch
(0.6”)/hour measured at the site.
b. Parking areas and access roads less
than five thousand (5,000) square feet for
commercial and industrial development.
c. Redevelopment and routine
maintenance areas.
d. In-fill areas less than five (5) acres.
e. Infiltration areas during periods when
the soil on the site is frozen.
f. Roads in commercial, industrial and
institutional land uses, and arterial
residential roads.
g. Highways provided the transportation
facility is not part of a larger common plan
of development or sale.
8. Where alternate uses of runoff are
employed, such as for toilet flushing,
laundry or irrigation, such alternate use shall
be given equal credit toward the infiltration
volume required by this paragraph.
9. a. Infiltration systems designed in
accordance with this paragraph shall, to the
extent technically and economically
feasible, minimize the level of pollutants
infiltrating to groundwater and shall
maintain compliance with the preventive
action limit at a point of standards
application in accordance with Ch. NR 140,
Wis. Adm. Code. However, if site specific
information indicates that compliance with a
preventive action limit is not achievable, the
infiltration BMP may not be installed or
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 19 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
shall be modified to prevent infiltration to
the maximum extent practicable.
b. Notwithstanding Subd. Par. a., the
discharge from BMPs shall remain below
the enforcement standard at the point of
standards application.
(d) Protective Areas.
1. Protective Area. An area of land that
commences at the top of the channel of
lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated
boundary of wetlands, and that is the
greatest of the following widths, as
measured horizontally from the top of the
channel or delineated wetland boundary to
the closest impervious surface. However, in
this paragraph, “Protective Area” does not
include any area of land adjacent to any
stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert,
such that runoff cannot enter the enclosure
at this location.
a. For outstanding resource waters and
exceptional resource waters, and for
wetlands in areas of special natural resource
interest as specified in S. NR 103.04,
seventy-five feet (75’).
b. For perennial and intermittent
streams identified on a United States
geological survey seven and a half (7½)
minute series topographic map, or a county
soil survey map, whichever is more current,
fifty feet (50’).
c. For lakes, fifty feet (50’).
d. For wetlands, fifty feet (50’) unless
variances and/or permits have been obtained
from Brown County, the Department of
Natural Resources, and the United States
Army Corps of Engineers, as applicable.
e. In Subd. 1a., and d., determinations of
the extent of the protective area adjacent to
wetlands shall be made on the basis of the
sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the
wetland in accordance with the standards
and criteria in S. NR 103.03.
f. For concentrated flow channels with
drainage areas greater than one hundred
thirty (130) acres, ten feet (10’).
g. Notwithstanding pars. a. to f., the
greates protective aria width shall apply
where rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands
are contiguous.
2. Wetlands shall be delineated.
Wetland boundary delineations shall be
made in accordance with S. NR 103.08(1m).
This Paragraph (d) does not apply to
wetlands that have been completely filled in
accordance with all applicable state and
federal regulations. The protective area for
wetlands that have been partially filled in
accordance with all applicable state and
federal regulations shall be measured from
the wetland boundary delineation after fill
has been placed.
3. This Paragraph (d) applies to postconstruction
sites located within a protective
area, except those areas exempted pursuant
to Subd. 6 below.
4. The following requirements shall be
met:
a. Impervious surfaces shall be kept out
of the protective area to the maximum extent
practicable. The stormwater management
plan shall contain a written site-specific
explanation for any parts of the protective
area that are disturbed during construction.
b. Where land disturbing construction
activity occurs within a protective area, and
where no impervious surface is present,
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative
cover of seventy percent (70%) or greater
shall be established and maintained. The
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative
cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank
stability, maintenance of fish habitat and
filtering of pollutants from upslope overland
flow areas under sheet flow conditions.
Non-vegetative materials, such as rock
riprap, may be employed on the bank as
necessary to prevent erosion, such as on
steep slopes or where high velocity flows
occur.
c. Best management practices such as
filter strips, swales, or wet detention basins
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 20 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
that are designed to control pollutants from
non-point sources may be located in the
protective area.
5. A protective area established or
created after the adoption date of this
chapter shall not be eliminated or reduced,
except as allowed in Subd. 6.b, c, or d
below.
6. Exemptions. The following areas are
not required to meet the protective area
requirements of this Paragraph (d):
a. Redevelopment and routine
maintenance areas provided the minimum
requirements within Subd. 5 above are
satisfied.
b. Structures that cross or access surface
waters such as boat landings, bridges and
culverts.
c. Structures constructed in accordance
with Wis. Stats. §59.692(1v).
d. Post-construction sites from which
runoff does not enter the surface water,
including wetlands, without first being
treated by a BMP to meet the local
ordinance requirements for total suspended
solids and peak flow reduction, except to the
extent that vegetative ground cover is
necessary to maintain bank stability.
e. In-fill development areas less than
five (5) acres.
(e) Fueling and Vehicle Maintenance
Areas. Fueling and vehicle maintenance
areas shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, have BMPs designed, installed
and maintained to reduce petroleum within
runoff, such that the runoff that enters
waters of the state contains no visible
petroleum sheen.
(f) Swale Treatment for Transportation
Facilities. This Section 10.17 (3) (f) is not
applicable to transportation facilities that are
part of a larger common plan of
development or sale.
1. Applicability. Except as provided in
Subd. 2., transportation facilities that use
swales for runoff conveyance and pollutant
removal meet all of the requirements of this
section, if the swales are designed to the
maximum extent practicable to do all of the
following:
a. Be vegetated. However, where
appropriate, non-vegetative measures may
be employed to prevent erosion or provide
for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap
stabilization or check dams.
b. Carry runoff through a swale for two
hundred feet (200’) or more in length that is
designed with a flow velocity no greater
than one and a half feet (1½’) per second for
the peak flow generated using either a two
(2) year, twenty-four (24) hour design storm
or a two (2) year storm a duration equal to
the time of concentration as appropriate. If
a swale of two hundred feet (200’) in length
cannot be designed with a flow velocity of
one and a half feet (1½’) per second or less,
then the flow velocity shall be reduced to the
maximum extent practicable.
2. Exemptions. The Director may,
consistent with water quality standards,
require other provisions of this section be
met on a transportation facility with an
average daily travel of vehicles greater than
two thousand five hundred (2,500) and
where the initial surface water of the state
that the runoff directly enters is any of the
following:
a. An outstanding resource water.
b. An exceptional resource water.
c. Waters listed in S. 303(d) of the
Federal Clean Water Act that are identified
as impaired in whole or in part due to
nonpoint source impacts.
d. Waters where targeted performance
standards are developed under S. NR
151.004, Wis. Adm. Code, to meet water
quality standards.
(g) Exemptions. The following areas
are not required to meet the performance
standards within Section 10.17 (3):
1. Agricultural production areas with
less than one hundred thousand (100,000)
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 21 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
square feet of impervious surface
disturbance.
2. Underground utility construction such
as water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone,
cable television, and fiber optic lines. This
exemption does not apply to the construction
of any above ground structures associated
with utility construction.
3. The following transportation facilities
are exempt, provided the transportation
facility is not part of a larger common plan
of development or sale.
a. Reconditioning or resurfacing of a
highway.
b. Minor reconstruction of a highway.
Notwithstanding this exemption, the
protective area requirements within NR
151.24(6) Wisconsin Administrative Code
apply to minor reconstruction of a highway.
c. A redevelopment transportation
facility with no increase in exposed parking
lots or roads.
d. A transportation facility with less
than ten percent (10%) connected
imperviousness based on complete
development of the transportation facility,
provided the cumulative area of all parking
lots and rooftops is less than one (1) acre.
e. Routine maintenance for
transportation facilities if performed to
maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the
facility.
(5) General Considerations for Onsite
and Offsite Stormwater Management
Measures. The following considerations
shall be observed in managing runoff:
(a) Natural topography and land cover
features such as natural swales, natural
depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity,
and natural groundwater recharge areas shall
be preserved and used, to the extent
possible, to meet the requirements of this
section.
(b) Emergency overland flow for all
stormwater facilities shall be provided to
prevent exceeding the safe capacity of
downstream drainage facilities and prevent
endangerment of downstream property or
public safety.
(6) Location and Regional Treatment
Option.
(a) The BMPs may be located onsite or
offsite as part of a regional stormwater
device, practice or system, but shall be
installed in accordance with s. NR 151.003,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) Post-construction runoff within a
non-navigable surface water that flows into
a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, is not
required to meet the performance standards
of this chapter. Post-construction BMPs
may be located in non-navigable surface
waters.
(c) Except as allowed under Par. (d),
post-construction runoff from new
development shall meet the postconstruction
performance standards prior to
entering a navigable surface water.
(d) Post-construction runoff from any
development within a navigable surface
water that flows into a BMP is not required
to meet the performance standards of this
chapter if:
1. The BMP was constructed prior to
the effective date of this chapter and the
BMP either received a permit issued under
Wis. Stats. Ch. 30, or the BMP did not
require a Wis. Stats. Ch. 30 permit; and
2. The BMP is designed to provide
runoff treatment from future upland
development.
(e) Runoff from existing development,
redevelopment and in-fill areas shall meet
the post-construction performance standards
in accordance with this paragraph.
1. To the maximum extent practicable,
BMPs shall be located to treat runoff prior to
discharge to navigable surface waters.
2. Post-construction BMPs for such
runoff may be located in a navigable surface
water if allowable under all other applicable
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 22 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
federal, state and local regulations such as
Ch. NR 103, Wis. Adm. Code and Wis.
Stats. Ch. 30.
(f) The discharge of runoff from a BMP,
such as a wet detention pond or after a series
of such BMPs is subject to this chapter.
(g) The Director may approve offsite
management measures provided that all of
the following conditions are met:
1. The Director determines that the postconstruction
runoff is covered by a
stormwater management system plan that is
approved by the Engineer and that contains
management requirements consistent with
the purpose and intent of this chapter.
2. The offsite facility meets all of the
following conditions:
a. The facility is in place.
b. The facility is designed and
adequately sized to provide a level of
stormwater control equal to or greater than
that which would be afforded by onsite
practices meeting the performance standards
of this chapter.
c. The facility has a legally obligated
entity responsible for its long-term operation
and maintenance.
(h) Where a regional treatment option
exists such that the Director exempts the
applicant from all or part of the minimum
onsite stormwater management
requirements, the applicant shall be required
to pay a fee in an amount determined in
negotiation with the Director. In
determining the fee for post-construction
runoff, the Director shall consider an
equitable distribution of the cost for land,
engineering design, construction, and
maintenance of the regional treatment
option.
(7) Alternate Requirements. The
Director may establish stormwater
management requirements more stringent
than those set forth in this section if the
Director determines that an added level of
protection is needed to protect sensitive
resources. Also, the Director may establish
stormwater management requirements less
stringent than those set forth in this section
if the Director determines that less
protection is needed to protect sensitive
resources and provide reasonable flood
protection. However, the alternative
requirements shall not be less stringent than
those requirements promulgated in rules by
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
under NR 151 Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
10.18 PERMITTING
REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES,
AND FEES.
(1) Permit Required. No responsible
party may undertake a land disturbing
construction activity for post-construction
stormwater management without receiving a
post-construction runoff permit from the
Director prior to commencing the proposed
activity.
(2) Permit Application and Fees.
Unless specifically excluded by this chapter,
any responsible party desiring a permit shall
submit to the Director a permit application
made on a form provided by the Director for
that purpose.
(a) Unless otherwise excepted by this
chapter, a permit application must be
accompanied by a stormwater management
plan, a maintenance agreement and a nonrefundable
permit administration fee as set
from time to time by resolution of the
Board.
(b) The stormwater management plan
shall be prepared to meet the requirements
of Section 10.17 and Section 10.19, the
maintenance agreement shall be prepared to
meet the requirements of Section 10.20, the
financial guarantee shall meet the
requirements of Section 10.21, and fees shall
be set from time to time by resolution by the
Board.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 23 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
(3) Review and Approval of Permit
Application. The Director shall review any
permit application that is submitted with a
stormwater management plan, maintenance
agreement, and the required fee. The
following approval procedure shall be used:
(a) Within ten (10) business days of the
receipt of a complete permit application,
including all items as required by Sub. (2),
the Director shall inform the applicant
whether the application, plan and
maintenance agreement are approved or
disapproved based on the requirements of
this chapter.
(b) If the stormwater permit application,
plan and maintenance agreement are
approved, or if an agreed upon payment of
fees in lieu of stormwater management
practices is made, the Director shall issue
the permit.
(c) If the stormwater permit application,
plan or maintenance agreement is
disapproved, the Director shall detail in
writing the reasons for disapproval.
(d) The Director may request additional
information from the applicant. If additional
information is submitted, the Director shall
have ten (10) business days from the date
the additional information is received to
inform the applicant that the plan and
maintenance agreement are either approved
or disapproved.
(e) Failure by the Director to inform the
permit applicant of a decision within ten
(10) business days of a required submittal
shall be deemed to mean approval of the
submittal and the applicant may proceed as
if a permit had been issued.
(f) Any decision of the Director may be
appealed by written request by the applicant
to the Village Board of Appeals pursuant to
Section 18.24 (3). Said written notice of
appeal must be filed with the Board of
Appeals within thirty (30) days of the
Director’s decision or be barred.
(4) Permit Requirements. All permits
issued under this chapter shall be subject to
the following conditions, and holders of
permits issued under this chapter shall be
deemed to have accepted these conditions.
The Director may suspend or revoke a
permit for violation of a permit condition,
following written notification of the
responsible party. An action by the Director
to suspend or revoke this permit may be
appealed in accordance with Section 18.24
(3).
(a) Compliance with this permit does
not relieve the responsible party of the
responsibility to comply with other
applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations.
(b) The responsible party shall design
and install all structural and non-structural
stormwater management measures in
accordance with the approved stormwater
management plan and this permit.
(c) The responsible party shall notify
the Director at least ten (10) business days
before commencing any work in conjunction
with the stormwater management plan, and
within ten (10) business days upon
completion of the stormwater management
practices. If required as a special condition
under Sub. (5), the responsible party shall
make additional notification according to a
schedule set forth by the Director so that
practice installations can be inspected during
construction.
(d) Practice installations required as part
of this chapter shall be certified "as built" by
a licensed professional engineer. Completed
stormwater management practices must pass
a final inspection by the Director or its
designee to determine if they are in
accordance with the approved stormwater
management plan and chapter. The Director
shall notify the responsible party in writing
of any changes required in such practices to
bring them into compliance with the
conditions of this permit.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 24 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
(e) The responsible party shall notify
the Director of any significant modifications
it intends to make to an approved
stormwater management plan. The Director
may require that the proposed modifications
be submitted to it for approval prior to
incorporation into the stormwater
management plan and execution by the
responsible party.
(f) The responsible party shall maintain
all stormwater management practices in
accordance with the stormwater
management plan until the practices either
become the responsibility of the Village or
are transferred to subsequent private owners
as specified in the approved maintenance
agreement.
(g) The responsible party authorizes the
Director to perform any work or operations
necessary to bring stormwater management
measures into conformance with the
approved stormwater management plan, and
consents to a special assessment or charge
against the property as authorized under
Wis. Stats. Ch. 66 Subch. VII, or to charging
such costs against the financial guarantee
posted Section 10.21.
(h) If so directed by the Director, the
responsible party shall repair at the
responsible party's own expense all damage
to adjoining municipal facilities and
drainage ways caused by runoff, where such
damage is caused by activities that are not in
compliance with the approved stormwater
management plan.
(i) The responsible party shall permit
property access to the Director for the
purpose of inspecting the property for
compliance with the approved stormwater
management plan and this permit.
(j) Where site development or
redevelopment involves changes in
direction, increases in peak rate and/or total
volume of runoff from a site, the Director
may require the responsible party to make
appropriate legal arrangements with affected
property owners concerning the prevention
of endangerment to property or public
safety.
(k) The responsible party is subject to
the enforcement actions and penalties
detailed in Section 10.99 (3), if the
responsible party fails to comply with the
terms of this permit.
(l) The permit applicant shall post the
“Certificate of Permit Coverage” in a
conspicuous location at the construction site.
(5) Permit Conditions. Permits issued
under this subsection may include
conditions established by Director in
addition to the requirements needed to meet
the performance standards in Section 10.17
or a financial guarantee as provided for in
Section 10.21.
(6) Permit Duration. Permits issued
under this section shall be valid from the
date of issuance through the date the
Director notifies the responsible party that
all stormwater management practices have
passed the final inspection required under
10.18(4)(d).
10.19 STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN.
(1) Plan Requirements. The
stormwater management plan required under
Section 10.17 (3) shall comply with the
Village Stormwater Reference Guide and
contain at a minimum the following
information:
(a) Name, address, and telephone
number of the landowner and responsible
parties.
(b) A legal description of the property
proposed to be developed.
(c) Pre-development site map with
property lines, disturbed limits, and drainage
patterns.
(d) Post-development site map with
property lines, disturbed limits, and drainage
patterns.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 25 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
1. Total area of disturbed impervious
surfaces within the site.
2. Total area of new impervious
surfaces within the site.
3. Performance standards applicable to
site.
4. Proposed best management practices.
5. Groundwater, bedrock, and soil
limitations.
6. Separation distances. Stormwater
management practices shall be adequately
separated from wells to prevent
contamination of drinking water.
(2) Alternate Requirements. The
Director may prescribe alternative submittal
requirements for applicants seeking an
exemption to onsite stormwater management
performance standards under Section 10.17
(3) (a) 4.
10.20 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
(1) Maintenance Agreement
Required. The maintenance agreement
required under Section 10.18 (2) for
stormwater management practices shall be
an agreement between the Village and the
responsible party to provide for maintenance
of stormwater practices beyond the duration
period of this permit. The maintenance
agreement shall be filed with the County
Register of Deeds as a property deed
restriction so that it is binding upon all
subsequent owners of the land served by the
stormwater management practices.
(2) Agreement Provisions. The
maintenance agreement shall contain the
following information:
(a) Identification of the stormwater
facilities and designation of the drainage
area served by the facilities.
(b) A schedule for regular maintenance
of each aspect of the stormwater
management system.
(c) Identification of the responsible
parties responsible for long-term
maintenance of the stormwater management
practices identified in the stormwater
management plan.
(d) Requirement that the responsible
parties shall maintain stormwater
management practices.
(e) Authorization for the Director to
access the property to conduct inspections of
stormwater management practices as
necessary to ascertain that the practices are
being maintained and operated in
accordance with the agreement.
(f) A requirement on the Director to
maintain public records of the results of the
site inspections, to inform the responsible
party responsible for maintenance of the
inspection results, and to specifically
indicate any corrective actions required to
bring the stormwater management practice
into proper working condition.
(g) Agreement that the party designated
under Par. (c), as responsible for long-term
maintenance of the stormwater management
practices, shall be notified by the Director of
maintenance problems which require
correction. The specified corrective actions
shall be undertaken within a reasonable time
frame as set by the Director.
(h) Authorization of the Director to
perform the corrected actions identified in
the inspection report if the responsible party
designated under Par. (c) does not make the
required corrections in the specified time
period. The Director shall enter the amount
due on the tax rolls and collect the money as
a special charge against the property
pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 66 Subch. VII.
10.21 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
(1) Establishment of the Guarantee.
The Director may require the submittal of a
financial guarantee, the form and type of
which shall be acceptable to the Director.
The financial guarantee shall be in an
amount determined by the Director to be the
estimated cost of construction and the
estimated cost of maintenance of the
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 26 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
stormwater management practices during the
period which the designated party in the
maintenance agreement has maintenance
responsibility. The financial guarantee shall
give the Director the authorization to use the
funds to complete the stormwater
management practices if the responsible
party defaults or does not properly
implement the approved stormwater
management plan, upon written notice to the
responsible party by the Director that the
requirements of this chapter have not been
met.
(2) Conditions for Release. Conditions
for the release of the financial guarantee are
as follows:
(a) The Director shall release the
portion of the financial guarantee
established under this section, less any costs
incurred by the Director to complete
installation of practices, upon submission of
"as built plans" by a licensed professional
engineer. The Director may make
provisions for a partial pro-rata release of
the financial guarantee based on the
completion of various development stages.
(b) The Director shall release the
portion of the financial guarantee
established under this section to assure
maintenance of stormwater practices, less
any costs incurred by the Director, at such
time that the responsibility for practice
maintenance is passed on to another entity
via an approved maintenance agreement.
SUBCHAPTER III – ILLICIT
DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
ORDINANCE
10.25 GENERAL.
(1) The purpose of this chapter is to
provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village through
the regulation of non-stormwater discharges
to the MS4 to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state
law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants
into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the Wisconsin Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (WPDES)
permit process. The objectives of this
chapter are:
(a) To regulate the contribution of
pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater
discharges by any user.
(b) To prohibit illicit connections and
discharges to the MS4.
(c) To establish legal authority to carry
out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring,
and enforcement procedures necessary to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
10.26 APPLICABILITY. This chapter
shall apply to all water entering the MS4
generated on any lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement
agency.
10.27 ADMINISTRATION. The Director
shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the Director
may be to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or as an employee of
the Village.
10.28 COMPATIBILITY WITH
OTHER REGULATIONS. This chapter is
not intended to modify or repeal any other
chapter, rule, regulation, or other provision
of law. The requirements of this chapter are
in addition to the requirements of any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law, and where any provision of
this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule, regulation, or other provision of law,
whichever provision is more restrictive or
imposes higher protective standards for
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 27 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
human health or the environment shall
control.
10.29 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
(1) Prohibition of Illicit Discharges.
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise
discharge, cause, or allow others under its
control to throw, drain, or otherwise
discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or
waters containing any pollutants, other than
stormwater. Pollutants include, but are not
limited to: dredged soil, solid waste, grass
clippings, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil,
chemical waste or biological materials. See
Wis. Stats. §283.01(13) for complete list.
(2) Allowed Discharges.
(a) Water line flushing, landscape
irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising
ground waters, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, discharges from potable water
sources, foundation drains, air conditioning
condensation, irrigation water, springs,
water from crawl space pumps, footing
drains, lawn watering, individual residential
car washing, flows from riparian habitats
and wetlands, and dechlorinated swimming
pool discharges.
(b) Discharges or flow from
firefighting, and other discharges specified
in writing by the Village as being necessary
to protect public health and safety.
(c) Any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under a WPDES permit, waiver,
or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the
authority of the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources. Any person subject to
such a WPDES stormwater discharge permit
shall comply with all provisions of such
permit.
(3) Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
(a) The construction, use, maintenance
or continued existence of illicit connections
to the MS4 is prohibited.
(b) This prohibition expressly includes,
without limitation, illicit connections made
in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.
(c) A person is considered to be in
violation of this chapter if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the
MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue.
(d) Improper connections in violation of
this chapter must be disconnected and
redirected, if necessary, to an approved
onsite wastewater management system or
the sanitary sewer system upon approval of
the Village.
(e) Any drain or conveyance that has
not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent, and which may be connected to
the storm sewer system, shall be located by
the owner or occupant of that property upon
receipt of written notice of violation from
the Village requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice will specify a
reasonable time period within which the
location of the drain or conveyance is to be
determined, that the drain or conveyance be
identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or
other, and that the outfall location or point
of connection to the storm sewer system,
sanitary sewer system or other discharge
point be identified. Results of these
investigations are to be documented and
provided to the Village.
10.30 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
Every person owning property through
which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that
part of the watercourse within the property
be free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation
and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse. In
addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or
adjacent to a watercourse, so that such
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 28 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
structures will not become a hazard to the
use, function, or physical integrity of the
watercourse.
10.31 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
(1) Right-of-Entry Inspecting and
Sampling. The Village shall be permitted to
enter and inspect facilities subject to
regulation under this chapter as often as may
be necessary to determine compliance with
this chapter.
(a) If a discharger has security measures
in force which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises,
the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the Village.
(b) Facility operators shall allow the
Village ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of
records.
(c) The Village shall have the right to
set up on any facility such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the Village to
conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility’s stormwater discharge.
(d) The Village has the right to require
the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its
own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(e) Any temporary or permanent
obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall
be promptly removed by the operator at the
written or oral request of the Village and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the operator.
(f) Unreasonable delays in allowing the
Village access to a facility are a violation. A
person who is the operator of a facility
commits an offense if the person denies the
Village reasonable access to the facility for
the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this chapter.
(2) Special Inspection Warrant. If the
Village has been refused access to any part
of the premises from which stormwater is
discharged, and the Director is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any order issued hereunder,
or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the
Village may seek issuance of a special
inspection warrant per Wis. Stats. §66.0119.
10.32 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT,
CONTROL, AND REDUCE
STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES. The owner or operator of
any activity, operation, or facility which
may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of stormwater, the MS4, or
waters of the state shall provide, at their own
expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other wastes into the MS4 or
watercourses through the use of these
structural and constructural BMPs. Further,
any person responsible for a property or
premise that is, or may be, the source of an
illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person’s expense,
additional structural and non-structural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all
terms and conditions of a valid WPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed in compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 29 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
Stormwater Management Plan
(SWMP)/Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance.
10.33 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law,
as soon as any person responsible for a
facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or
operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are
resulting or may result in illicit discharges or
pollutants discharging into stormwater, the
MS4, or waters of the state, said person shall
take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of
hazardous materials said person shall
immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency
dispatch services. In the event of a release
of non-hazardous materials, said person
shall notify the Village in person or by
phone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Village within
two (2) business days of the phone notice. If
the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an onsite
written record of the discharge and the
actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such
records shall be retained for at least five (5)
years. Failure to provide notification of a
release as provided above is a violation of
this chapter.
10.34 VIOLATIONS. It shall be unlawful
for any person to violate any provision or
fail to comply with any of the requirements
of this chapter. Any person who has
violated or continues to violate the
provisions of this chapter, may be subject to
the enforcement actions outlined in this
section or may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by
law. In the event the violation constitutes an
immediate danger to public health or public
safety, the Village is authorized to enter
upon the subject private property, without
giving prior notice, to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation.
The Village is authorized to seek costs of the
abatement as outlined in Section 10.28.
(1) Warning Notice. When the Village
finds that any person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the
Village may serve upon that person a written
warning notice, specifying the particular
violation believed to have occurred and
requesting the discharger to immediately
investigate the matter and to seek a
resolution whereby any offending discharge
will cease. Investigation and/or resolution
of the matter in response to the warning
notice in no way relieves the alleged violator
of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the warning notice.
Nothing in the subsection shall limit the
authority of the Village to take action,
including emergency action or any other
enforcement action without first issuing a
warning notice.
(2) Notice of Violation. Whenever the
Village finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement
of this chapter, the Village may order
compliance by written notice of violation to
the responsible person. The notice of
violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the alleged
violator;
(b) The address when available or a
description of the building, structure or land
upon which the violation is occurring, or has
occurred;
(c) A statement specifying the nature of
the violation;
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 30 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
(d) A description of the remedial
measures necessary to restore compliance
with this chapter and a time schedule for the
completion of such remedial action;
(e) A statement of the penalty or
penalties that shall or may be assessed
against the person to whom the notice of
violation is directed;
(f) A statement that the determination of
violation may be appealed to the Village by
filing a written notice of appeal within three
(3) days of service of notice of violation;
and a statement specifying that, should the
violator fail to restore compliance within the
established time schedule, the work will be
done by a designated governmental agency
or contractor and the expense thereof shall
be charged to the violator. Such notice may
require without limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring,
analyses, and reporting;
2. The elimination of illicit connections
or discharges;
3. That violating discharges, practices,
or operations shall cease and desist;
4. The abatement or remediation of
stormwater pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
5. Payment of a fine to cover
administrative and remediation costs; and
6. The implementation of BMPs.
10.35 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
(1) Emergency Cease and Desist
Orders. When the Village finds that any
person has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, or any order
issued hereunder, or that the person’s past
violations are likely to recur, and that the
person’s violation(s) has (have) caused or
contributed to an actual or threatened
discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United
States which reasonably appears to present
an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, the Village may issue an order
to the violator directing it immediately to
cease and desist all such violations and
directing the violator to:
(a) Immediately comply with all chapter
requirements; and
(b) Take such appropriate preventive
action as may be needed to properly address
a continuing or threatened violation,
including immediately halting operations
and/or terminating the discharge. Any
person notified of an emergency order
directed to it under this subsection shall
immediately comply and stop or eliminate
its endangering discharge. In the event of a
discharger’s failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the emergency order, the
Village may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize harm to
the MS4 or waters of the United States,
and/or endangerment to persons or to the
environment, including immediate
termination of a facility’s water supply,
sewer connection, or other municipal utility
services. The Village may allow the person
to recommence its discharge when it has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Village that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless further termination
proceedings are initiated against the
discharger under this chapter. A person that
is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the
harmful discharge and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the Village
within three (3) days of receipt of the
prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the violator.
(2) Suspension Due to Illicit
Discharges in Emergency Situations. The
Village may, without prior notice, suspend
MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 31 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
present imminent and substantial danger to
the environment, or to the health or welfare
of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the
state. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency,
the Village may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to
the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to
minimize danger to persons.
(3) Suspension Due to the Detection of
Illicit Discharge. Any person discharging
to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may
have their MS4 access terminated if such
termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The Village will notify a violator
of the proposed termination of its MS4
access. The violator may petition the
Village for a reconsideration and hearing. A
person commits an offense if the person
reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section without
the prior approval of the Village.
10.36 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE
VIOLATION. Within thirty (30) days after
abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of
abatement, including administrative costs.
If the amount due is not paid by the date
determined by the Village, the charges shall
become a special charge against the property
and shall constitute a lien on the property.
10.37 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A
PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any condition in
violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter and declared and deemed a
nuisance, may be summarily abated or
restored at the violator’s expense.
10.38 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
The remedies listed in this chapter are not
exclusive of any other remedies available
under any applicable federal, state, or local
law and it is within the discretion of the
Village to seek cumulative remedies. The
Village may recover all attorney fees court
costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this chapter, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.
10.39 FEE SCHEDULE. The permitting
fees for this chapter shall be as set from time
to time by resolution by the Board. A
schedule of the fees established by the
Board shall be available for review at
Village Hall.
10.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY,
ENFORCEMENT, AND APPEALS.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this chapter
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100) and nor
more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation. Failure or refusal to
pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs.
(2) Severability. If any section, clause,
provision or portion of this chapter is judged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the
chapter shall remain in force and not be
affected by such judgment.
(3) Enforcement.
(a) The Director may post a stop-work
order if any of the following occurs:
1. Any land disturbing construction
activity regulated under this chapter is being
undertaken without a permit.
2. The erosion and sediment control
plan is not being implemented in a good
faith manner.
3. The conditions of the permit are not
being met.
(b) If the responsible party does not
cease activity as required in a stop-work
order posted under this section or fails to
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 32 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
comply with the erosion and sediment
control plan or permit conditions, the
Director may revoke the permit.
(c) If the responsible party, where no
permit has been issued, does not cease the
activity after being notified by the Director,
or if a responsible party violates a stop-work
order posted under Sub. (1), the Director
may request the Village Attorney to obtain a
cease and desist order in any court with
jurisdiction.
(d) The Board of Appeals may retract
the stop-work order issued under Sub. (1) or
the permit revocation under Sub. (2).
(e) After posting a stop-work order
under Sub. (1), the Director may issue a
notice of intent to the responsible party of its
intent to perform work necessary to comply
with this chapter. The Director may go on
the land and commence the work after
issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the
work performed under this subsection by the
Director, plus interest at the rate authorized
by Board shall be billed to the responsible
party or recovered from the surety bond,
cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit.
In the event a responsible party fails to pay
the amount due, the Clerk shall enter the
amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a
special assessment against the property
pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 66 Subch. VII.
(f) Compliance with the provisions of
this chapter may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It
shall not be necessary to prosecute for
forfeiture or a cease and desist order before
resorting to injunctional proceedings.
(g) Enforcement of this chapter shall be
the responsibility of the Board or its
designee, and/or Village Police Department.
(h) Any land disturbing construction
activity or post-construction runoff initiated
after the effective date of this chapter by any
person, firm, association, or corporation
subject to the chapter provisions shall be
deemed a violation unless conducted in
accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(i) The Director shall notify the
responsible party by certified mail of any
non-complying land disturbing construction
activity or post-construction runoff. The
notice shall describe the nature of the
violation, remedial actions needed, a
schedule for remedial action, and additional
enforcement action which may be taken.
(j) Upon receipt of written notification
from the Director under Sub. (2), the
responsible party shall correct work that
does not comply with the stormwater
management plan or other provisions of this
permit. The responsible party shall make
corrections as necessary to meet the
specifications and schedule set forth by the
Director in the notice.
(k) If the violations to a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter are likely to result in
damage to properties, public facilities, or
waters of the state, the Director may enter
the land and take emergency actions
necessary to prevent such damage. The
costs incurred by the Director plus interest
and legal costs shall be billed to the
responsible party.
(4) Appeals.
(a) Board of Appeals. Appeals are
heard by the Village Board of Appeals
established under Section 18.24 (3) of the
Village Code.
(b) Who May Appeal. Appeals to the
Board of Appeals may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by any office,
department, board, or bureau of the Village
affected by any decision of the Director.
Village of Suamico
10-Stormwater Utility Page 33 of 33 Adopted 6-2-08
Chapter 10
Ordinance 2008-14 Creating Chapter 10 Stormwater Ordinance
Adopted 6-2-08
Ordinance 2016-08 Amending Chapter 10 Stormwater of the Village Code
Adopted 5-16-16
Ordinance 2017-12 Amending Chapter 10
Adopted 9-18-17
Ordinance 2020-03 Amending Chapter 10 Stormwater Utility
Adopted 2-17-20
Village of Suamico
Chapter 11
11-Public Nuisances Page 1 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
PUBLIC NUISANCES/PEACE AND ORDER
Subchapter I – Animal Control ................................................................................................. 4
11.01 Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 4
11.02 Mistreating Animals ........................................................................................................ 4
11.03 Animals at Large .............................................................................................................. 4
11.04 Dangerous or Wild Animals ............................................................................................ 4
11.05 Noisy Animals ................................................................................................................... 5
11.06 Dogs Licensed ................................................................................................................... 5
11.07 Nuisance Animals ............................................................................................................. 5
11.08 Animals Causing Damage or Injury .............................................................................. 5
11.09 Bee Keeping ...................................................................................................................... 6
11.10 Keeping Nuisance Animals.............................................................................................. 6
11.11 Prohibited Amphibians, Arachnids, or Reptiles ........................................................... 6
11.12 Exceptions ......................................................................................................................... 7
11.13 Dognapping and Catnapping .......................................................................................... 7
11.14 Decompression Prohibited .............................................................................................. 7
11.15 Leading Animal from Motor Vehicle ............................................................................. 7
11.16 Transportation of Animals .............................................................................................. 7
11.17 Use of Poisonous and Controlled Substances ................................................................ 7
11.18 Shooting at Caged or Staked Animals ........................................................................... 7
11.19 Sale of Baby Rabbits, Chicks, and Other Fowl ............................................................. 7
11.19.5 Keeping of Chickens ..................................................................................................... 7
11.20 Artificially Colored Animals; Sale ................................................................................. 8
11.21 Providing Proper Food and Drink to Confined Animals ............................................. 8
11.22 Providing Proper Shelter ................................................................................................ 8
11.23 Keeping of Vicious Dogs Regulated................................................................................ 9
11.24 Enforcement Authority ................................................................................................. 11
11.25 Disposition ...................................................................................................................... 11
11.255 Animals; Humane Officer ........................................................................................... 11
Subchapter II – General Nuisances ......................................................................................... 11
11.30 Public Nuisances Prohibited ......................................................................................... 11
11.31 Public Nuisances Defined .............................................................................................. 11
11.32 Public Nuisances Affecting Health ............................................................................... 11
11.33 Public Nuisances Offending Morals and Decency ...................................................... 12
11.34 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety .............................................................. 13
11.35 Storage of Junk .............................................................................................................. 16
11.35.5 Chronic Nuisance Property ........................................................................................ 17
11.36 Abatement of Public Nuisances .................................................................................... 20
11.37 Cost of Abatement.......................................................................................................... 21
11.38 Littering .......................................................................................................................... 21
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 2 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
Subchapter III – Peace and Order .......................................................................................... 22
11.39 Discharge of Firearms Regulated ................................................................................. 22
11.40 Endangering Safety by Use of a Dangerous Weapon ................................................. 24
11.41 Carrying Concealed Weapon ........................................................................................ 24
11.42 Carrying Firearm in a Public Building ........................................................................ 24
11.43 Carrying Handgun Where Alcohol Beverages May Be Consumed .......................... 25
11.44 Carrying a Concealed Knife ......................................................................................... 25
11.45 Possession of a Dangerous Weapon by a Person under 18......................................... 25
11.46 Restrictions on Use of Facsimile Firearms .................................................................. 25
11.47 Discharging a Firearm in the Direction of an Electronic or Telecommunications
Transmission Facility................................................................................................................ 25
11.48 Leaving or Storing a Loaded Firearm within Reach or Easy Access of a Child ..... 25
11.49 Dangerous Weapons Other than Firearms on School Premises ................................ 26
11.50 Throwing or Shooting of Missiles and Projectiles ...................................................... 26
11.51 Possession of Oleoresin of Capsicum by a Felon ......................................................... 26
11.52 Possession of Nitrous Oxide .......................................................................................... 26
11.53 Restrictions on the Use of Laser Pointers .................................................................... 26
11.54 Obstructing Emergency or Rescue Personnel ............................................................. 26
11.55 Resisting or Obstructing an Officer ............................................................................. 26
11.56 Disorderly Conduct ........................................................................................................ 27
11.57 Disrupting a Funeral or Memorial Service ................................................................. 27
11.58 Causing Violence or Breach of the Peace by Damaging or Destroying a U.S. Flag.....
..................................................................................................................................................... 27
11.59 Hazing ............................................................................................................................. 27
11.60 False Complaints of Police Misconduct ....................................................................... 27
11.61 Intimidation of Witnesses .............................................................................................. 27
11.62 Intimidation of Victims.................................................................................................. 27
11.63 Duty to Aid Victim or Report Crime ........................................................................... 27
11.64 Battery ............................................................................................................................. 27
11.65 Attempted Battery ......................................................................................................... 28
11.66 Refusing to Aid Officer .................................................................................................. 28
11.67 Escape.............................................................................................................................. 28
11.68 Impersonating Peace Officers ....................................................................................... 28
11.69 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited ..................................................................... 28
11.70 Loitering/Prowling ......................................................................................................... 28
11.71 Loitering in School and Playground Areas Prohibited .............................................. 29
11.72 Consumption and Possession of Intoxicating Liquors or Fermented Malt Beverages
on Public Ways and Public Property ...................................................................................... 29
11.73 Solicitation of Drinks Prohibited .................................................................................. 29
11.74 Drinking in Common Carriers ..................................................................................... 29
11.75 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators, Etc. Prohibited ........................................ 30
11.76 Drug Paraphernalia ....................................................................................................... 30
11.77 Possession of Marijuana ................................................................................................ 30
11.78 Possession/Use of Tobacco and Vapor Products by Minors ...................................... 30
11.79 Restrictions on Sale or Gift of Cigarettes or Tobacco/Vaping Products .................. 33
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 3 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
11.80 Truancy ........................................................................................................................... 33
11.81 Juvenile Curfews ............................................................................................................ 34
11.82 Daytime Curfew ............................................................................................................. 36
11.83 Contributing to the Delinquency of a Child ................................................................ 37
11.84 Neglecting a Child .......................................................................................................... 37
11.85 Prohibiting the Harboring of Minors without Parental Consent .............................. 37
11.86 Tattooing of Children .................................................................................................... 38
11.87 Issuance of Worthless Checks ....................................................................................... 38
11.88 Petty Theft ...................................................................................................................... 38
11.89 Attempted Petty Theft ................................................................................................... 38
11.90 Retail Theft ..................................................................................................................... 38
11.91 Theft of Cellular Telephone Service ............................................................................. 38
11.92 Theft of Television Service ............................................................................................ 38
11.93 Theft of Satellite Cable Programming ......................................................................... 38
11.94 Fraudulent Tapping of Electric Wires or Gas or Water Meters or Pipes ................ 38
11.95 Removal of Shopping Cart ............................................................................................ 39
11.96 Receiving Property from a Child .................................................................................. 39
11.97 Receiving Stolen Property ............................................................................................. 39
11.98 Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper, Recreational Attraction, Taxicab Operator,
or Gas Station ............................................................................................................................ 39
11.99 Fraudulent Return of Merchandise ............................................................................. 39
11.100 Trespass to Land .......................................................................................................... 39
11.101 Trespass to Dwellings .................................................................................................. 39
11.102 Criminal Trespass to a Medical Facility .................................................................... 40
11.103 Entry onto a Construction Site or into a Locked Building, Dwelling, or Room .... 40
11.104 Entry into a Locked Vehicle........................................................................................ 40
11.105 Entry into Locked Coin Box ....................................................................................... 40
11.106 Criminal Damage to Railroads ................................................................................... 40
11.107 Damage to Property ..................................................................................................... 40
11.108 Graffiti .......................................................................................................................... 40
11.109 Unlawful Use of Telephone ......................................................................................... 40
11.110 Unlawful Use of Computers ........................................................................................ 41
11.111 Sexting by Minors Prohibited ..................................................................................... 41
11.112 Tampering with Public Records and Notices ............................................................ 41
11.113 Fornication.................................................................................................................... 42
11.114 Sexual Gratification ..................................................................................................... 42
11.115 Lewd and Lascivious Behavior ................................................................................... 42
11.116 Obscene Material or Performance ............................................................................. 42
11.117 Making Lewd, Obscene, or Indecent Drawings ........................................................ 42
11.118 Prostitution ................................................................................................................... 42
11.119 Patronizing Prostitutes ................................................................................................ 42
11.120 Pandering ...................................................................................................................... 42
11.121 Harassment ................................................................................................................... 43
11.122 Vagrancy ....................................................................................................................... 43
11.123 Exposing a Child to Harmful Material or Harmful Descriptions or Narrations ... 43
11.124 Sexual Assault (Fourth Degree) .................................................................................. 43
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 4 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
11.125 Invasion of Privacy ...................................................................................................... 43
11.126 Child Protection Restrictions ...................................................................................... 43
11.127 Smoking Prohibited in Certain Areas ........................................................................ 49
11.128 Synthetic Cannabinoid Prohibited ............................................................................. 52
11.129 Misuse of 911 Emergency Telephone Service ............................................................ 52
11.130 Defamation.................................................................................................................... 52
11.131 Giving False Information for Publication.................................................................. 52
11.132 Opening Letters ............................................................................................................ 53
11.133 Representation Depicting Nudity ............................................................................... 53
11.134 Use of a Drone .............................................................................................................. 53
11.199 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement..................................................................... 53
SUBCHAPTER I – ANIMAL CONTROL
11.01 DEFINITIONS. In this chapter:
(1) "Animal" includes every living:
(a) Warm-blooded creature (except a
human being);
(b) Reptile;
(c) Amphibian; or
(d) Bird.
11.02 MISTREATING ANIMALS. No
person may treat any animal, whether
belonging to the person or another, in a cruel
manner. No person shall cruelly treat,
inhumanely beat, under feed, overload, or
abandon any animal in the Village. No
person shall cause or allow any place where
any animal is or may be kept to become
unclean or unwholesome.
11.03 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
(1) No person, owner, or custodian shall
permit an animal to be at large within the
Village. Any animal shall be deemed to be
at large when it is off the premises owned or
leased by its owner or custodian unless
crated, penned, or under the control of a
person able to control the animal by means
of a leash of sufficient strength to control the
action of the animal or such other personal
attention as will reasonably control the
conduct and actions of the animal.
(2) No person, owner, or custodian shall
permit any animal to be left unattended
within five (5) feet of a public right-of-way.
(a) Such public rights-of-way include,
but are not limited to sidewalks, streets,
alleys, and parking lots.
(b) Unattended animals shall include
those animals which are crated, penned, or
leashed but which are without personal
supervision or control sufficient to properly
restrain the animal.
(3) No person shall permit any animal
owned by or under the control of such
person to trespass or be upon the property of
another person without the owner’s or
occupant’s permission.
11.04 DANGEROUS OR WILD
ANIMALS.
(a) As stated in Wis. Stats. §173.23(4),
§174.01, and §29.921(7) members of the
Police Department, or any peace or health
officer in the Village are authorized to kill
any animal, bird, or reptile when it is
necessary to protect persons or to prevent
the communication or spread of infection or
disease.
(b) No person may keep any animal not
indigenous to Wisconsin; or any lion, tiger,
leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay,
mountain lion, Canada lynx, bobcat,
jaguarondi, hyena, coyote, wolf, wolf
hybrid, alligator, poisonous snake or eagle,
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 5 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
prairie dog, or other like dangerous wild
animal, reptile, bird or creature in any place
within the Village other than in a safely and
properly maintained zoological park, circus,
scientific, or educational institution, research
laboratory, veterinary hospital, designated
pound, or animal refuge, or in a wellsecured
vehicle, while being transported
without delay to or from any such
authorized place or through the Village.
Any such animal that is within the Village at
any time without being safely and properly
maintained as authorized under any of the
foregoing is declared to be a public nuisance
and shall be dealt with in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
(c) It shall be no defense that the keeper
of any such animal contrary to the
provisions hereof has attempted to
domesticate same.
11.05 NOISY ANIMALS.
(1) No person shall harbor or keep any
animal, bird, or reptile which disturbs the
peace by loud or unusual noises at any time
of the day or night.
(2) No owner or person in control of
any dog shall suffer, permit or allow such
animal to bark or bay in such a manner as to
detrimentally affect the peaceful repose of
one (1) or more property owners or residents
of the immediate area, and within earshot of
the barking or baying. In determining
whether the noise detrimentally affects
peaceful repose, the volume of the noise,
time of day, length of time the noise persists,
the location of the animal, and prior
substantiated complaints shall be relevant.
Where a dog is left unattended out-of-doors,
it shall be presumed the owner or person in
control is permitting the noise.
11.06 DOGS LICENSED. No person shall
own, harbor or keep any dog within the
Village unless the dog is licensed as
provided by Wis. Stats. §174.05. All dogs
shall be licensed according to the provisions
in Section 5.09 of the Village Code.
11.07 NUISANCE ANIMALS. Whereas
animals, birds, and reptiles may have
propensities to or may otherwise cause noise
or odor or perform actions which may
disturb persons in the reasonable use and
enjoyment of property, or cause annoyance,
discomfort, or injury to the health or welfare
of persons, the keeping of any animal, bird,
or reptile in conflict with any provision of
this section declared to be a public nuisance,
and such animal, bird, or reptile may be
impounded as provided by law.
11.08 ANIMALS CAUSING DAMAGE
OR INJURY.
(1) Any incident occurring in the
Village where any animal bites a person, or
is suspected of biting a person, shall be
immediately reported to the Police
Department or to the Brown County Health
Department by any person having
knowledge of such incident and the
following procedure shall be followed.
(a) Any animal which bites a person in
the Village, if it can be found, or any animal
which is customarily kept within the Village
and which bites a person, shall be
quarantined for a period of ten (10) days
from the day of the bite for the purpose of
observation for the possibility of rabies.
Such quarantine shall be affected as directed
by the Health Department and may be:
1. Confinement of the animal to a
structure or enclosure, which is adequate to
with-strain the animal on the premises of the
owner or agent.
2. Confinement of the animal with a
licensed veterinarian.
3. Confinement of the animal at a
boarding facility approved by the Village.
Costs of boarding shall be at owner’s
expense.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 6 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
(b) No animal which is known or
suspected to have bitten a person shall be
destroyed until after the ten (10) day
quarantine period has elapsed, unless it
cannot be apprehended safely, in which case
the destruction shall be accomplished
without damage to the head of the animal, if
at all possible. The Brown County Health
Department shall be immediately notified of
such destruction of the animal, and the dead
animal shall not be disposed of until such
specimens as the Health Department shall
direct have been obtained and permission is
given by him to dispose of the dead animal.
(c) In case an animal, which has been
quarantined in accordance with this section,
dies for any reason during the quarantine
period, the person having custody of the
animal shall immediately notify the Health
Department as required in Section 11.08
above.
(2) Without notice, the owner,
custodian, or person in control of any animal
shall forfeit not less than twenty dollars
($20) nor more than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500) if the animal
causes injury to any person, livestock,
property, deer, game birds, or the nests or
eggs of game birds.
11.09 BEE KEEPING. The keeping or
raising of honey bees is allowed within all
areas of the Village. In areas not zoned for
agricultural use, a site plan is required to be
submitted and approved by the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee. The
hives shall be centrally located on the lot
and not in front of the home. The Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to
relax this requirement on larger lots. The
hives shall have visual barrier, not entirely
concealing the hive but providing a
softening appearance. Lots smaller than one
acre in size are limited to two (2) hives. It is
recommended that the hive owner join the
Brown County Beekeepers Association for
education and guidance purposes.
11.10 KEEPING NUISANCE
ANIMALS. The keeping of any animal,
fowl, reptile, mammal, or bird which affects
or disturbs the public health, public peace,
public safety or public decency is a public
nuisance and is prohibited within the
Village. No action shall be taken under this
subsection unless and until the Village
investigates, and they have ascertained that
the raising or keeping of a particular animal,
fowl, reptile, mammal, or bird within the
Village reasonably constitutes a condition
which is detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare. For purposes of enforcing
this subsection, the Humane Officer, Police
Department, Building Inspector, or other
peace officer may enter any premises for the
purpose of inspection. Any person, who
violates any provision of this subsection,
shall be notified by the Village of the
determination that a public nuisance exists
on his or her premises. Each day that the
condition continues after notification by the
Village shall be considered a separate
violation of this subsection.
11.11 PROHIBITED AMPHIBIANS,
ARACHNIDS, OR REPTILES. No
person, firm, or corporation shall bring into,
keep, maintain, offer for sale, or barter, or
release to the wild in the Village:
(1) any poisonous or venomous biting
or injecting species or amphibian, arachnid
or reptile (including snakes);
(2) any snake not indigenous to
Wisconsin;
(3) any snakes indigenous to Wisconsin
of the following species, upon attaining a
length of five (5) feet or more:
(a) The pilot black snake (Elaphe
obsoleta obsoleta).
(b) Bull snake (Pituophis
melanoleucus).
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 7 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
(c) Fox snake (Elaphe vulpine gloydi).
11.12 EXCEPTIONS. This section shall
not prohibit a circus or like entertainment
organization, an educational or medical
institution, the Department of Parks and
Recreation, or a person designated by the
Humane Officer, from keeping such animal
where the same are securely and humanely
confined.
11.13 DOGNAPPING AND
CATNAPPING. No person may take the
dog or cat of another from one (1) place to
another without the owner's consent or cause
such a dog or cat to be confined or carried
out of this Village or held for any purpose
without the owner's consent. This section
does not apply to law enforcement officers
or humane society agents engaged in the
exercise of the official duties.
11.14 DECOMPRESSION
PROHIBITED. No person may kill an
animal by means of decompression.
11.15 LEADING ANIMAL FROM
MOTOR VEHICLE. No person shall lead
any animal upon a highway or roadway
from a motor vehicle or from a trailer or
semi-trailer drawn by a motor vehicle.
11.16 TRANSPORTATION OF
ANIMALS. No person may transport any
animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel
manner.
11.17 USE OF POISONOUS AND
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. No
person may expose any domestic animal
owned by another to any known poisonous
substance or controlled substance listed in
Wis. Stats. Ch. 961, whether mixed with
meat or other food or not, so that the
substance is liable to be eaten by an animal
and for the purposes of harming the animal.
This section shall not apply to poison used
on one's own premises and designed for the
purpose of rodent or pest extermination nor
to the use of a controlled substance in bona
fide experiments carried on for scientific
research or in accepted veterinary practices.
11.18 SHOOTING AT CAGED OR
STAKED ANIMALS. No person may
instigate, promote, aid or abet as a principal,
agent, employee, participant or spectator, or
participate in the earnings from, or
intentionally maintain or allow any place to
be used for the shooting, killing, or
wounding with a firearm or any deadly
weapon, any animal that is tied, staked out,
caged, or otherwise intentionally confined in
a man-made enclosure, regardless of size.
Nothing in this section prohibits the
shooting of any wild game in its wild state
or the shooting of game birds and waterfowl
at licensed game farms or licensed shooting
preserves.
11.19 SALE OF BABY RABBITS,
CHICKS, AND OTHER FOWL.
(1) No person may sell, offer for sale,
barter, or give away living chicks,
ducklings, or other fowl unless the person
provides proper brooder facilities for the
care of such chicks, ducklings, or other fowl
during the time they are in the person's
possession.
(2) No retailer, as defined in Wis. Stats.
§100.30(2)(e), may sell, offer for sale,
barter, or give away living baby rabbits,
baby chicks, ducklings, or other fowl under
two (2) months of age in any quantity less
than six (6) unless in the business of selling
these animals for agriculture, wildlife or
scientific purposes.
11.19.5 KEEPING OF CHICKENS.
Chickens may be raised in Rural Residential
(RR) and Residential Sewer (RS) zoning
districts provided a permit has been issued
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 8 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
and the following conditions are met;
(1) Maximum number of chickens
allowed per lot;
(a) RR greater than 2 acres, 10 chickens
(b) RR less than 2 acres, 6 chickens
(c) RS, 4 chickens
(2) No roosters shall be kept
(3) Lot must be in single family use
(4) The chickens are raised on the
property of the owner. If the current resident
is a tenant, the tenant must have written
permission of the owner
(5) It is the owners responsibility to be
in compliance with any restrictive covenant
in place for their subdivision
(6) The chickens shall be kept humanely
contained at all times
(7) The chickens shall be provided with
a covered water resistant coop & a fenced
run per 11.22, Providing Proper Shelter
(8) The coop shall be located at least
twenty-five (25) feet from a lot line and
shall not be located in a front yard
(9) The coop shall be cleaned regularly
to ensure a healthy and odor free
environment
(10) No chickens over eight (8) weeks
of age may be kept in a primary structure
(11) The slaughtering of chickens in any
residential zoning is allowed in an enclosed
structure.
11.20 ARTIFICIALLY-COLORED
ANIMALS; SALE. No person may sell,
offer for sale, raffle, give as a prize or
premium, use as an advertising device or
display living chicks, ducklings, other fowl
or rabbits that have been dyed or otherwise
colored artificially.
11.21 PROVIDING PROPER FOOD
AND DRINK TO CONFINED
ANIMALS. As stated in Wis. Stats.
§951.13 no person owning or responsible for
confining or impounding any animal may
fail to supply the animal with a sufficient
supply of food and water as prescribed in
this section.
(1) Food. The food shall be sufficient
to maintain all animals in good health.
(2) Water. If potable water is not
accessible to the animals at all times, it shall
be provided daily and in sufficient quantity
for the health of the animal.
11.22 PROVIDING PROPER
SHELTER. As stated in Wis. Stats.
§951.14 no person owning or responsible for
confining or impounding any animal may
fail to provide the animal with proper shelter
as prescribed in this section. In the case of
farm animals, nothing in this section shall be
construed as imposing shelter requirements
or standards more stringent than normally
accepted husbandry practices in Brown
County.
(1) Indoor Standards. Minimum
indoor standards of shelter shall include:
(a) Ambient temperatures. The ambient
temperature shall be compatible with the
health of the animal.
(b) Ventilation. Indoor housing
facilities shall be adequately ventilated by
natural or mechanical means to provide for
the health of the animals at all times.
(2) Outdoor Standards. Minimum
outdoor standards of shelter shall include:
(a) Shelter from sunlight. When
sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion of
an animal tied or caged outside, sufficient
shade by natural or artificial means shall be
provided to protect the animal from direct
sunlight. As used in this paragraph, "caged"
does not include farm fencing used to
confine farm animals.
(b) Shelter from inclement weather.
1. Animals generally. Natural or
artificial shelter appropriate to the local
climatic conditions for the species
concerned shall be provided as necessary for
the health of the animal.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 9 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
2. Dogs. If a dog is tied or confined
unattended outdoors under weather
conditions which adversely affect the health
of the dog, a shelter of suitable size to
accommodate the dog shall be provided.
(3) Space Standards. Minimum space
standards for both indoor and outdoor
enclosures shall include:
(a) Structural strength. The housing
facilities shall be structurally sound and
maintained in good repair to protect the
animals from injury and to contain the
animals.
(b) Space requirements. Enclosures
shall be constructed and maintained so as to
provide sufficient space to allow each
animal adequate freedom of movement.
Inadequate space may be indicated by
evidence of debility, stress, or abnormal
behavior patterns.
(4) Sanitation Standards. Minimum
standards of sanitation for both indoor and
outdoor enclosures shall include periodic
cleaning to move excreta and other waste
materials, dirt and trash so as to minimize
health hazards.
11.23 KEEPING OF
DANGEROUS/POTENTIALLY
DANGEROUS DOGS REGULATED.
(1) Definitions. The terms used in this
section are defined as follows:
(a) Dangerous/Potentially Dangerous
Dog.
1. Any dog with a propensity, tendency,
or disposition to attack, cause injury, or
otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or other domestic animals as
evidenced by its habitual or repeated chasing
or snapping, or barking and/or snarling in a
threatening manner.
2. Any dog which attacks a human
being or another domestic animal without
sufficient provocation.
3. Any dog owned or harbored primarily
or in part for the purpose of dog-fighting, or
any dog trained for dog-fighting.
(2) Requirements and Prohibitions.
(a) Leash and Muzzle. No person
owning, harboring or having the care of a
dangerous/potentially dangerous dog may
suffer or permit such dog to go outside its
kennel or pen unless the dog is securely
leashed with a leash no longer than four feet
(4’) in length. No person may permit a
dangerous/potentially dangerous dog to be
kept on a chain, rope, or other type of leash
outside its kennel or pen unless a person is
in physical control of the leash.
1. The dog may not be leashed to
inanimate objects such as trees, posts, and
buildings. A dangerous/potentially
dangerous dog, on a leash outside the dog's
kennel and off the owner’s property, shall be
muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to
prevent the dog from biting persons or other
animals. A dangerous/potentially dangerous
dog shall not be required to be muzzled
when shown either in a sanctioned American
Kennel Club show or upon prior approval by
the Village Humane Officer and/or Police
Department.
(b) Confinement. All dangerous/
potentially dangerous dogs shall be securely
confined indoors or in a securely enclosed
and locked pen or kennel, except when
leashed and muzzled as provided in Section
11.23 (2) (a) above. The pen, kennel, or
structure shall have secure sides and a
secure top attached to all sides. A structure
used to confine a dangerous/potentially
dangerous dog shall be locked with a key or
combination lock when the dog is within the
structure. The structure shall have a secure
bottom or floor attached to the sides of the
pen, or the sides of the pen must be
embedded in the ground no less than two
feet (2’). All structures erected to house
dangerous/potentially dangerous dogs shall
comply with all zoning and building
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 10 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
regulations of the Village. All structures
shall be adequately lighted and ventilated
and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(c) Confinement Indoors. No
dangerous/potentially dangerous dog may be
kept on a porch, patio, or in part of a house
or structure that would allow the dog to exit
the building on its own volition. No
dangerous/potentially dangerous dog may be
kept in a house or structure when the
windows are open or when screen windows
or screen doors are the only obstacle
preventing the dog from exiting the
structure.
(d) Prohibited in Multiple Dwellings.
No dangerous/potentially dangerous dog
may be kept within any portion of any
multiple building.
(e) Signs. All owners, keepers, or
harborers of dangerous/potentially
dangerous dogs shall, within fifteen (15)
days of the effective date of this section,
display in a prominent place on their
premises a sign easily readable by the public
using the words "Beware of Dog." A
similar sign is required to be posted on the
kennel or pen of the dog.
(f) Insurance. All owners, keepers or
harborers of dangerous/potentially
dangerous dogs shall within thirty (30) days
of the effective date of this section, provide
proof to the Village Humane Officer and/or
Police Department of public liability
insurance in a single incident amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000) for bodily
injury to or death of any person or for the
damage to property owned by any person
which may result from the ownership,
keeping or maintenance of dangerous/
potentially dangerous dogs. The insurance
policy shall provide that no cancellation of
the policy will be made unless a ten (10) day
written notice is first given to the Village
Humane Officer and/or Police Department.
The owner or custodian of the dog shall
produce evidence of the required insurance
upon request of the Village Humane Officer
and /or Police Department or any other law
enforcement officer. This paragraph does
not apply to dogs kept by law enforcement
agencies.
(3) Dangerous/Potentially Dangerous
Dog Determination. The Village Humane
Officer and/or Police Department shall
investigate every dog complaint and make a
determination as to whether or not such dog
is "dangerous/potentially dangerous", as
defined in Section 11.23 (1) (a) above. In
the event the Village Humane Officer and/or
Police Department makes a determination
that the dog is "dangerous/potentially
dangerous", he or she shall so inform the
owner, keeper or harborer of such dog and
provide such person with a copy of this
section.
(4) Appeal of Dangerous/Potentially
Dangerous Dog Determination. Any
person aggrieved by the determination of the
Village Humane Officer and/or Police
Department, as provided in Section 11.23
(3) above, may appeal such determination
by submitting a written appeal to the Board
within ten (10) days of such determination.
The owner, keeper, or harborer of a
dangerous/potentially dangerous dog shall
comply with all provisions of this section
while awaiting the outcome of the appeal.
(5) Compliance. Within ten (10) days
of the determination that a dog is
dangerous/potentially dangerous, as
provided in Section 11.23 (3) above, the
owner, keeper, or harborer of a
dangerous/potentially dangerous dog shall
either comply with all provisions of this
section or dispose of such dog.
(6) Disposition of Dangerous/
Potentially Dangerous Dogs. As stated in
Wis. Stats. §95.21(4)(c) and §174.02 any
dangerous/potentially dangerous dog which
attacks a human being or domestic animal
may be ordered destroyed by the Village
Humane Officer and/or Police Department
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 11 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
or any police officer when, in the judgment
of a court of competent jurisdiction, the dog
represents a continuing threat of serious
harm to human beings or domestic animals.
11.24 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
The Village Humane Officer and/or Police
Department shall have authority to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, including but
not limited to seizing any animal which the
Humane Officer and/or Police Department
reasonably believes has been taken,
employed, used, or possessed in violation of
this section. The Building Inspector may
enforce any provisions of this chapter,
which relates to his or her position.
11.25 DISPOSITION. Any seized animal
under this chapter shall be held by the
Brown County Health Department, Village
Humane Officer, or Police Department until
that animal is identified as to genus and
species in order to ascertain if the animal is
an endangered species under Wis. Stats.
29.604.
11.25.5 ANIMALS; HUMANE
OFFICERS. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this section, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. Ch. 173,
describing and defining regulations with
respect to animals and Humane Officers,
inclusive of any provisions therein relating
to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of
any regulations for which the statutory
penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment,
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of the chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any act, required to be performed, or
prohibited by any stature incorporated
herein by reference is required or prohibited
by this chapter. Any future amendments,
revisions or modifications of the statutes
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this section.
SUBCHAPTER II – GENERAL
NUISANCES
11.30 PUBLIC NUISANCES
PROHIBITED. No person shall erect,
contrive, cause, continue, maintain, or
permit to exist any public nuisance within
the Village.
11.31 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation,
condition, or use of property, which
continues for such length of time as to:
(1) Substantially annoy, injure or
endanger the comfort, health, repose, or
safety of the public.
(2) In any way render the public
insecure in life or in the use of property.
(3) Greatly offend the public morals or
decency.
(4) Unlawfully and substantially
interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct,
or render dangerous any street, alley,
highway, navigable body of water, or other
public way.
11.32 PUBLIC NUISANCES
AFFECTING HEALTH. The following
acts, omissions, places, conditions and
things are specifically declared to be public
health nuisances; but such enumeration shall
not be construed to exclude other health
nuisances coming within the definition of
Section 11.31.
(1) Adulterated Food. All decayed,
adulterated or unwholesome food or drink
sold or offered for sale to the public.
(2) Carcasses Unburied. Carcasses of
animals, birds or fowl not intended for
human consumption or food which is not
buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary
manner within twenty-four (24) hours after
death.
(3) Insects or Vermin, Breeding
Places for. Accumulations of decayed
animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish,
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 12 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
rotting lumber, bedding, packing material,
scrap metal, or any material in which flies,
mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats, or
other vermin can breed.
(4) Water, Stagnant. All stagnant
water in which flies, or other insects can
multiply.
(5) Privy Vaults and Garbage Cans.
Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not
fly-tight.
(6) Weed, Noxious. See Wis. Stats.
§66.0407, and Chapter 6.07(1) of the
Village Code.
(7) Pollution, Water. The pollution of
any public well or cistern, stream, lake,
canal, or other body of water by sewage,
creamery, or industrial wastes or other
substances.
(8) Odors, Noxious. Any use of
property, substances, or things within the
Village emitting or causing any foul,
offensive, noisome, noxious or disagreeable
odors, gases, effluvia, or stenches extremely
repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary
persons which annoy, discomfort, injure, or
inconvenience the health of any appreciable
number of persons within the Village.
(9) Pollution, Street. Any use of
property, which causes any noxious or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow
into or upon any street, gutter, alley,
sidewalk, or public place within the Village.
(10) Pollution, Air. The escape of
smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes,
gases, fly ash, industrial dust, or other
atmospheric pollutants within the Village or
within one (1) mile therefrom in such
quantities as to endanger the health of
persons of ordinary sensibilities or threaten
or cause substantial damage to property in
the Village.
(11) Abandoned Wells. All abandoned
wells not securely covered or secured for
public use.
(12) Obstruction of Watercourse, Etc.
Any obstruction in or across any
watercourse, drainage ditch, or swale.
(13) Deposit of Garbage, Refuse, etc.
The deposit of garbage, refuse or any
offensive substance on any public or private
property except as may be permitted by
ordinance. Garbage can not be placed out
for pickup prior to twenty-four (24) hours
before such scheduled pickup.
(14) Smoke.
(a) Dense Smoke. The emission of
dense smoke from the smokestack of any
engine or from the smokestack or chimney
of any building within the Village is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and is
prohibited.
(b) Stationary Engineer. The owner,
lessee, or occupant of any
building, or the fireman, engineer, or any
other person having charge or control of any
furnace or stationary engine who shall
cause, permit, or allow dense smoke to issue
or be emitted from the smokestack or
chimney connected with any such furnace or
stationary engine within the Village shall be
guilty of creating a public nuisance and of
violating the provisions of this section.
(c) All Soot Prohibited. The emission
of soot, cinders, or coal dust from any
chimney, stack, furnace, or from any
building within the Village is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and is
prohibited.
(15) Air Contaminants. No operation
or use shall cause, create, or allow air
contaminants at the emission point or within
the bounds at the property, which exceeds
federal or state air pollution regulations.
11.33 PUBLIC NUISANCES
OFFENDING MORALS AND
DECENCY. The following acts, omissions,
places, conditions, and things are
specifically declared to be public nuisances
offending public morals and decency; but
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 13 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
such enumeration shall not be construed to
exclude other nuisances offending public
morals and decency coming within the
definition of Section 11.31.
(1) Disorderly Houses. All disorderly
houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame,
gambling houses, and buildings or structures
kept or resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse
or gambling. Any building in which
gambling, prostitution, or liquor and
fermented malt beverage violations occur or
which is used for the purpose of unlawfully
selling, serving, storing, keeping, or giving
away controlled substances as defined in
Wis. Stats. Ch. 961 (Uniform Controlled
Substance Act). No person shall knowingly
keep, control, or operate a disorderly house,
or knowingly be an inmate of, frequent,
patronize, or be found within any disorderly
house. In addition to the forfeiture
provisions of this section, the operation of
any disorderly house shall be deemed to be a
public nuisance and may be enjoined by the
Village.
(2) Gambling Devices. All gambling
devices and slot machines.
(3) Unlicensed Sale of Liquor and
Beer. All places where intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages are sold, stored,
brewed, bottled, manufactured, or rectified
without a permit or license as provided for
by the ordinances of the Village.
(4) Continuous Violation of Village
Ordinances. Any place or premises within
the Village where Village code or state laws
relating to public health, safety, peace,
morals, or welfare are openly, continuously,
repeatedly, and intentionally violated.
(5) Illegal Drinking. Any place or
premises resorted to for the purpose of
drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented
malt beverages in violation of state laws.
11.34 PUBLIC NUISANCES
AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following acts, omissions, places,
conditions, and things are declared to be
public nuisances affecting peace and safety,
but such enumeration shall not be construed
to exclude other nuisances affecting public
peace or safety coming within the definition
of Section 11.31.
(1) Dangerous Signs, Billboards, etc.
All signs, billboards, awnings, and other
similar structures over or near streets,
sidewalks, public grounds, or places
frequented by the public, so situated or
constructed as to endanger the public safety.
(2) Illegal Buildings. All buildings
erected, repaired, or altered in violation of
Village code relating to materials and
manner of construction of buildings and
structures within the Village.
(3) Unauthorized Traffic Signs. All
unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or
devices placed or maintained upon or in
view of any public highway or railway
crossing which purport to be, or may be
mistaken as, official traffic control devices,
railroad signs, or signals or which, because
of their color, location, brilliance, or manner
of operation, interfere with the effectiveness
of any such device, sign, or signal.
(4) Obstruction of Intersections. All
trees, hedges, billboards, or other
obstructions which prevent persons driving
vehicles on public streets, alleys, or
highways from obtaining a clear view of
traffic when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk.
(5) Low-Hanging Tree Limbs. All
limbs of trees, which project over and less
than fourteen feet (14’) above any public
sidewalk or street.
(6) Dangerous Trees. All trees which
are a menace to public safety or which are
the cause of substantial annoyance to the
general public.
(7) Fireworks. All use or display of
fireworks except as provided by state laws
and Chapter 4 of the Village code.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 14 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
(8) Dilapidated Buildings. All
buildings or structures so old, dilapidated, or
out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for human use.
(9) Low-Hanging Wires and Cables.
All wires and cables over streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or crosswalks, and all
excavations in or under the same, except as
permitted by Village codes, but including
those which, although made in accordance
with such codes, are kept or maintained for
an unreasonable or illegal length of time
after the purpose thereof has been
accomplished or which do not conform to
the permit.
(10) Noisy Animals or Fowl. The
keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl
which, by frequent or habitual howling,
yelping, barking, crowing, or making of
other noises, greatly annoys or disturbs a
neighborhood or any considerable number
of persons within the Village.
(11) Obstruction of Streets;
Excavations. All obstructions of streets,
alleys, sidewalks, or crosswalks, and all
excavations in or under the same, except as
permitted by Village codes, but including
those which, although made in accordance
with such codes, are kept or maintained for
an unreasonable or illegal length of time
after the purpose thereof has been
accomplished or which do not conform to
the permit.
(12) Unlawful Assemblies. Any
authorized or prohibited use of property
abutting on a public street, alley, or
sidewalk, or of a public street, alley, or
sidewalk which causes large crowds of
people to gather, obstructing traffic and free
use of the streets or sidewalks.
(13) Noises or Vibrations. All loud,
discordant, and unnecessary noises or
vibration of any kind.
(14) Open and Unguarded Pits, Wells,
etc. All open and unguarded pits, wells,
excavations, or unused basements freely
accessible from any public street, alley, or
sidewalk.
(15) Abandoned Refrigerators or Ice
Boxes. All abandoned refrigerators or
iceboxes from which the doors and other
covers have not been removed or which
cannot be opened by pushing from inside by
a small child.
(16) Repeated or Continuous
Violations. Repeated or continuous
violations of the Village code or state laws
relating to the storage of flammable liquids.
(17) Structure or Material which
Constitutes a Fire Hazard. Any structure,
material, or condition which constitutes a
fire hazard or will impair the extinguishing
of any fire.
(18) Any Nuisance. Any nuisance so
defined by the Wisconsin statutes.
(19) Sound Amplifiers.
(a) The use of sound amplifiers outside
buildings within the Village is prohibited
without a permit from the Village. A sound
amplifier shall not be operated after 10 p.m.
or before 7 a.m. (after 11 p.m. Friday and
Saturday or before 7 a.m. on Saturday and
Sunday), or in the vicinity of churches while
services are being conducted, or near
schools that are in session. The Village may
order a reduction in the volume of an
amplifier on complaint being made by a
citizen or when such loudspeaker is a
nuisance because of volume, the method in
which it is being used, at the location in
which it is being operated.
(b) Between the hours of 10 p.m. and
7 a.m. (between 11 p.m. Friday and
Saturday and 7 a.m. on Saturday and
Sunday), no person may operate a radio,
juke box, or other electric sound
amplification device emitting sound from
any business premises within the Village
that is audible on residentially-zoned
property under normal conditions from a
distance of seventy-five feet (75’) or more
beyond the lot line of any business premises
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 15 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
described which emits a sound, unless the
electric sound amplification device is being
used to request assistance or warn against
unsafe conditions.
(20) Lot Line Noise Regulation.
(a) This section provides for noise
limitations for emitting and receiving zones
located in various zoning districts as
established in the Village. No person shall
operate or cause to be operated on private or
public property any source of sound in such
a manner as to create a sound level which
exceeds any of the limits set for the zone
categories in Table I.
TABLE I
Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure
(Levels in Decibels re .0002 Microbars)
7 a.m. to 10 p.m.
Octave Band Center Resid Comm Industrial Industrial Comm
Frequency (hz) Into Into Into Into Into
Resid Comm Comm Resid Resid
31.5 72 79 79 72 72
63 71 78 78 71 71
125 65 72 73 66 65
250 57 64 67 60 57
500 51 58 61 54 51
1000 47 52 55 49 45
2000 39 46 50 44 39
4000 34 41 46 40 34
8000 32 39 43 37 32
A-scale levels 55 dB(A) 63 dB(A) 64 dB(A) 58 dB(A) 55dB(A) (for
monitoring purposes)
Comm=Commercial
Resid=Residential
(b) Decibel Level Corrections.
1. The levels cited above are daytime
levels. Daytime shall refer to the hours
between sunrise and sunset on any given
day.
2. When noise is present at nighttime,
subtract (-5dB) from the levels in the table
above.
(c) Definitions of Zone Categories. The
following zones are included in the zone
categories. These are defined:
1. Residential. Rural Residential,
Single Family Residence, Agriculture, and
Exclusive Agricultural.
2. Commercial. Community Business,
Service & Entertainment, and Highway
Business.
3. Industrial. Limited Industrial and
Industrial Park. Regulation will be
according to the underlying zones.
Conservancy zones that are not publicly
owned shall be regulated according to the
adjacent zone. If the neighboring zones are
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 16 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
different, they shall be extended to the
center of the conservancy for the purposes
of this section.
(d) Measurements. The measurement
shall be made at or beyond the property line
of the property on which said noise is
generated at or within the property line of
the property on which said noise is
perceived as inappropriate. Measurement
shall be done at a minimum height of four
feet (4’) above the ground. The
measurement of sound shall be made either
with a sound level meter that meets or
exceeds the ANSI requirements of the
American Standard Specification for Sound
Level Meters, Type I or Type II (ANSI #1.4
-1971) or with an Octave Band Analyzer
that meets or exceeds the requirements of
ANSI (#1.6 - 1960) or any subsequent
nationally adopted standards superseding the
above standards. In both cases, the
instruments should be maintained in
calibration and good working order.
When a sound level meter is used, it
shall be set to the A-weighting scale and in
the FAST response mode. A windscreen
shall be mounted on the microphone and the
noise limitations shall be the A-scale levels
set forth in Table I.
An octave band analyzer may be
employed when there is a concentration of
sound energy within a limited number of
bands, but its use shall not be restricted to
such situations. When an octave band
analyzer is used, a standard octave band
analyzer shall be conducted that spans the
frequency range set forth in Table I.
(e) Exceptions. The provisions of this
article shall not apply to:
1. Activities covered by the variance
and exemption section of this section.
2. The activities covered under the
motor vehicle section of this section.
3. Non-stationary farming equipment.
(f) Analysis. Where an octave band
analysis is not done, an A-weighted sound
level measurement of the noise shall be
taken. When this method is used, the noise
limitations shall be the A-scale levels
included in the table.
(g) Excessive Construction/Equipment
Noise Prohibited. Between the hours of
10 p.m. and 7 a.m., no person may operate
construction machinery, any equipment, or
tools emitting excessive sound from any
premises within the Village that is audible
on residentially-zoned property under
normal weather conditions beyond the lot
line of any premises described which emits
the sound, unless an emergency situation
exists requiring the use of such equipment or
tools. The following are exempt from the
provisions of this code: implements of
husbandry being used on agricultural lands,
equipment operated by Brown County
Highway Department, and equipment used
in any municipal operation.
(21) Vibrations. The use of any
property or portion thereof which is zoned in
any Industrial District classification causing
earth-shaking vibrations such as are created
by uses including, but not limited to, drop
forges and hydraulic surges, shall be
controlled in such manner as to prevent
transmission beyond the lot line of earthshaking
vibrations perceptible without the
aid of instruments.
11.35 STORAGE OF JUNK.
(1) The unsheltered accumulation or
storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and
automobiles not in good and safe operating
condition, any other vehicles, machinery,
implements, equipment, any parts thereof,
and personal property of any kind which is
no longer safely usable for the purposes for
which it was manufactured within the
Village is declared to be a public nuisance
and dangerous to the public health, safety
and well-being of Village residents.
(2) The owner, tenant, lessee, and
occupants of any lot upon which such
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 17 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
accumulation or storage is made and the
owner and lessee of the items involved in
such storage, all referred to collectively as
“owners”, shall jointly and severally abate
the nuisance by promptly moving such items
into completely enclosed buildings
authorized to be used for such storage
purposes, if the same can be found within
the Village, or otherwise by moving the
items to a location outside the Village.
(3) Whenever the owners fail to abate
the nuisance, the Village shall move such
items to a location of its selection, and the
expense therefore shall be billed to the
owners, jointly and severally, which bill
shall be coverable through tax roll. When
such items have been removed and placed in
storage by the Village, they shall be sold by
the Village after the lapse of such time as is
provided. If the proceeds of such sale are
insufficient to pay the costs of abatement,
the owners shall be jointly and severally
liable to the Village for the balance of the
costs to be recoverable in a suit of law. If
the proceeds are in excess of costs, the
balance shall be paid to the owners or
deposited with the Village for their use.
11.35.5 CHRONIC NUISANCE
PROPERTY.
(1) Findings. The Village Board of
Suamico finds that certain premises within
the Village of Suamico receive and require
more than the general, acceptable level of
services from Village departments. These
premises place an undue and inappropriate
burden on the Village of Suamico taxpayers.
Nuisance activity contributes to the general
decay of an affected neighborhood and
negatively impacts law-abiding residents in
these neighborhoods. This ordinance is
intended to encourage responsible
ownership of such properties such as they do
not unduly burden the Village’s departments
or taxpayers. This section is not intended to
discourage crime victims or a person in
legitimate need of Village services from
requesting them. This section does not
affect a premise owner’s duty to comply
with the fair housing laws, nor does it affect
a premises owner’s duty to comply with all
other laws governing residential tenancies
which are contained in Chapter 704 of the
Wisconsin statutes, Chapter ATCP 134 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code and
other parts of this code.
(2) Definitions. The following words,
terms and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
(a) Authorized official. Singularly or
collectively, officers of the Police
Department, Fire Chief, Health Officer,
Inspections officers, Village Engineer,
Public Works Director, Village
Administrator, or their designee with
jurisdiction to enforce the various statutes
and ordinances prohibiting nuisance
activities.
(b) Chronic nuisance properties. A
property that meets any of the following
criteria:
1. A property which has generated three
(3) or more calls for Village services within
a three (3) year period. This includes
enforcement action against any person
associated with the property; or
2. A property for which a court of law
has determined that, pursuant to a search
warrant request, probable cause exists that
manufacture, distribution or delivery of a
controlled substance has occurred on or in
association with the premises within thirty
(30) days prior to the date of the search
warrant application; or
3. Is a property which has had one (1)
enforcement action associated with the
property resulting from the manufacture,
delivery or distribution of a controlled
substance(s) as defined in Chapter 961 of
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 18 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
the Wisconsin statutes or a property which is
used as a meeting place of a criminal gang,
or that is used to facilitate the activities of a
criminal gang as defined in S.939.22(9),
Wis. Stats.
(c) Chronic Nuisance Properties Notice
(CNP Notice). The notice issued by an
authorized official of the Village.
(d) Enforcement action. The arrest, the
issuance of a citation, or the issuance of a
written or verbal warning.
(e) Nuisance activities. May include,
but is not limited to, any of the following
activities, behaviors or conduct:
1. An act of harassment, as defined in
S.947.013, Wis. Stats.
2. Disorderly conduct as defined in
Ch. 11.56, Suamico Village Code or
S.947.01, Wis. Stats.
3. Crimes of violence as defined in
Ch. 940, Wis. Stats.
4. Resisting or obstructing an officer as
prohibited by Ch. 11.55, Suamico Village
Code or S.946.41, Wis. Stats.
5. Lewd and lascivious behavior as
prohibited by Ch.11.115, Suamico Village
Code or S. 944.20 Wis. Stats.
6. Damage to property as prohibited by
Ch.11.107, Suamico Village Code or
S. 943.01, Wis. Stats.
7. Loud and unnecessary noise as
prohibited by Ch. 11.69, Suamico Village
Code.
8. Crimes involving illegal possession
of firearms as defined in SS. 941.23, 941.26,
941.28, 941.29 and 948.60, Wis. Stats.
9. Trespass to land as defined in
Ch. 11.100, Suamico Village Code or
S. 943.13 and S.943.14, Wis. Stats.
10. Loitering, obstructing a street or
sidewalk, as prohibited Ch. 11.70 and 11.71,
Suamico Village Code.
11. Theft as defined in Ch. 11.88, 11.89,
and 11.90, Suamico Village Code.
12. Arson as defined in S.943.02, Wis.
Stats.
13. Keeping a place of prostitution as
defined in S.944.34, Wis. Stats.
14. Prostitution as prohibited in Ch.
11.118, Suamico Village Code or S.944.30,
Wis. Stats.
15. Battery, substantial battery, or
aggravated battery as defined in S.940.19,
Wis. Stats.
16. Receiving stolen property as defined
in Ch.11.97, Suamico Village Code or
S.943.34, Wis. Stats.
17. Patronizing prostitutes as prohibited
in Ch. 11.119, Suamico Village Code or
S. 944.32, Wis. Stats.
18. Animal violations as defined in
Ch. 11, Suamico Village Code.
19. Gambling as defined in S.945.02,
Wis. Stats.
20. Any conspiracy to commit, as
defined in S.939.31, Wis. Stats., or attempt
to commit, as defined in S.939.32, Wis.
Stats., any of the activities, behaviors, or
conduct enumerated in Subsection a.
through s. above.
21. The execution of arrest or search
warrants at a particular location.
22. Alcohol violations, as defined in
Ch. 5.04, 11.72 and 11.73, Suamico Village
Code or S. 125, Wis. Stats.
23. Fire violations, as defined in Ch. 4
Sub. II, Suamico Village Code.
24. Any other violations of the Suamico
Village Code of Ordinances, Brown County
Code, or Wisconsin Statutes.
(f) Person. Any natural person, agent,
association, firm, partnership, corporation or
other entity capable of owning, occupying or
using property in the Village of Suamico.
(g) Premises/Property. A business,
public or private clubhouse, a place of
abode, a residence, a house or multiple
dwelling unit for one (1) or more persons,
including lodging houses, hotels, motels and
tourist rooming houses and associated
common areas, yards and parking lots.
(3) Procedure.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 19 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) Whenever an authorized Village
official determines that three (3) or more
nuisance activities resulting in enforcement
action have occurred at the premises or
property during a three (3) year period, the
Village official may notify the premises or
property owner in writing. The Village
official shall not count nuisance activities
reported by the owner of the premises or
onsite premises manager. Sec. 968.075,
Wis. Stats., broadly defines “domestic
abuse”. Therefore, in reaching a
determination that a premises is a chronic
nuisance premises, activities that are
“domestic abuse” incidents pursuant to
S.968.075, Wis. Stats., shall not be included
as nuisance activities unless the incidents
have been reviewed by the Police
Department and the Village Attorney and a
determination is made that, based upon the
specific facts of each incident, the activities
should be deemed nuisance activities. In
determining whether to include such
activities, the Police Department and Village
Attorney shall consider the strong public
policy in favor of domestic victims reporting
alleged abuses, and this ordinance shall not
operate to discourage such reports.
The notice shall be deemed to be
properly delivered if sent either by first class
mail to the premises’ owner’s last known
address or if delivered in person to the
premises’ owner. If the premises’ owner
cannot be located, the notice shall be
deemed to be properly delivered if a copy is
left at the premises’ owners usual place of
abode in the presence of some competent
member of the family at least fourteen (14)
years of age, or a competent adult currently
residing there and who shall be informed of
the contents of the notice. If a current
address cannot be located, it shall be deemed
sufficient if a copy of the notice is sent by
first class mail to the last known address of
the owner identified by the records of the
Village Assessor.
(b) The notice shall contain the street
address or legal description sufficient to
identify the premises.
(c) A description of the nuisance
activities that have occurred on the premises
and a statement indicating that the cost of
future enforcement may be assessed as a
special charge against the premises.
(d) A statement that the premises owner,
in addition to actual abatement costs, may be
subject to a forfeiture action with a penalty
of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25) nor
more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) for each day a chronic nuisance is
allowed to continue.
(e) A statement that the premises’
owner shall within thirty (30) days, meet
with the Village official either to appeal or
to propose a written course of action to abate
the nuisance activities which is acceptable to
the authorized Village official.
(4) Abatement Plan. Any owner
receiving notice pursuant to Subsection (3),
shall meet with the authorized Village
official or his or her designee within (30)
days of receipt of such notice. The parties
shall review the problems occurring on the
property. Within ten (10) business days of
this meeting, the owner shall submit to the
authorized Village official or his or her
designee, an abatement plan to end the
nuisance activity on the property. The plan
shall also specify a name, address, and
telephone number of a person living within
sixty (60) miles of the property who can be
contacted in the event of further police, fire,
or other authorized Village official contact.
(5) Additional Nuisance Activity.
Whenever the authorized Village official
determines that the additional nuisance
activity has occurred at the premises for
which notice has been issued pursuant to
this section, that this nuisance activity has
occurred not less than fifteen (15) days after
the notice has been issued, and that
reasonable efforts have not been made to
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 20 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
abate the nuisance activity, the authorized
Village official may calculate the cost of
Village response and enforcement for this
and any subsequent nuisance activities and
cause such charges and administrative costs
to be assessed as collected as a special
charge.
(6) Appeal. Appeal of the
determination of the authorized Village
official may be submitted to the Suamico
Village Health & Safety Committee.
However, if no petition for an appeal
hearing is filed within twenty (20) days
following receipt of the notice provided to
the premises owner, the petitioner’s right
herein provided to a hearing shall be deemed
waived by the petitioner and the hearing
petition shall be voided as untimely.
11.36 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC
NUISANCES.
(1) Enforcement. The Police
Department, Zoning Administrator, Fire
Chief, Director of Public Works, Weed
Commissioner, Building Inspector, Humane
Officer, Forester, or Health Officer shall
enforce those provisions of this chapter that
come within the jurisdiction of their offices;
and they shall make periodic inspections and
inspections upon complaint to insure that
such provisions are not violated. No actions
shall be taken under this section to abate a
public nuisance unless the officer has
inspected or caused to be inspected the
premises where the nuisance is alleged to
exist and has satisfied himself or herself that
a nuisance does in fact exist. Whenever
practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause
photographs to be made of the premises and
shall file the same in the offices of the Clerk.
(2) Summary Abatement. If the
inspecting officer determines that a public
nuisance exists within the Village and that
there is great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals, or
decency, the Administrator may direct the
proper officer to cause the same to be abated
or to remove such nuisance within twentyfour
(24) hours and shall state that unless
such nuisance is so abated, the Village will
cause the same to be abated and will charge
the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or
person causing, permitting, or maintaining
the nuisance, as the case may be.
(3) Abatement by Village. If the
nuisance is not abated within the time
provided, or if the owner, occupant, or
person causing the nuisance cannot be
found, the Police Department, Zoning
Administrator, Fire Chief, Director of Public
Works, or Weed Commissioner shall cause
the abatement or removal of such nuisance.
The charge for the abatement or removal
shall be as set from time to time by the
Board and its costs shall be charged to the
property owner. If such charges are not paid
by November 15 of the year in which they
are billed, such charges, together with an
additional administrative fee for collection
equal to ten percent (10%) of the total of
such charges and fees, shall be extended on
the next succeeding tax roll as a tax charged
against the property affected and collected in
the same manner as are other real estate
taxes.
(4) Abatement after Notice. If the
inspecting officer determines that a public
nuisance exists on private premises but that
such nuisance does not threaten great and
immediate danger to the public health,
safety, peace, morals, or decency, he or she
shall serve notice on the person causing or
maintaining the nuisance to remove the
same within ten (10) days. If such nuisance
is not removed within ten (10) days, the
proper officer shall cause the nuisance to be
removed as provided in Section 11.36 (2).
(5) Other Methods Not Excluded.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the abatement of public
nuisances by the Village or its officials in
accordance with the laws of the state.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 21 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
(6) Court Order. Except when
necessary under Section 11.36 (2), an officer
hereunder shall not use force to obtain
access to private property to abate a public
nuisance, but shall request permission to
enter upon private property if such premises
are occupied and if such permission is
denied, shall apply to any court having
jurisdiction for an order assisting the
abatement of the public nuisance.
11.37 COST OF ABATEMENT.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by
this section for the erection, contrivance,
creation, continuance, or maintenance of a
public nuisance, the cost of abating a public
nuisance by the Village shall be collected as
a debt from the owner, occupant, or person
causing, permitting, or maintaining the
nuisance; and if notice to abate the nuisance
has been given to the owner, such costs shall
be assessed against the real estate as a
special charge.
11.38 LITTERING.
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of this
section, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meaning
given:
(a) Litter. Garbage, refuse, and rubbish
as defined herein and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as
herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to
public health, safety, and welfare.
(b) Refuse. All putrescible and nonputrescible
solid wastes including ashes,
street cleanings, dead animals, and all other
abandoned personal property and solid
market and industrial waste. Refuse
includes animal offal, the droppings from
pet animals, manure, and night soil.
(c) Rubbish. Non-putrescible and solid
wastes, both combustible and noncombustible,
including, but not limited to,
circulars, leaflets, pamphlets, wrappers,
handbills, newspapers, and any other printed
or non-printed paper material, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves,
wood, glass, and other similar materials.
(d) Receptacles, private and public.
Private receptacles are containers made of
durable, rust resistant, water tight, rodent
proof, and easily cleaned material with
close-fitting fly tight covers. Public
receptacles are litter containers which are
placed on Village roadways or fastened to
poles and maintained by the Village and
marked as "litter receptacles".
(e) Garbage. Waste resulting from the
handling, cooking, processing, preparation,
serving, storage, and consumption of food,
including animal, fish, fowl, fruits,
vegetables, or other matter which is subject
to decomposition, decay, putrefaction, and
the generation of offensive and noxious
gases or odors.
(2) Litter in Public Places. No person
shall throw, deposit, or cause to be placed,
litter upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public place within the Village except
in public receptacles provided by the
Village.
(3) Placement of Litter in Receptacles
so as to Prevent Scattering. Persons
placing litter in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles shall do so in
such a manner and in such containers as will
prevent it from being carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk,
alley, or other public place or upon private
property within the Village.
(4) Sweeping Litter into Gutters
Prohibited. No person shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street, alley, or other
public place within the Village the
accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying the
property shall keep the sidewalks, entrance
walks, parking lots, and parking areas in
front of or upon their premises free of litter.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 22 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
(5) Litter in Public Waters. No person
shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain,
pond, wading pool, river, bay, or other body
of water in a public or private place or
elsewhere within the Village.
(6) Litter on Occupied Private
Property. No person shall throw or deposit
litter on any occupied private property
within the Village, whether owned by such
person or not, except the owner or person in
control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection
in such a manner that litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public place or any private property.
(7) Owner to Maintain Premises Free
of Litter.
(a) The owner or person in control of
any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter;
provided, however, this section shall not
prohibit the storage of litter in an authorized
private receptacle for collection.
(b) Littering at Razing or Removal Site.
No person or owner shall leave litter,
building debris, excavations, or ground piles
on property on which a building is being
razed or from which a building has been
moved. If work is not being done in a
satisfactory manner or is not progressing
thus causing a public safety hazard and
nuisance, the Building Inspector, after a
written notice specifying a definite period
within which persons concerned shall clean
up the property and level off the ground to
the adjoining level, shall cause such work to
be done; and the cost thereof shall be borne
by the property or the property owner.
(8) Litter on Vacant Lot. No person
shall throw or deposit litter on any open or
vacant private property or public property
within the Village whether owned by such
person or not.
(9) Animal Offal and Other Offensive
Wastes. It is expressly recognized that
animal offal, the droppings from pet
animals, manure, and night soil, create a
danger to public health, safety, and welfare
when deposited on the roadway, or upon the
shoulders of public roadways or shoulders of
private property. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of such animals
to dispose of such wastes in a sanitary
manner as provided above.
(10) Litter from Vehicles.
(a) The operator of every vehicle and
trailer transporting solid waste materials or
other materials within the Village shall
provide proper devices necessary to
completely secure the solid waste or other
materials. Tarps are required for materials
such as paper and plastic products and other
material, which because of size, weight and
configuration could blow or bounce off the
vehicle. Tailgates in an upright position,
backboards of at least one foot (1’) in
height, ropes, chains, straps, or a
combination of these devices is required to
completely secure other solid waste
materials or other materials to prevent
blowing, bouncing, leaking, falling or
spillage. Materials shall not extend above
the side, front or back of the cargo-carrying
portion of the vehicle unless the material is
securely fastened to the vehicle.
(b) No person shall throw or discard any
litter materials out of any vehicle onto any
roadway or public or private property within
the Village.
SUBCHAPTER III – PEACE AND
ORDER
11.39 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS
REGULATED. There shall be no
discharge of firearms on any lands within
the corporate limits of the Village without
permission of the owner of the land. Any
peace officer in the discharge of his or her
duties is exempt from this restriction.
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of this
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 23 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
chapter, certain words and phrases shall be
defined as follows:
(a) Firearms. A rifle of any caliber,
shotgun of any gauge, pistol, or revolver of
any caliber. A weapon which expels a
missile by the explosive force of gunpowder
or by release of compressed air or gases.
(b) Recorded Subdivision. Any
subdivision of land within the Village laid
out and established in accordance with the
provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, or in
accordance with existing ordinances of the
Village relating to land divisions.
(2) Prohibited Use of Firearms. No
person shall discharge any firearm in any
area so designated by the Board on the
Village map. Remaining areas of the
Village shall be governed by the current
edition of the WISCONSIN HUNTING
REGULATIONS as issued by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
(3) Exceptions.
(a) The prohibitions of this section shall
not apply to persons who are acting pursuant
to lawful appointment or election as federal
law enforcement officers or law
enforcement officers of the state, county, or
Village.
(b) Any weapon unloaded and properly
encased.
(c) Target practice by an organized club
holding a valid permit, as follows:
Such permits will be granted by the Board
only upon a determination that the health,
safety, and welfare of persons will not be
adversely affected.
1. No permit shall be valid for a period
in excess of three (3) years.
2. The permit shall designate the times
and places at which such target practice may
occur and shall be subject to such other
terms and conditions as may be determined
by the Board.
3. The fee for the permit must be paid at
the time application is made for the permit.
A refund as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board shall be made if the
permit is not granted.
4. The Clerk shall not issue the permit
until the permittee provides proof of liability
insurance satisfactory to the Clerk with
limits of liability not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000).
5. The permit shall provide that the
permittee shall indemnify the Village and
hold it harmless for any liability from
activities carried on pursuant to the permit.
(d) Pest control (see Section 11.39 (5)).
(e) The prohibitions of this section shall
not apply to state owned or county owned
lands within the Village.
(f) Discharge of firearms directed over
or into the waters of Green Bay for the
purposes of migratory bird hunting. The
weapon and ammunition used shall be as
prescribed in NR 10.09, Wis. Admin. Code.
(g) The prohibitions of this section shall
not apply to persons who legally possess a
weapon pursuant to Wis. Stats. 29.621 and
Wis. Stats. 175.60.
(5) Permit for Pest Control. Upon
application to the Health & Safety
Committee, residents of the Village who
operate farms may receive up to a nine (9)
month permit which shall permit limited
discharge of a shotgun or air rifle in a
restricted area for the purposes of pest
control. Upon approval of the
Administrator, the Clerk shall be authorized
to issue such permits. Such permits shall be
dated and timed to coincide with any
permits issued by the State of Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
(6) Parental Responsibility. If a minor
violates this section, his or her parent or
legal guardian may be held responsible for
the violation in the same manner as if the
parent or legal guardian had violated the
same, and ignorance of such violation shall
not be a defense; prosecution of the parent
or legal guardian shall not be a bar to
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 24 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
prosecution of the minor.
(7) Petitions from Landowners.
Landowners in the Village may petition the
Board to be included or removed from areas
designated on the Village map which restrict
the discharge of firearms. No cost will be
assessed the petitioner. The petitioner can
complete a request for a hearing before the
Health & Safety Committee at the Village
office. Upon receipt of such request, the
Clerk will place the request on the Health &
Safety Committee agenda for the next
available scheduled meeting.
Recommendations from Health & Safety
shall be forwarded to the Board for action.
(8) Newly Recorded Subdivisions.
New subdivisions, upon acceptance and
approval of the final plat by the Board, will
be designated as areas in which the
discharge of firearms is prohibited.
(9) Possession of Dangerous or Deadly
Weapon.
(a) Except as reasonably necessary to
fulfill the exceptions provided elsewhere in
this section, or as otherwise permitted
pursuant to Wis. Stats. 29.621 and Wis.
Stats. 175.60, no person shall carry or
transport, conceal about the person or
display in a threatening manner any
dangerous or deadly weapon including, but
not limited by numeration to: pistol,
revolver, rifle or shotgun.
(b) The prohibitions of Section 11.39
(9) (a) will not be construed to prevent the
carrying of any type of weapon when it is
unloaded and properly encased, boxed,
packaged, or otherwise unavailable for
immediate use or transported in conformity
with Wis. Stats. §167.31, or the display and
sale of such weapon by a licensed retailer; or
when such weapon is possessed in strict
conformity with Wis. Stats. §29.227, nor
shall any of these prohibitions forbid any
law enforcement officer of the United
States, State of Wisconsin, or subdivision
thereof from carrying, wearing, or using
such weapons as shall be necessary in the
proper exercise of their duties.
(10) Penalty. Any person that violates
Section 11.39 or any part thereof shall be
subject to a forfeiture of at least twenty-five
dollars ($25) but not to exceed two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500) for each
offense. In addition, the person shall be
responsible for the costs of prosecution and
in default of payment of such forfeiture and
costs of prosecution, he or she may be
imprisoned in the County Jail until said
forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to
exceed ninety (90) days for each violation.
11.40 ENDANGERING SAFETY BY
USE OF A DANGEROUS WEAPON.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §941.20(1), are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.41 CARRYING CONCEALED
WEAPON. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §941.23,
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.42 CARRYING FIREARM IN A
PUBLIC BUILDING.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Firearms means a weapon that acts
by force of gunpowder.
(b) Law Enforcement means any person
employed by the State of Wisconsin or any
political subdivision of this state, for the
purpose of detecting and preventing crime
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 25 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
and enforcing laws or ordinances and who is
authorized to make arrests for violations of
the laws or ordinances he or she is employed
to enforce.
(c) Weapon means a handgun, an
electronic weapon as defined at Wis. Stats.
Section 941.295, a knife other than a
switchblade under Wis. Stats. Sec. 941.24,
or a billy club.
(2) The provisions of Wis. Stats. Sec.
175.60 enumerating places where the
carrying of a weapon or a firearm is
prohibited, including exceptions thereto, are
hereby adopted as part of this ordinance.
Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
(3) In addition to the public buildings
listed at 11.42(2) above, it shall be unlawful
for any person other than a law enforcement
officer to enter any school property within
the Village while carrying a weapon or a
firearm.
11.43 CARRYING HANDGUN WHERE
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES MAY BE
CONSUMED. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §941.237
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.44 CARRYING A CONCEALED
KNIFE. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stats. §941.231 are
hereby adopted and by reference made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
(Section 941.24 was repealed under state
law and 941.231 was created)
11.45 POSSESSION OF A
DANGEROUS WEAPON BY A
PERSON UNDER 18. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§948.60(1), (2)(a), and (3) are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.46 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF
FACSIMILE FIREARMS. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §941.2965 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.47 DISCHARGING A FIREARM IN
THE DIRECTION OF AN
ELECTRONIC OR
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
TRANSMISSION FACILITY. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §167.31 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.48 LEAVING OR STORING A
LOADED FIREARM WITHIN REACH
OR EASY ACCESS OF A CHILD.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 26 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §948.55 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.49 DANGEROUS WEAPONS
OTHER THAN FIREARMS ON
SCHOOL PREMISES. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §948.61(1), (2)(a), (3), and (4) are
hereby adopted and by reference made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.50 THROWING OR SHOOTING OF
MISSILES AND PROJECTILES. No
person shall carry or cause to be discharged
any air gun, BB gun, pellet gun, gas
operated gun, sling shot or similar
dangerous missile in any prohibited area
within the Village nor throw any object,
arrow, stone, snowball, or other missile or
projectile, by hand or by any other means, at
any person or at, in or into any building,
street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park,
playground, or other public place within the
Village.
11.51 POSSESSION OF OLEORESIN
OF CAPSICUM BY A FELON. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §941.26(4)(L) are hereby adopted and
by reference made part of this chapter as if
fully set forth herein. Any future
amendments, revisions, or modifications of
this statute incorporated herein are intended
to be made part of this chapter.
11.52 POSSESSION OF NITROUS
OXIDE. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stats. §941.315(2) are
hereby adopted and by reference made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.53 RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE
OF LASER POINTERS.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §941.299 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.54 OBSTRUCTING EMERGENCY
OR RESCUE PERSONNEL. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §941.37(1) and (2) are hereby adopted
and by reference made part of this chapter as
if fully set forth herein. Any future
amendments, revisions, or modifications of
this statute incorporated herein are intended
to be made part of this chapter.
11.55 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING
AN OFFICER. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§946.41(1), (2), and (3) are hereby adopted
and by reference made part of this chapter as
if fully set forth herein. Any future
amendments, revisions, or modifications of
this statute incorporated herein are intended
to be made part of this chapter.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 27 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
11.56 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §947.01 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.57 DISRUPTING A FUNERAL OR
MEMORIAL SERVICE. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §947.011(1), (2), and (3)(a) are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.58 CAUSING VIOLENCE OR
BREACH OF THE PEACE BY
DAMAGING OR DESTROYING A U.S.
FLAG. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stats. §947.07 are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.59 HAZING. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§948.51(1), (2), and (3)(a) are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.60 FALSE COMPLAINTS OF
POLICE MISCONDUCT. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §946.66 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.61 INTIMIDATION OF
WITNESSES. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §940.42
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.62 INTIMIDATION OF VICTIMS.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §940.44 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.63 DUTY TO AID VICTIM OR
REPORT CRIME. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §940.34
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.64 BATTERY. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 28 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
§940.19(1) are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.65 ATTEMPTED BATTERY. Except
as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §939.32(1) are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.66 REFUSING TO AID OFFICER.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §946.40 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.67 ESCAPE. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§946.42(1), (2), and (4) are hereby adopted
and by reference made part of this chapter as
if fully set forth herein. Any future
amendments, revisions, or modifications of
this statute incorporated herein are intended
to be made part of this chapter.
11.68 IMPERSONATING PEACE
OFFICERS. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§946.70(1) are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.69 LOUD AND UNNECESSARY
NOISE PROHIBITED.
(1) No person shall make or cause to be
made any loud, disturbing, or unnecessary
sounds or noises which may annoy or
disturb a person of ordinary sensibilities in
or about any public street, alley or park or
any private residence.
(2) No person shall make unnecessary
and annoying noise with a motor vehicle by
squealing tires, excessive acceleration of
engine, excessive braking, or by emitting
unnecessary and loud muffler noises.
11.70 LOITERING/PROWLING.
(1) Loitering or Prowling Prohibited.
No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at
a time or in a manner not usual for lawabiding
individuals under circumstances that
warrant alarm for the safety of persons or
property in the vicinity. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such alarm is
warranted is the fact that the person takes
flight upon appearance of a police or peace
officer, refuses to identify himself or herself
or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself
or herself or any object. Unless flight by the
person or other circumstances makes it
impracticable, a police officer or peace
officer shall, prior to any arrest for an
offense under this subsection, afford the
person an opportunity to dispel any alarm
which would otherwise be warranted by
requesting him or her to identify himself or
herself and explain his or her presence and
conduct. No person shall be convicted of an
offense under this subsection if the police or
peace officer did not comply with the
preceding sentence or if it appears at trial
that the explanation given by the person was
true and, if believed by the police or peace
officer at the time, would have dispelled the
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 29 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
alarm.
(2) Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks
Prohibited. No person shall loaf or loiter in
a group or crowd upon the public streets,
alleys, sidewalks, street crossing or bridges,
or in any other public place within the
Village in such manner as to prevent,
interfere with or obstruct the ordinary free
use of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks,
street crossings or bridges, or other public
places by persons passing along and over the
same.
(3) Loitering in Public Places. No
person shall loiter, lounge, or loaf in or
about any depot, theater, dance hall,
restaurant, store, public sidewalk, public
parking lot or other place of assembly for
public use after being requested to move by
the owner or person in charge or any police
officer. Upon being requested to move, a
person shall immediately comply with such
request by leaving the premises or area
thereof at the time of the request.
11.71 LOITERING IN SCHOOL AND
PLAYGROUND AREAS PROHIBITED.
No person not in official attendance or on
official school business shall enter into,
congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or
play in or on any school property within the
Village between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m. on
official school days.
11.72 CONSUMPTION AND
POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING
LIQUORS OR FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGES ON PUBLIC WAYS AND
PUBLIC PROPERTY.
(1) No person shall consume any
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverage upon the public highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, street crossings, bridges,
public parks or parking lots or premises held
out to the public for use of their motor
vehicles, whether the premises are publicly
or privately owned, in the Village except for
approved community functions or events
where authorized by specific resolution of
the Board.
(2) All purchases of intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverage by the glass or
in open containers shall be consumed on the
licensed premises where served, and shall
not be removed therefrom to any public
highway, street, alley, sidewalk, street
crossing, bridge, public park, parking lot, or
premises held out to the public for use of
their motor vehicles, whether the premises
are publicly or privately owned, within the
Village.
(3) No person shall bring upon, use,
consume, sell or convey any intoxicating
liquor or fermented malt beverage in or
upon any property, building, or other
structure which is owned or under control of
the Village except in such places as may be
designated by the Village and in accordance
with the rules and regulations as may be
from time to time adopted by the Board.
11.73 SOLICITATION OF DRINKS
PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §944.36
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.74 DRINKING IN COMMON
CARRIERS. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §947.04
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 30 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
11.75 ABANDONED OR
UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS,
ETC. PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §167.25
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.76 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §961.571, §961.572, §961.573(1) and
(2), §961.574(1) and (2), §961.575(1) and
(2), and §961.576 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.77 POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA.
(1) Possession Prohibited. The
possession of twenty-five (25) grams or less
of marijuana is hereby prohibited.
(2) Definitions. "Marijuana" shall
have, for purposes of this section, the same
meaning and definition as set forth in the
provisions of Wis. Stats. §961.01(14), with
the exception set forth in Wis. Stats.
§961.41(3g).
(3) Defenses. Authorization of
possession of marijuana under Wis. Stats.
§961.32 or Wis. Stats. §961.335 shall be a
defense to any offense alleged hereunder.
11.78 POSSESSION/USE OF
TOBACCO AND VAPOR PRODUCTS
BY MINORS.
(1) Statement of Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this section is to
protect the public health, safety and welfare
of the property and persons in the Village of
Suamico by prohibiting persons under
eighteen (18) years of age from possessing
tobacco products and vapor products, and
prohibiting the sale of tobacco products and
vapor products to persons under eighteen
(18) years of age.
(b) Persons under age eighteen (18) are
prohibited by law from purchasing or
possessing cigarettes and other tobacco
products, and retailers are prohibited from
selling them to minors. There are new
tobacco-less products, however, commonly
referred to as "electronic cigarettes," "ecigarettes,"
"e-cigars," "e-cigarillos," "epipes,"
"e-hookahs," or "electronic nicotine
delivery systems," which allow the user to
simulate cigarette smoking. These products
may be purchased by minors and are being
marketed without age restrictions or health
warnings and come in different flavors that
appeal to young people.
(c) E-cigarettes, and similar devices, are
a relatively new nicotine delivery system.
While devices vary in their appearance and
specific method of operation, they have a
few basic elements in common. A solution
of water, dissolved nicotine, and other
ingredients (usually flavoring) is heated with
a heating element (usually battery-powered).
This vaporizes the nicotine solution, which
passes into a mouthpiece and is inhaled in a
manner similar to cigarette smoking. Often,
glycerol or propylene glycol is added to the
solution to give the appearance of smoke
when the solution is vaporized. The
concentration of nicotine contained in the
solution can be customized by the retailer to
the buyer's specifications, and many
manufacturers make nicotine-free solutions.
(d) The production and distribution of ecigarettes
is not currently regulated by
federal or state authorities, and the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration has not
completed testing of these products. But,
initial studies by the FDA have determined
that e-cigarettes can increase nicotine
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 31 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
addiction among young people and contain
chemical ingredients known to be harmful,
which may expose users and the public to
potential health risks.
(e) The use of e-cigarettes and similar
devices has increased significantly in recent
years.
(f) Existing studies on electronic
smoking devices' vapor emissions and
cartridge contents have found a number of
dangerous substances including:
1. Chemicals known to cause cancer
such as formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, lead,
nickel and chromium;
2. PM 2.5 , acrolein, tin, toluene, and
aluminum, which are associated with a
range of negative health effects such as skin,
eye, and respiratory irritation, neurological
effects, damage to reproductive systems, and
even premature death from heart attacks and
stroke.
(g) Some cartridges used by electronic
smoking devices can be refilled with liquid
nicotine solution, creating the potential for
exposure to dangerous concentrations of
nicotine.
(h) Clinical studies about the safety and
efficacy of these products have not been
submitted to the FDA for the over four
hundred (400) brands of electronic smoking
devices that are on the market and for this
reason, consumers have no way of knowing
whether electronic smoking devices are safe,
what types of potentially harmful chemicals
the products contain, and what dose of
nicotine the products deliver.
(i) Electronic smoking devices often
mimic conventional tobacco products in
shape, size, and color, with the user exhaling
a smoke-like vapor similar in appearance to
the exhaled smoke from cigarettes and other
conventional tobacco products.
(j) The use of electronic smoking
devices in smoke-free locations threatens to
undermine compliance with smoking
regulations and reverses the progress that
has been made in establishing a social norm
that smoking is not permitted in public
places and places of employment.
(k) It is the intent of the Suamico
Village Board, in enacting the ordinance
codified in this section, to provide for the
public health, safety and welfare by
facilitating uniform and consistent
enforcement of smoke-free air laws; by
reducing the potential for re-normalizing
smoking in public places and places of
employment; by reducing the potential for
children to associate the use of electronic
smoking devices with a normative or healthy
lifestyle; and by prohibiting the sale or
distribution of electronic smoking devices to
minors.
(l) Therefore, the Suamico Village
Board determines that prohibiting the sale,
giving, or furnishing of e-cigarettes to
minors and prohibiting the purchase,
possession, or use of e-cigarettes by minors
is in the Village’s best interest and will
promote public health, safety, and welfare.
(2) Definitions. For the purpose of
construction and application of this section,
the following definitions shall apply:
(a) Law Enforcement Officer. The
meaning given in Wis. Stats.§30.50(4s).
(b) Minor. Means an individual who is
less than eighteen (18) years of age.
(c) Person who Sells Tobacco Products
at Retail. Means a person whose ordinary
course of business consists, in whole or in
part, of the retail sale of tobacco products
subject to the state sales tax.
(d) Person who Sells Vapor Products at
Retail. Means a person whose ordinary
course of business consists, in whole or in
part, of the retail sale of vapor products.
(e) Possession of a Tobacco Product.
Shall mean either actual physical control of
the tobacco product without necessarily
owning that product, or the right to control
the tobacco product even though it is in a
different room or place than where the
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 32 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
person is physically located.
(f) Public Place. Means a public street,
sidewalk, or park or any area open to the
general public in a publically owned or
operated building or premises, or in a public
place of business or school.
(g) Tobacco Product. Means a product
that contains tobacco and is intended for
human consumption, including but not
limited to, cigarettes, non-cigarette smoking
tobacco, or smokeless tobacco, as those
terms are defined in Section 2 of the
Tobacco Products Tax Act, and cigars.
Tobacco product does not include a vapor
product or a product regulated as a drug or
device by the United States Food and Drug
Administration. Tobacco product also has
the meaning given in Wis. Stats.
§139.75(12).
(h) Use a Tobacco Product or Vapor
Product. Means to smoke, chew, suck,
inhale, or otherwise consume a tobacco
product or vapor product.
(i) Vapor Product. Means any product
containing or delivering nicotine, lobelia, or
any other substance intended for human
consumption that can be used by a person to
simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine
or any other substance through inhalation of
vapor from the product. Electronic delivery
device shall include any component part of
such a product whether or not sold
separately. Electronic delivery device shall
not include any product that has been
approved or otherwise certified by the
United States Food and Drug Administration
for legal sales for use in tobacco cessation
treatment or other medical purposes, and is
being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.
(3) Prohibited Conduct.
(a) Consistent with Wis. Stats. § 254.92,
a minor shall not do any of the following:
1. Purchase or attempt to purchase a
tobacco product or vapor product.
2. Possess or attempt to possess a
tobacco product or vapor product.
3. Use a tobacco product or vapor
product in a public place.
4. Present or offer to an individual a
purported proof of age that is false,
fraudulent, or not actually his or her own
proof of age for the purpose of purchasing,
attempting to purchase, possessing, or
attempting to possess a tobacco product or
vapor product.
(b) No individual, regardless of age,
who is enrolled in secondary school may
possess or attempt to possess a tobacco
product or vapor product while on school
property.
(c) An individual who violates
Subsection (1) shall be subject to the civil
forfeiture of at least ten dollars ($10) nor
more than fifty dollars ($50), plus costs.
(d) An individual who violates
Subsection (2) shall be subject to the
following penalties:
1. For the violation, the person is
responsible for a civil infraction punishable
by a civil forfeiture of at least twenty-five
($25) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100), plus costs.
(e) Subsection (1) does not apply to a
minor participating in any of the following:
1. An undercover operation in which the
minor purchases or receives a tobacco
product or vapor product under the direction
of the minor's employer and with the prior
approval of the local prosecutor's office as
part of an employer-sponsored internal
enforcement action.
2. An undercover operation in which the
minor purchases or receives a tobacco
product or vapor product under the direction
of the state police or a local police agency as
part of an enforcement action, unless the
initial or contemporaneous purchase or
receipt of the tobacco product or vapor
product by the minor was not under the
direction of the state police or the local
police agency and was not part of the
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 33 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
undercover operation.
3. Compliance checks in which the
minor attempts to purchase tobacco products
for the purpose of satisfying federal
substance abuse block grant youth tobacco
access requirements, if the compliance
checks are conducted with the prior approval
of the state police or a local police agency.
(f) As stated in Wis. Stats.
§254.92(2)(a), Subsection (1) does not apply
to the handling or transportation of a
tobacco product or vapor product by a minor
under the terms of that minor's employment
if employed by a retailer licensed under Wis.
Stats. §134.65(1).
(g) This section does not prohibit an
individual from being charged with,
convicted of or found responsible for, or
sentenced for any other violation of law that
arises out of the violation of Subsection (1).
(4) Enforcement. A law enforcement
officer shall seize any cigarette or tobacco,
or vaping product involved in any violation
of Section 11.78 (2) committed in his or her
presence.
11.79 RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OR
GIFT OF CIGARETTES OR
TOBACCO/VAPING PRODUCTS.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §134.66 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.80 TRUANCY. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §118.15,
§118.16, and §118.163 are hereby adopted
in strict conformity and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
(1) Definitions. The terms used herein
shall be defined as follows:
(a) "Habitual Truant". A pupil who is
absent from school without an acceptable
excuse under Wis. Stats. §118.15 or
§118.16(4), for part or all of five (5) or more
days on which school is held during a school
semester.
(b) "Truancy". A pupil who is absent
from school without an acceptable excuse
under Wis. Stats. §118.15 or §118.16(4) for
part or all of any day on which school is
held during a school semester.
(2) Habitual Truant. Any child found
by the court to be a habitual truant shall be
subject to one (1) or more of the following:
(a) Suspension of the child's operating
privilege as defined in Wis. Stats.
§340.01(40), for not less than thirty (30)
days nor more than one (1) year. The court
shall immediately take possession of any
suspended license and forward it to the
Department of Transportation, together with
a notice stating the reason for the duration of
the suspension.
(b) An order for the child to participate
in counseling, community service, or a
supervised work program as provided under
Wis. Stats. §48.34(9).
(c) An order for the child to remain at
home, except during hours in which the
child is attending religious worship or a
school program, including travel time
required to get to and from the school
program or place of worship. The order
may permit a child to leave home if the child
is accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
(d) An order for the child to attend an
educational program under Wis. Stats.
§48.34(12).
(e) Any other order or forfeiture as
permitted by Wisconsin statutes to be
imposed in Municipal Court.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 34 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
(3) Contributing to Truancy.
(a) Except as provided in Subsection (a)
any person eighteen (18) years of age or
older who, by any act of omission,
knowingly encourages or contributes to the
truancy of a child shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than twenty-five dollars
($25) and not more than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500), together with the
costs of prosecution, and in default of the
payment of the forfeiture and costs of
prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the
County Jail until said forfeiture and costs are
paid, but not to exceed ninety (90) days.
(b) Subsection (a) does not apply to a
person who has under his or her control a
child who has been sanctioned under Wis.
Stats. §49.50(2)(h).
(c) An act or omission contributes to the
truancy of a child, whether or not the child is
adjudged to be in need of protection or
services, if the natural and probable
consequences of that act or omission would
be to cause the child to be truant.
(4) Truant. Any child found by the
court to be truant shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not more than fifty dollars
($50) plus costs for a first (1st) violation, or a
forfeiture of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100) plus costs for any second
(2nd) or subsequent violation committed
within twelve (12) months of a previous
violation.
Any child not in attendance at
school, at the child's place of residence, or
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian
on a day on which school is held during a
school semester and during the hours when
that child is required to be in attendance at
school shall be presumed truant. The child
shall have the burden to present the court
with evidence sufficient to rebut this
presumption.
(5) Parent Liability. All or part of any
forfeiture or costs assessed by a court under
this section may be assessed against the
child, the parents or guardian of the child, or
both.
11.81 JUVENILE CURFEWS.
(1) Legislative Purpose. Pursuant to
Sec. 59.54 (6), Wis. Stats., 1995-1996, the
Suamico Board has determined that there
has been an increase in juvenile violence,
juvenile gang activity and crime by persons
under the age of seventeen (17) in the
Village and persons under the age of
seventeen (17) are particularly susceptible
by their lack of maturity and experience to
participate in unlawful and gang-related
activities and to be victims of other
perpetrators of crime. The Village of
Suamico has an obligation to provide for the
protection of minors from each other and
from other persons, for the enforcement of
parental control over the responsibility for
children, for the protection of the general
public, and for the reduction of the incidence
of juvenile criminal activities, and a
nighttime curfew for those under the age of
seventeen (17) will be in the interest of the
public health, safety, and general welfare
and will help to attain the foregoing
objectives and to diminish the undesirable
impact of such conduct on the citizens of the
Village.
(2) Definitions. In this section:
(a) Village. The Village of Suamico,
Wisconsin.
(b) Curfew Hours.
1. 10 p.m. until 6 a.m. the following
day, each day of the week.
(c) Emergency. An unforeseen
combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate
action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile
accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily
injury (defined below) or loss of life.
(d) Establishment. Any privately
owned place of business operated for a
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 35 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
profit to which the public is invited,
including, but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
(e) Guardian.
1. A person who, under court order, is
the guardian of the person or a minor; or
2. A public or private agency with
whom a minor has been placed by the court.
(f) Minor. Any person under seventeen
(17) years of age.
(g) Operator. Any individual, firm,
association, partnership, or corporation,
managing or conducting any establishment.
The term includes the members or partners
of an association or partnership and the
officer of a corporation.
(h) Parent. A person who is:
1. A natural parent, adoptive parent,
or step-parent to another person; or
2. At least eighteen (18) years of age
and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
(i) Public Place. Any place to which
the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not
limited to, streets, highways, and the
common areas of schools, hospitals,
apartment houses, office buildings, transport
facilities and shops.
(j) Remain.
1. linger or stay; or
2. Failure to leave when requested to do
so by a law enforcement officer of the
owner, operator, or other person in control
of the premises.
(k) Serious Bodily Injury. Any bodily
injury that creates a substantial risk of death
or that causes death, serious permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ.
(3) Offenses.
(a) A minor commits an offense if he or
she remains in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the
Village during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor
commits an offense if he or she knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows,
the minor to remain in any public place or
on the premises of any establishment within
the Village during curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any
employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he or she knowingly allows a
minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
(4) Defenses. It is not a violation under
this Section 11.81 if the minor was:
(a) Accompanied by the minor's parent
or guardian;
(b) On an errand at the direction of the
minor's parent or guardian without any
detour or stop;
(c) In a motor vehicle involved in
interstate travel;
(d) Engaged in any employment activity
or going to or returning home from an
employment activity without any detour or
stop;
(e) Involved in an emergency;
(f) Attending an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the
county, or by any city, village or town, a
civic organization, or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the minor, or
going to or returning from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious,
or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the county, or by
any city, village or town, a civic
organization or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor.
(g) Going to, attending, or returning
home from, without any detour or stop, a
movie theater.
1. It is a defense to prosecution under
Section 11.81 (3) (c) that the owner,
operator, or employee of an establishment
promptly notified a law enforcement
department that a minor was present on the
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 36 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
premises of the establishment during curfew
hours and refused to leave.
(5) Enforcement. Before taking any
enforcement action under this section, a law
enforcement officer shall ask the offender's
age and reason for being in the public place.
The officer shall not issue a citation or make
an arrest under this section unless the officer
reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response
and other circumstances, no defense in
Subsection (4) is present.
11.82 DAYTIME CURFEW.
(1) Purpose and Intent. It is the
purpose of this ordinance to discourage
children of compulsory school age from
unauthorized absences and to impose
penalties upon those students and also upon
their parents or legal guardians. It is the
intent of this ordinance to promote the
development and welfare of these children
by discouraging unauthorized absenteeism
and encouraging school attendance. The
Board hereby finds that daytime absence
constitutes an increased risk to public safety,
health and welfare of the citizens of the
Village.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Responsible Adult. A person
eighteen (18) years of age or older who has
the mental competency to fulfill the duty of
protecting and caring for the general welfare
of a child and who has a written
authorization from that child's parent or
legal guardian designating the person as a
responsible adult, naming the child involved
and designating the time period during
which the responsible adult shall have
control of the child.
(b) Subject to Compulsory School
Attendance. Include any child subject to
mandatory school attendance under
Wisconsin law in the school district of his or
her residence, or any child found in the
Village who would be subject to mandatory
attendance if the child were a resident of the
Village.
(3) Offenses.
(a) No child subject to compulsory
school attendance shall be at any place
within the Village, except in attendance at
school or at the student's place of residence,
during the hours when that student is
required to be in attendance at either a
public or private school as required by law,
unless that child has written proof from
school authorities excusing him or her from
attending school at that particular time, or
unless the student is accompanied by the
parent, legal guardian or responsible adult
selected by the parent or legal guardian who
supervises the student.
(b) Parental Violation. Each parent or
legal guardian of a student subject to the
provisions of this ordinance shall have the
duty to prevent that student from violating
the provisions of this ordinance and each
failure by that parent or guardian to do so is
a separate offense.
(4) Affirmative Defenses.
(a) It shall be an affirmative defense to
Subsections (3) a. and (3) b. that the student,
at the time of the alleged violation, was not
required by law to be in attendance at the
school attended by the student.
(b) It shall be an affirmative defense to
Subsection (3) b. that the parent or legal
guardian is the petitioner in a currently
pending juvenile court proceeding involving
the student or such proceeding in which the
judge has retained ongoing supervision or
jurisdiction.
(c) It shall be an affirmative defense to
Subsection (3) a. and (3) b. that if at the time
of the alleged violation the student was
employed pursuant to a school sponsored
program or was the recipient of a work
permit issued by school authorities and the
student was actually on the job or traveling
to or from the job site or program location.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 37 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
(d) Any party claiming an affirmative
defense hereunder shall have the duty to
prove the same to the same standard of proof
required of the plaintiff in prosecuting the
action.
(5) Warning. The first time a child is
detained by law enforcement officers for
violation of this ordinance, the parent,
guardian, or person having legal custody
may be advised as to the provisions of this
ordinance, any violation of this ordinance
occurring thereafter by said child and parent,
guardian, or person having legal custody
shall result in a penalty being imposed in
sub. (5) above.
(Suggested Warning Format)
Name: __________________
The above-named juvenile was found in
violation of the Village of Suamico (or
Brown County) Daytime Curfew Ordinance.
As parents or guardians responsible for such
conduct and the welfare of this juvenile, you
are hereby served this curfew violation
notice setting forth the manner in which the
law has been violated.
The Village of Suamico (or Brown County)
Daytime Ordinance states:
No child subject to compulsory school
attendance shall be at any place within the
Village of Suamico (or Brown County),
except in attendance at school or at the
student's place of residence, during the hours
when that student is required to be in
attendance at either a public or private
school as required by law, unless that child
has written proof from school authorities
excusing him or her from attending school at
that particular time, or unless the student is
accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or
responsible adult selected by the parent or
legal guardian who supervises the student.
Parental Violation. Each parent or legal
guardian of a student subject to the
provisions of this ordinance shall have the
duty to prevent that student from violating
the provisions of this ordinance and each
failure by that parent or guardian to do so is
a separate offense. To knowingly permit
such child to again violate the provisions of
this ordinance, they shall be fined no more
than five hundred dollars ($500) for each
offense. If a child knowingly violates the
provisions of this ordinance, the child shall
be fined no more than five hundred dollars
($500) for each violation.
11.83 CONTRIBUTING TO THE
DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD. Except
as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §948.40(1), (2), (3), and (4)(a) are
hereby adopted and by reference made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.84 NEGLECTING A CHILD. Except
as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §948.21 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.85 PROHIBITING THE
HARBORING OF MINORS WITHOUT
PARENTAL CONSENT. It shall be
unlawful for any owner, tenant, or person in
control of a residence or other facility to
allow a child under the age of eighteen (18)
to loiter, idle, or remain in said residence or
upon said property without the consent of
the child’s parent, guardian, or spouse.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 38 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
11.86 TATTOOING OF CHILDREN.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §948.70 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.87 ISSUANCE OF WORTHLESS
CHECKS. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stats. §943.24(1), (3), (4),
and (5) are hereby adopted and by reference
made part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.88 PETTY THEFT. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §943.20(1), (2), (3)(a) and (4) are
hereby adopted and by reference made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.89 ATTEMPTED PETTY THEFT.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §939.32(1) are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.90 RETAIL THEFT. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §943.50(1), (1m), (3), (3m), (4)(a),
and (5) are hereby adopted and by reference
made part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.91 THEFT OF CELLULAR
TELEPHONE SERVICE. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §943.455(1), (2), (4)(a), and (4)(b) are
hereby adopted and by reference made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.92 THEFT OF TELEVISION
SERVICE. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§943.46(1), (2), (4)(a), and (4)(b) are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.93 THEFT OF SATELLITE CABLE
PROGRAMMING. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§943.47(1), (2), (3)(a), and (3)(b) are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.94 FRAUDULENT TAPPING OF
ELECTRIC WIRES OR GAS OR
WATER METERS OR PIPES. Except as
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 39 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §941.36 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.95 REMOVAL OF SHOPPING
CART. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stats. §943.55 are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.96 RECEIVING PROPERTY FROM
A CHILD. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stats. §948.63 are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.97 RECEIVING STOLEN
PROPERTY. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§943.34(1)(a) and §943.34(2) are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.98 FRAUD ON HOTEL OR
RESTAURANT KEEPER,
RECREATIONAL ATTRACTION,
TAXICAB OPERATOR, OR GAS
STATION. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §943.21
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.99 FRAUDULENT RETURN OF
MERCHANDISE. It shall be unlawful for
any person to return merchandise to a
merchant for the purpose of claiming a cash
refund or credit if the person intentionally
deceives the merchant by doing any of the
following:
(1) Represents that such person
purchased the merchandise when the person
did not purchase it.
(2) Represents that the merchandise was
purchased from a particular merchant when
it was not purchased from that merchant.
Represents that the merchandise was
purchased for a particular price when it was
purchased for a lower price.
(3) Gives the merchant a false name or
address.
11.100 TRESPASS TO LAND. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §943.13 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.101 TRESPASS TO DWELLINGS.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §943.14, are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 40 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.102 CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO A
MEDICAL FACILITY. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §943.145 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.103 ENTRY ONTO A
CONSTRUCTION SITE OR INTO A
LOCKED BUILDING, DWELLING, OR
ROOM. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stats. §943.15 are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.104 ENTRY INTO A LOCKED
VEHICLE. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §943.11
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.105 ENTRY INTO LOCKED COIN
BOX. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stats. §943.125 are
hereby adopted and by reference made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.106 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO
RAILROADS. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §943.07
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.107 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §943.01(1), (2m), (3), and (4) are
hereby adopted and by reference made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.108 GRAFFITI. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§943.017(1), (4), and (5) are hereby adopted
and by reference made part of this chapter as
if fully set forth herein. Any future
amendments, revisions, or modifications of
this statute incorporated herein are intended
to be made part of this chapter.
11.109 UNLAWFUL USE OF
TELEPHONE. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §947.012
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 41 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
11.110 UNLAWFUL USE OF
COMPUTERS. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §947.0125
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.111 SEXTING BY MINORS
PROHIBITED.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Nudity means the showing of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area,
or buttocks with less than a fully opaque
covering; or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering
of any portion thereof below the top of the
nipple; or the depiction of covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state. A
mother’s breastfeeding of her baby does not
under any circumstance constitute “nudity”,
irrespective of whether or not the nipple is
covered during or incidental to feeding.
(b) Harmful to minors means any
reproduction, imitation, characterization,
description, exhibition, presentation, or
representation, of whatever kind or form,
depicting nudity, sexual conduct, or sexual
excitement when it:
1. Predominantly appeals to a prurient,
shameful, or morbid interest;
2. Is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole
with respect to what is suitable material or
conduct for minors; and
3. Taken as a whole, is without serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value
for minors.
(c) Minor means any person under the
age of 18 years.
(2) A minor commits the offense of
sexting if he or she knowingly:
(a) Uses a computer, or any other
device capable of electronic data
transmission or distribution, to transmit or
distribute to another minor any photograph
or video of any person by another minor
which depicts nudity; as defined above, and
is harmful to minors, as defined above.
(b) Possesses a photograph or video of
any person that was transmitted or
distributed by another minor which depicts
nudity, as defined above, and is harmful to
minors, as defined above. A minor does not
violate this paragraph if all of the following
apply:
1. The minor did not solicit the
photograph or video.
2. The minor took reasonable steps to
report the photograph or video to a school or
law enforcement official.
3. The minor did not transmit or
distribute the photograph or a video to a
third party other than a law enforcement
official.
(c) Uses a computer, or any device
capable of electronic data transmission or
distribution, to transmit or distribute to
another minor any text, correspondence, or
message of a sexual nature when it:
1. Predominantly appeals to a prurient,
shameful, or morbid interest;
2. Is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole
with respect to what is suitable material or
conduct for minors; and
3. Taken as a whole, is without serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value
for minors.
(d) Solicits the transmission or
distribution of any text, correspondence,
message, photograph, or video from another
minor that would itself be prohibited under
this section of the Municipal Code.
11.112 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC
RECORDS AND NOTICES.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 42 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §946.72(2) are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.113 FORNICATION. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §944.15 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.114 SEXUAL GRATIFICATION.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §944.17 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.115 LEWD AND LASCIVIOUS
BEHAVIOR. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §944.20
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.116 OBSCENE MATERIAL OR
PERFORMANCE. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§944.21(1), (2), (3), (4), and (6) are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.117 MAKING LEWD, OBSCENE,
OR INDECENT DRAWINGS. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §944.23 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.118 PROSTITUTION. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §944.30 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.119 PATRONIZING PROSTITUTES.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §944.31 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.120 PANDERING. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §943.33(1) and (3) are hereby adopted
and by reference made part of this chapter as
if fully set forth herein. Any future
amendments, revisions, or modifications of
this statute incorporated herein are intended
to be made part of this chapter.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 43 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
11.121 HARASSMENT. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §947.013(1), (1m), (1r), and (2) are
hereby adopted and by reference made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
(a) The act occurs while the actor is
subject to an order or injunction under Wis.
Stats. §813.12, §813.122, or §813.125 that
prohibits or limits his or her contact with the
victim.
11.122 VAGRANCY. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. §947.02
are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.123 EXPOSING A CHILD TO
HARMFUL MATERIAL OR
HARMFUL DESCRIPTIONS OR
NARRATIONS. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§948.11(1) and (2)(b) are hereby adopted
and by reference made part of this chapter as
if fully set forth herein. Any future
amendments, revisions, or modifications of
this statute incorporated herein are intended
to be made part of this chapter.
11.124 SEXUAL ASSAULT (FOURTH
DEGREE). Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, the
statutory provisions in Wis. Stats.
§940.225(3m), (4), (5), and (6) are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.125 INVASION OF PRIVACY.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §942.08 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.126 CHILD PROTECTION
RESTRICTIONS.
(1) Findings and Intent.
(a) Repeat sexual offenders, sexual
offenders who use physical violence, and
sexual offenders who prey on children are
sexual predators who present an extreme
threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders
are extremely likely to use physical violence
and to repeat their offenses; and most sexual
offenders commit many offenses, have many
more victims that are never reported, and are
prosecuted for only a fraction of their
crimes. This makes the cost of sexual
offender victimization to society at large,
while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
(b) It is the intent of this ordinance not
to impose a criminal penalty but rather to
serve the Village’s compelling interest to
promote, protect, and improve the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
Village by creating areas around locations
where children regularly congregate in
concentrated numbers wherein certain
sexual offenders and sexual predators are
prohibited from establishing temporary or
permanent residence. Due to the high rate
of recidivism, and the unpredictability and
severity of these crimes, it is the intent of
this ordinance to limit the availability of
situations where the potential for such
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 44 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
crimes is increased in the interest of
protecting the children of our community.
(2) Definitions. The following words,
terms, and phrases, when used in this
ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except when the
context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
(a) Child means a person under the age
of eighteen (18) as defined in Wis. Stats Ch.
48.02(2) and Ch. 990.01(20) for purposes of
this ordinance.
(b) A Crime Against Children shall
include any of the following offenses set
forth within the Wisconsin statutes, as may
be amended and the laws of this or any other
state or federal government, having like
elements necessary for conviction:
940.225(1) First Degree Sexual Assault
940.225(2) Second Degree Sexual Assault
940.225(3) Third Degree Sexual Assault
940.22(2) Sexual Exploitation by Therapist
940.30 False Imprisonment – Victim was Minor and Not the Offender’s Child
940.302(2) Human Trafficking (if 940.302(2)(a)1b applies)
940.31 Kidnapping – Victim was Minor and Not the Offender’s Child
944.02 Rape (prior statute, see now 940.225)
944.06 Incest
944.10 Sexual Intercourse with a Child (prior statute, see now 948.02)
944.11 Indecent Behavior with a Child (prior statute, see now 948.02)
944.12 Enticing Child for Immoral Purposes (prior statute, see now 948.07)
948.02(1) First Degree Sexual Assault of a Child
948.02(2) Second Degree Sexual Assault of a Child
948.025 Engaging in Repeated Acts of Sexual Assault of the Same Child
948.05 Sexual Exploitation of a Child
948.051 Trafficking of Child
948.055 Causing a Child to View or Listen to Sexual Activity
948.06 Incest with a Child
948.07(1) thru (4) Child Enticement
948.075 Use of a Computer to Facilitate a Child Sex Crime
948.085 Sexual Assault of a Child Placed in Substitute Care
948.08 Soliciting a Child for Prostitution
948.095 Sexual Assault of a Student by School Instructional Staff
948.11(2)(a) or (am) Exposing a Child to Harmful Material-Felony sections
948.12 Possession of Child Pornography
948.13 Convicted Child Sex Offender Working with Children
948.30 Abduction of Another’s Child
971.17 Not Guilty by Reason of Mental Disease of a Listed Sex Offense
975.06 Sex Crimes Law Commitment
980.01 Sexually Violent Person Commitment
Including court ordered registration for
violations of:
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 45 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
940 Crimes against Life and Bodily Security
944 Crimes against Sexual Morality
948 Crimes against Children
971.17 Not Guilty by Reason of Mental Disease
943.01 to 943.15 Certain Crimes against Property
942.08 Invasion of Privacy (aka peeping Tom)
(c) Loiter or Loitering means whether in
a crowd, group or as an individual, to stand
idly about, loaf, prowl, congregate, wander,
linger aimlessly, proceed slowly or with
many stops, to delay or dawdle, for the
purpose or in a manner likely to interact or
attempting to interact with children
(excepting children of the offender), or
engaging in activities that would interest
children (excepting the children of the
offender) or acting in a manner that
otherwise has no legitimate purpose.
(d) Minor means a person under the age
of seventeen (17) as defined in Wis. Stats.
Ch. 990.01(20).
(e) Residence (reside). A place at
which a home or place of abode is
maintained for a period of over four (4) days
(consecutive or nonconsecutive) in any
month. Where a voluntary concurrence of a
physical presence and an intent to remain in
a fixed place of habitation are present, the
place will be presumed to be a residence. A
residence may be more than one (1) location
and may be mobile or transitory.
(f) Sex Offender is a person who has
been convicted of, or has been found
delinquent of, has been found not guilty by
reason of disease or mental defect of a
“sexually violent offense” and/or a “crime
against children”, or has been required by
any court to register under Wis. Stat. 301.45
for any offense against a child.
(g) Sexually Violent Offense shall have
the meaning as set forth in Wisconsin
Statute 980.01(6), as may be amended.
(3) Sexual Offender and Sexual
Predator Residence, Prohibition;
Penalties; Exceptions.
(a) Prohibited Location of Residence. It
is unlawful of a sex offender to establish a
residence within two thousand five hundred
feet (2,500’) of any school, licensed day
care center, park, trail, playground, place of
worship, or any other place designated by
the Village as a place where children are
known to congregate.
(b) Prohibited Activity. It is unlawful
for a sex offender to participate in a holiday
event involving children under eighteen (18)
years of age, such as distributing candy or
other items to children on Halloween,
wearing a Santa Claus costume on or
preceding Christmas or wearing an Easter
Bunny costume on or preceding Easter.
Holiday events in which the offender is the
parent or guardian of the children involved,
and no non-familial children are present, are
exempt from this paragraph. Participation is
to be defined as actively taking part in the
event.
(c) Measurement of Distance.
1. For purposes of determining the
minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following
a straight line from the outer property line of
the permanent residence or temporary
residence to nearest outer property line of a
school, licensed day care center, park, trail,
playground, place of worship, or any other
place designated by the Village where
children are known to congregate.
2. The Village Clerk shall maintain an
official map showing prohibited locations as
defined by this ordinance. The Clerk shall
update the map at least annually to reflect
any changes in the location of prohibited
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 46 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
zones. These shall be designated on the map
as child safety zones.
(d) Exceptions. A designated offender
residing within a prohibited area as
described in Section (2)(a) does not commit
a violation of this section if any of the
following apply:
1. The person established the residence
and reported and registered pursuant to Wis.
Stat. 301.45 before the effective date of this
ordinance.
2. The person is a minor or ward under
guardianship and is not required to register
under Wis. Stat. 301.45 or 301.46.
3. The school, licensed day care center,
park, trail, playground, place of worship, or
any other place designated by the Village as
a place where children are known to
congregate within two thousand five
hundred feet (2,500’) of the person’s
permanent residence was opened after the
person established the permanent residence
or temporary residence and reported and
registered the residence pursuant to Wis.
Stat. 301.45.
(4) Property Owners Prohibited from
Renting Real Property to Certain Sexual
Offenders and Sexual Predators;
Penalties.
(a) It is unlawful to let or rent any place,
structure, or part thereof, trailer or other
conveyance, with the knowledge that it will
be used as a residence by any person
prohibited from establishing such permanent
residence or temporary residence pursuant to
this ordinance, if such place, structure, or
part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is
located within a prohibited location zone
described in Section (3)(a).
(b) A property owner’s failure to
comply with provision of this section shall
constitute a violation of this section, and
shall subject the property owner to the code
enforcement provision in Section 11.199 as
provided in this ordinance.
(5) Child Safety Zones.
(a) No sex offender shall loiter in or
within fifty feet (50’) of any of the following
places:
1. a public park, parkway, parkland,
park facility;
2. a public swimming pool;
3. a public library;
4. a recreational trail;
5. a public playground;
6. a school for children;
7. athletic fields used by children;
8. a movie theatre;
9. a daycare center;
10. any specialized school for children,
including, but not limited to a gymnastics
academy, dance academy, or music school;
11. a public or private golf course or
range;
12. aquatic facilities open to the public;
and
13. any facility for children (which
means a public or private school, a group
home, as defined in §48.02(7), Wis. Stats, a
residential care center for children and
youth, as defined in §48.02(15d), Wis. Stats,
a shelter care facility, as defined in
§48.02(17), Wis. Stats, a foster home, as
defined in §48.02(6), Wis. Stats, a treatment
foster home, as defined in §48.02(17q), Wis.
Stats., a day care center licensed under
§48.65, Wis. Stats, a day care program
established under §120.13(14), Wis. Stats., a
day care provider certified under
§48.65l(m), Wis. Stats, or a youth center, as
defined in §961.0l(22), Wis. Stats.).
(b) The Village shall maintain an
official map showing child safety zones,
updating that list at annually. The child
safety zone maps will be available at the
Village’s offices and on the Village’s
official website. The maps shall be for
informational purposes only. The absence
of a location on the map shall not be a
defense to prosecution where the alleged
violator is within fifty feet (50’) of a place
listed above and circumstances make it clear
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 47 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
that the violator had actual notice of that
proximity.
(c) A person does not commit a
violation of this Section 11.126(5) and the
enumerated uses may allow such person on
the property supporting such use if any of
the following apply:
1. The property supporting an
enumerated use under 11.126(5) (a) also
supports a church, synagogue, mosque,
temple or other house of religious worship
(collectively “place of worship”) subject to
the following conditions:
a. Entrance and presence is limited to
that portion of the premises that is a place of
worship and either:
1. occurs only during hours of
worship or other religious
programs/services; or
2. The person is present for
counseling or worship purposes with the
prior or contemporaneous knowledge and
consent of an individual in charge of the
place of worship or such counseling or
worship.
2. The property supporting an
enumerated use under 11.126(5) also
supports a use lawfully attended by a
person’s natural or adopted child(ren),
which child’s use reasonably requires the
attendance of the person as the child’s
parent upon the property, subject to the
following conditions:
a. Entrance and presence upon the
property occurs only during hours of activity
related to the use as posted to the public; and
b. Notice is made from the person to an
individual in charge of the use upon the
property and approval from an individual in
charge of the use upon the property as
designated by the owner of the use upon the
property is made in return, of the attendance
by the person.
3. The property supporting an
enumerated use under 11.126(5) also
supports a polling location in a local, state or
federal election, subject to the following
conditions:
a. The person is eligible to vote;
b. The designated polling place for the
person is an enumerated use; and
c. The person enters the polling place
property, proceeds to cast a ballot with
whatever usual and customary assistance is
provided to any member of the electorate;
and the person vacates the property
immediately after voting.
4. The property supporting an
enumerated use under 11.126(5) also
supports an elementary or secondary school
lawfully attended by a person as a student
under which circumstances the person who
is a student may enter upon that property
supporting the school at which the person is
enrolled, as is reasonably required for the
educational purposes of the school.
5. The property also supports a court,
government office or room for public
governmental meetings, subject to all of the
following conditions:
a. The sex offender is on the property
only to transact business at the government
office or place of business, other than a
public library, or attend an official meeting
of a governmental body; and
b. The sex offender leaves the property
immediately upon completion of the
business or meeting.
(6) Appeal.
(a) Sexual Offender/Predator Residence
Board. The above requirements may be
waived upon approval of the Sex Offender
Residence Board through appeal by the
affected party. Such appeal shall be made to
the Village Clerk’s Office, who shall
forward the request to the Sex Offender
Residence Board, which shall receive
reports from the Police Department on such
appeal. The Board shall convene and
consider the public interest as well as the
affected party’s presentation and concerns.
In making its determination under this
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 48 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
provision the Sex Offender Residence Board
may consider any or all of the following
factors that may be applicable in the
particular appeal:
1. The circumstances of the case(s) that
have led to the designation as a sexual
offender including:
a. Relationship of appellant and victim
b. Presence of use of force
c. Presence of enticement
d. Proximity in time
e. Time out of incarceration
2. Credibility of applicant
3. Remorse
4. Proximity of proposed residence to
child congregation area
5. Support network of applicant
6. Support network and relationship of
those at the proposed residence
7. Counseling and treatment.
After deliberation, the Board shall
forward its decision in writing to the Village
of Suamico Inspection Division and/or the
Suamico Police Department for their
information and action. A written copy of
the decision shall be provided to the affected
party.
(b) Membership. The Health & Safety
Committee shall serve as the Sex Offender
Residence Board.
(7) Penalty, Severability, and
Enforcement.
(a) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this ordinance,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation. Failure or refusal to
pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(b) If a person violates any provision of
Chapter 11.126, by establishing a residence
or occupying residential premises within
two thousand five hundred feet (2,500’) of
those premises as described therein, without
any exception(s) as also set forth above,
each twenty-four (24) hour period of
residence shall be considered a separate
period of violation and the Village Attorney,
may bring an action in the name of the
Village in the Circuit Court for Brown
County to permanently enjoin such
residency as a public nuisance. If a person
violates any provision of this chapter, in
addition to the aforesaid injunctive relief,
such person shall be subject to the general
penalty provisions in Subsection (1). In
addition, the Village of Suamico may
undertake all other legal and equitable
remedies to prevent or remove a violation of
Chapter 11.126.
(c) Severability. The several sections of
this ordinance are declared to be severable.
If a court of competent jurisdiction deems
any provision of this ordinance invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other
provisions of the same. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(d) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Sunset Provision: This ordinance shall
remain in full force and effect upon its
passage and publication according to law
unless and until the state legislature enacts
preemptive legislation on this topic at which
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 49 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
time this ordinance shall sunset without
further action of the Village Board.
11.127 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN
CERTAIN AREAS. It is recognized that
smoking is not only hazardous to the health
of those who smoke, but also to the health of
non-smokers when in the presence of those
who are smoking. Therefore the purpose of
this ordinance is to protect the public health,
comfort, safety and welfare by prohibiting
smoking in certain areas.
(1) Definitions. For purposes of this
section, the following terms have the
meanings indicated:
(a) Bar. Means an establishment that is
devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the
premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those
beverages, including but not limited to
taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and
cabarets.
(b) Business. Means a sole
proprietorship, partnership, joint venture,
corporation or other business entity, either
for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail
establishments where goods or services are
sold; professional corporations and other
entities where legal, medical, dental,
engineering, architectural, or other
professional services are delivered, and
private clubs.
(c) Concession Area. Means a place
where food, drink or other refreshments are
purchased directly from a concession stand.
(d) Employee. Means a person who
may be required or directed by any
employer, in consideration of direct or
indirect gain or profit, to engage in any
employment, or to go to work or be at any
time in any place of employment, and a
person who volunteers his or her services for
a non-profit entity.
(e) Employer. Means a person,
business, partnership, association, trust,
firm, corporation, including a municipal
corporation, for-profit or non-profit entity,
or governmental agency under the Village’s
authority that has control over a place of
employment.
(f) Enclosed Area. Is defined as a
structure or area that has a roof and more
than two (2) substantial walls. A
“substantial wall” is a wall with no opening
or with an opening that either does not allow
air in from the outside or that is less than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the wall’s
surface area. All operable windows must be
opened to their full extent at all times of
occupancy as a smoking area.
(g) Health Care Facility. Means an
office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical,
mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, psychological conditions,
including but not limited to hospitals,
rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics,
including weight control clinics, nursing
homes, or other similar types places.
(h) Place of Employment. Means any
area under the control of an employer
including, but not limited to, work areas,
private offices, elevators, employee lounges,
restrooms, conference rooms, meeting
rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias,
hallways, stairways, a lobby, and vehicles.
A private residence shall not be considered a
place of employment unless it is used as a
child care, adult daycare or health care
facility.
(i) Private Residence. Means premises
owned, rented or leased for temporary or
permanent habitation, including lobbies,
hallways and other common areas in any
apartment building, condominium,
retirement facility, nursing home or other
multiple-unit residential facility.
(j) Public Place. Means any area into
which the public is invited or permitted,
regardless of whether a fee is charged,
including elevators, reception areas, waiting
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 50 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
rooms, cafeterias, restrooms, lobbies,
hallways and other common areas in any
retail building, mixed-use commercial
building, apartment building, condominium,
retirement facility, nursing home or other
multiple-unit residential facility. A private
residence located within a mixed-use
commercial building is not public place
unless it is used as a child care, adult
daycare or health care facility.
(i) Service Line. Means an indoor or
outdoor line in which one (1) or more
persons are waiting for or receiving service
of any kind, whether or not the service
involves the exchange of money, including
but not limited to ATM lines, concert lines
or waiting for public transportation. The
term “service line” does not include lines in
which people wait in their vehicle such as a
drive-through or car wash line.
(j) Smoking. Means inhaling, exhaling,
burning or carrying any lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe or other lighted tobacco
product in any manner or in any form.
(2) Prohibition of Smoking.
(a) Public Places. Smoking is
prohibited in any enclosed area of a public
place, service lines or designated Village
property. Nothing in this ordinance shall be
interpreted as a limitation on the right of a
property owner to prohibit smoking in any
area where smoking is not prohibited by the
ordinance.
(b) Place of Employment. It shall be
unlawful for any person to smoke cigarettes
or tobacco products in any enclosed area of
a place of employment.
(c) Prohibited Areas. Smoking is
prohibited in the following places:
concession areas of restaurants, service
lines, bus shelters, theatres, daycare centers,
educational facilities, restaurants, taverns,
private clubs, retail establishments, common
areas of multiple unit residential properties,
lodging establishments, inpatient health care
facilities, government buildings, outdoor
seating areas such as stadiums, bleachers or
outdoor auditoriums for spectators of sports
events, outdoor theaters, amphitheaters,
public conveyances (mass transit vehicles
and school buses), pavilions, gymnasiums,
swimming pools, skating rinks, bowling
center, or similar areas used by spectators at
other public events.
Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed
places other than those listed, that are places
of employment or public places.
(e) Village Parks. Smoking is
prohibited in any enclosed area in Village
parks.
(f) Paraphernalia Prohibited. Ashtrays,
matches, and other smoking paraphernalia
shall not be located in areas where smoking
is prohibited.
(3) Exceptions. The following areas
shall not be subject to the smoking
restrictions of this ordinance:
(a) Private residences are exempt from
this ordinance unless they are used as a child
care facility, adult care facility, or health
care facility.
(b) A room used by only one (1) person
in an assisted living facility as his or her
residence.
(c) A room in an assisted living facility
in which two (2) or more persons reside if
every person who lives in that room smokes
and each of those persons has made a
written request to the person in charge of the
assisted living facility to be placed in a room
where smoking is allowed.
(4) Posting of Signs.
(a) Every public place, place of
employment, or any other area where
smoking is prohibited by the ordinance shall
have posted at every entrance a conspicuous
sign clearly stating that smoking is
prohibited. Every vehicle that constitutes a
place of employment shall post a
conspicuous sign likely to be seen by any
occupant clearly stating that smoking is
prohibited. Use of the international “No
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 51 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
Smoking” symbol, a pictorial representation
of a burning cigarette in a red circle with a
red bar across the cigarette, shall be
construed as a clear statement that smoking
is prohibited. The posting of signs is an
affirmative duty upon the owner or operator
of a public place, but failure of the owner or
operator of a public place to post signs shall
not be a defense to prosecution of a violation
of this ordinance. All such signs shall
reference this subsection of the Suamico
Village Code.
(b) Each sign and the language
contained therein shall be clearly visible
from a distance of at least ten feet (10’).
Every vehicle that constitutes a place of
employment under this ordinance shall have
at least one (1) conspicuous sign, visible
from the exterior of the vehicle, clearly
stating that smoking is prohibited.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to
remove, deface, or destroy any sign required
by this ordinance, or to smoke in any place
where any such sign is posted.
(5) Retail Sales of Cigarettes. Nothing
in this ordinance shall prohibit retail sales of
pre-packaged cigarettes and cigars upon
obtaining a license pursuant to Chapter 5 of
the Suamico Code of Ordinances.
(6) Enforcement. The Police
Department, Fire Department, Village
Zoning Administrator or their designee shall
have the power, under law, to enter upon the
premises named in this ordinance to
ascertain whether the premises are in
compliance with this ordinance.
(a) The proprietor, employer or other
person in charge of premises regulated
hereunder, upon either observing or being
advised of a violation, shall make reasonable
efforts to prevent smoking in prohibited
areas by approaching smokers who fail to
voluntarily comply with this ordinance and
requesting that they extinguish their
cigarette or tobacco product and refrain from
smoking. If the person refuses to comply,
the proprietor, employer or other person in
charge may ask the person to leave the
premises, and to contact the Police
Department if the person does not leave
after being requested to do so.
(b) Any person who desires to register a
complaint under this ordinance may contact
the Police Department.
(c) Any person who violates, or
knowingly allows or permits any violation
of, any provision of this ordinance, shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25) and not more than
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500)
per violation. Failure or refusal to pay the
forfeiture may result in imprisonment for a
period of not more than ninety (90) days for
each violation. A separate offense and
violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(7) Clean Indoor Air.
(a) Intent and Construction. The
Village of Suamico finds that it is in the
interest of the health, safety and welfare of
the community to adopt by reference 2009
Wisconsin Act 12, and subsequent
amendments, additions and recodifications.
This ordinance shall not be construed to
mean that progressive discipline of Village
employees for violations of laws, rules, and
regulations is only authorized where
explicitly provided by ordinance.
(b) Penalty. The penalties provided by
2009 Wisconsin Act 12 shall be in addition
to the penalties provided for violation of
Chapter 11.199 when a person has violated
both laws. In addition to the penalties
provided by this ordinance and 2009
Wisconsin Act 12, any Village employee
who violates any provision of this ordinance
or 2009 Wisconsin Act 12, may also be
subject to progressive discipline by his or
her employer.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 52 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
11.128 SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID
PROHIBITED.
(1) Possession Use and Sale are
Illegal. It shall be illegal for any person to
possess or attempt to possess a control
substances specified in Section
961.14(4)(tb) to (ty) Wisconsin Statutes as
further defined in 2011 Wisconsin Act 31.
(2) First Offense Violation Only. Now
withstanding the foregoing, any person who
is charged with possession of a controlled
substances specified in Section
961.14(4)(tb) and (ty) following a
conviction for a controlled substance in this
state shall not be prosecuted under this
ordinance pursuant to Section
66.0107(1)(bn) Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Penalties. Any person violating this
section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25) nor more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) exclusive of cost and upon failure
to pay the same shall be confined in the
county jail for not more than ninety (90)
days.
11.129 MISUSE OF 911 EMERGENCY
TELEPHONE SERVICE.
(1) Purpose. The primary purpose of
this ordinance is to prevent the misuse of the
emergency 911 number. Further, it is meant
to encourage parents or the legal guardian of
a minor, to maintain control over the actions
of the minor and prevent the misuse of the
911 emergency number.
(2) Misuse. The intentional calling of
the 911 emergency number and knowingly
giving a false report, or no report, or as a
prank when no emergency exists and no
valid request is made for emergency
services.
(3) General Provisions.
(a) It shall be a violation of this
ordinance for anyone to intentionally call the
911 emergency number to knowingly give
false information, no information as a prank,
or when no valid request for emergency
services exist.
1. It shall also be a violation to
knowingly encourage, aid or permit another
to make a call as defined above.
2. It shall also be a violation of this
ordinance for anyone to hook up their alarm
system to the 911 number.
3. Each call shall be considered a
separate violation.
(b) A parent or legal guardian of a
minor may be found liable for any injury or
damage, which may result from the misuse
of the 911 number and penalties may be
imposed under Wis. Stats. §895.035.
(c) This ordinance does not attempt to
restrict emergency calls, but only to prevent
the misuse of the 911 number.
(1) Penalty. Any person violating the
provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than $25 nor more than $2,500, together
with the costs of prosecution, and upon
default of payment be imprisoned in the
county jail not less than 2 days nor more
than 90 days.
(a) Parents or a legal guardian may be
held liable for the acts of minors subject to
the above penalties, if they know or should
have known that the absence of control of
their minor may or could result in the misuse
of 911.
11.130 DEFAMATION. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §942.01 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.131 GIVING FALSE INFORMATION
FOR PUBLICATION. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 53 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §942.03 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of the statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.132 OPENING LETTERS. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §942.05 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of the statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.133 REPRESENTATION
DEPICTING NUDITY. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §942.09(1), (3m), and (5) are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of the statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
11.134 USE OF A DRONE. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §942.10 are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of the statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
11.199 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY,
AND ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this ordinance,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation. Failure or refusal to
pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 54 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 11
Ordinance 2008-08 Deleting Section 11.124 False Alarms
Adopted 5-5-08
Ordinance 2008-15 Restoring Curfew Provisions to Chapter 11; Section 11.81 Juvenile
Curfews and Section 11.82 Daytime Curfew
Adopted 6-2-08
Ordinance 2008-23 Creating Section 11.126 Child Protection
Adopted 8-4-08
Ordinance 2009-08 Amending Chapter 11, Subchapter II General Nuisances of the Municipal
Code to Amend Chapter 11.35.5 Chronic Nuisance Property
Adopted 5-4-09
Ordinance 2009-22 Amending Chapter 11.126 Child Protection Restrictions of the Municipal
Code of the Village of Suamico
Adopted 10-5-09
Ordinance 2010-01 Amending Chapter 11 Public Nuisances/Peace and Order, Subchapter IV
Health & Safety
Adopted 1-4-10
Ordinance 2010-08 Replacing Chapter 11.126 Child Protection Restrictions entirely
Adopted 3-29-10
Ordinance 2010-12 Amending Chapter 11.127(2) Definitions (f) Enclosed Area
Adopted 6-7-10
Ordinance 2011-01 Creating Chapter 11.128 Synthetic Cannabinoid Prohibited
Adopted 1-3-11
Ordinance 2011-10 Repealing and Recreating Chapter 11.128 Synthetic Cannabinoid Prohibited
Adopted 10-3-11
Ordinance 2011-11 Amending Section 11.39 and 11.42 of the Code Relating to Discharge of
Firearms and Carrying Firearms in Public Buildings
Adopted 10-3-11
Ordinance 2012-07 Amendment to Chapter 11.39 Discharge of Firearms Regulated
Adopted 6-4-12
Ordinance 2012-10 Creating Chapter 11.19.5 Keeping of Chickens
Adopted 6-18-12
Ordinance 2014-09 Amending Chapter 11.09 Bee Keeping
Adopted 6-16-14
Ordinance 2014-14 Creating Chapter 11.129 Misuse of 911 Emergency Telephone Service
Adopted 10-6-14
Ordinance 2015-05 Amending Chapter 11 Public Nuisances/Peace and Order
Adopted 6-15-15
Ordinance 2016-03 Amending Chapter 11 Public Nuisances—Peace and Order of the Village
Code
Adopted 4-4-16
Ordinance 2016-04 Amending and/or Creating Sections in Chapter 11Public Nuisances/Peace
and Order of the Village Code
Adopted 3-21-16
Village of Suamico
11-Public Nuisances Page 55 of 55 Adopted 1-21-08
Ordinance 2017-10 Amending Chapter 11
Adopted 8-7-17
Ordinance 2019-02 Creating 11.78 Possession/Use of Tobacco and Vapor Products by Minors
and 11.79 Restrictions on Sale or Gift of Cigarettes, Tobacco or Vapor Products
Adopted 3-18-19
Ordinance 2020-01 Repealing 11.111 Sending Obscene or Sexually Explicit Electronic
Messages and Replacing with 11.111 Sexting by Minors Prohibited
Adopted 1-20-20
Village of Suamico
Chapter 12
12-Traffic Control Page 1 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
TRAFFIC CONTROL
Subchapter I ................................................................................................................................ 1
12.01 State Traffic Laws Adopted ............................................................................................ 1
12.02 Official Traffic Signs and Signals ................................................................................... 5
12.03 Illegal Signs ....................................................................................................................... 6
12.04 Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle..................................................................... 6
12.05 Negligent Operation of Vehicle ....................................................................................... 6
12.06 Compression Brakes Prohibited ..................................................................................... 6
12.07 Enforcement Procedure................................................................................................... 7
12.08 Heavy Truck Routes ........................................................................................................ 7
12.09 Parking .............................................................................................................................. 8
12.10 Neighborhood Electric Vehicles (NEVs) ...................................................................... 11
12.11 Regulation of Golf Carts ............................................................................................... 11
Subchapter II – Snowmobiles .................................................................................................. 15
12.20 State Snowmobile Laws Adopted ................................................................................. 15
12.21 Applicability of Rules of the Road to Snowmobiles .................................................... 15
12.22 Operation of Snowmobiles in Village Restricted ........................................................ 15
12.23 Snowmobile Routes and Regulations ........................................................................... 15
12.24 Snowmobiles/Written Consent of Owner Required ................................................... 16
12.25 Snowmobile Curfew ....................................................................................................... 16
Subchapter III – Abandoned, Unlicensed, and Junk Vehicles ............................................. 16
12.30 Definitions ....................................................................................................................... 16
12.31 Unlicensed Motor Vehicles ............................................................................................ 17
12.32 Abandoned Motor Vehicles ........................................................................................... 17
12.33 Junked Vehicles .............................................................................................................. 17
12.34 Permits Required ........................................................................................................... 17
12.35 Enforcement Procedure................................................................................................. 18
Subchapter IV – Speed Limits ................................................................................................. 19
12.40 Speed Limits ................................................................................................................... 19
12.99 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement....................................................................... 19
SUBCHAPTER I
12.01 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS
ADOPTED.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this section, the statutory
provisions in Wis. Stats. Ch. 23, §30.50 to
§30.71, §30.80, §30.99, Ch. 167, Ch. 340 to
Ch. 348 and §941.01(1), describing and
defining regulations with respect to vehicles
and traffic, inclusive of any provisions
therein relating to penalties to be imposed
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 2 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
and exclusive of any regulations for which
the statutory penalty is a fine or term of
imprisonment, are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any act, required to be
performed, or prohibited by any statute
incorporated herein by reference is required
or prohibited by this chapter. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of
the statutes incorporated herein are intended
to be made part of this section in order to
secure uniform statewide regulation of
traffic on the highways, streets, roads and
alleys of the State of Wisconsin. Sections of
the Wisconsin statutes adopted herein shall
have the same number in this code
proceeded by (4.) and may be so cited.
(2) Sections of Wis. Stats. Ch. 340
through Ch. 348 adopted by reference shall
include but not be limited to the following:
340.01 Words and phrases defined.
341.04 Penalty for operating unregistered vehicles, etc.
341.11(4) Display of registration plates.
341.15 Display of registration plates.
341.16(4) Issuance of duplicate plates.
341.41 Reciprocity permits.
341.51(5) Dealer registration.
341.55 Misuse of dealer plates.
341.57(3) Registration of finance companies and financial institutions.
341.61 Improper use of evidence of registration.
341.62 False evidence of registration.
341.63 When registration is to be suspended.
342.05(4) Certificate of title required.
342.15(5)(6)(7) Transfer of interest in vehicle.
342.23 Secured party’s and owner’s duties.
342.30, 342.31,
342.32, 342.34
Anti-theft and anti-fraud provisions.
343.01 Word and phrases defined.
343.05 Operators to be licensed; exceptions.
343.305 Implied consent.
343.35 Surrender of licenses upon cancellation, revocation, suspension.
343.45 - 434.46 Unlawful practices related to licenses.
343.60 - 343.72 Licensing of driver’s schools and instructors.
343.73 Penalty for violation of Wis. Stats. §343.60-§343.72.
344.01 Word and phrases defined.
344.45 - 344.47 Penalties for violations of chapter.
344.51 Financial responsibility for domestic rented vehicles.
345.01 Words and phrases defined.
345.20 - 345.53 General provisions in traffic forfeiture actions.
345.55 Traffic officers not to profit from arrests.
346.01 Words and phrases defined.
346.02 Applicability of chapter.
346.03 Applicability of rules of the road to authorized emergency vehicles.
346.04, 346.05-
346.16
Driving, meeting, overtaking, and passing.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 3 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
346.17 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.04-§346.16.
346.18 - 346.21 Right-of-way.
346.22 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.18-§346.21.
346.23 - 346.29 Drivers and pedestrians.
346.30 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.23-§346.29.
346.31 - 346.35 Turning and stopping and required signals.
346.36 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.31-§346.35.
346.37 - 346.42 Traffic signs, signals, and markings.
346.43 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.37-§346.42.
346.44 - 346.48 Required stops.
346.49 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.44-§346.48.
346.50 - 346.55 Restrictions on stopping and parking.
345.56 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.50-§346.55.
346.57 - 346.595 Speed restrictions.
346.60 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.57-§346.595.
346.61 Applicability of sections relating to reckless and drunken driving.
346.62 Reckless driving-first offense in four (4) years.
346.63 Operating under influence of intoxicant-first offense in ten (10) years.
346.64 Employment of drunken operators-first offense in one (1) year.
346.65(1) and (2) Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.62-§346.64.
346.66 Applicability of sections relating to accident and accident reporting.
346.67 Duty upon striking person or attended or occupied vehicle.
346.68 and 346.69 Duty upon striking unattended vehicle-upon striking property on or
adjacent on highway-first offense within a year.
346.70-346.73 Duty to report accident, etc.
346.74 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.67-§346.73.
346.77 - 346.81 Bicycles and play vehicles.
346.82 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.77-§346.81.
346.87 - 346.94 Miscellaneous rules.
346.95 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §346.87-§346.94.
347.01 - 347.05 General provisions.
347.06 - 347.29 Lighting provisions.
347.30 Penalty for violating lighting equipment requirements.
347.35 - 347.49 Other equipment.
347.50 Penalty for violating Wis. Stats. §347.35-§347.49.
348.01 - 348.02 Size, weight, load-General Provisions.
348.05 - 348.10 Size and load.
348.11 Penalty for violating size and load limitations.
348.15 - 348.20 Weight.
348.21 Penalty for violating weight limitations.
348.25 - 348.27 Permits.
348.28 Permits to be carried-penalty.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 4 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
(c) Wis. Adm. Code Provisions Adopted.
Hereby adopted by reference are the
following Standards for Motor Vehicle
Equipment. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of the provisions
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this code in order to secure uniform
state-wide regulation of traffic on the
highways, streets, and alleys of the State of
Wisconsin.
Subchapter I General Provisions
Trans 305.01 Purpose and scope.
Trans 305.02 Applicability.
Trans 305.04 Penalty.
Trans 305.03 Enforcement.
Trans 305.05 Definitions.
Trans 305.06 Identification of vehicles.
Trans 305.065 Homemade, replica, street modified, reconstructed, and off-road vehicles.
Subchapter II Automobiles, Motor Homes, and Light Trucks
Trans 305.07 Definitions.
Trans 305.075 Auxiliary lamps.
Trans 305.08 Back-up lamps.
Trans 305.09 Directional signal lamps.
Trans 305.10 Hazard warning lamps.
Trans 305.11 Head Lamps.
Trans 305.12 Parking lamps.
Trans 305.13 Registration plate lamps.
Trans 305.14 Side marker lamps, clearance lamps, and reflectors.
Trans 305.15 Stop lamps.
Trans 305.16 Tail lamps.
Trans 305.17 Brakes.
Trans 305.18 Bumpers.
Trans 305.19 Doors, hoods, locks, and latches.
Trans 305.20 Exhaust and air pollution control systems.
Trans 305.21 Floor pan and firewall.
Trans 305.22 Fenders and projecting parts.
Trans 305.23 Frames.
Trans 305.24 Fuel systems.
Trans 305.25 Horn.
Trans 305.26 Mirrors.
Trans 305.27 Restraining devices and seats.
Trans 305.28 Speed indicator and odometer.
Trans 305.29 Steering and suspension.
Trans 305.30 Tires and rims.
Trans 305.31 Modifications affecting height of a vehicle.
Trans 305.32 Vent, side, and rear windows.
Trans 305.33 Windshield defroster-defogger.
Trans 305.34 Windshields.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 5 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
Trans 305.35 Windshield wipers.
Subchapter III Motorcycles
Trans 305.37 Applicability of Subchapter III.
Trans 305.38 Brakes.
Trans 305.39 Exhaust system.
Trans 305.40 Fenders and bumpers.
Trans 305.41 Fuel system.
Trans 305.42 Horn.
Trans 305.43 Lighting.
Trans 305.44 Mirrors.
Trans 305.45 Sidecars.
Trans 305.46 Suspension system.
Trans 305.47 Tires, wheels, and rims.
Subchapter IV Heavy Trucks, Trailers, and Semi-trailers
Trans 305.48 Definitions.
Trans 305.485 Applicability of Subchapter IV.
Trans 305.49 Axle control valves.
Trans 305.50 Bed and body on trailers and semi-trailers.
Trans 305.51 Brakes on heavy trucks, trailers, and semi-trailers.
Trans 305.52 Coupling devices.
Trans 305.53 Fenders and mud guards.
Trans 305.54 Frames on heavy trucks, trailers, and semi-trailers.
Trans 305.55 Lighting devices.
Trans 305.56 Rear end protection.
Trans 305.57 Suspension system on heavy trucks, trailers, and semi-trailers.
Trans 305.58 Wiring.
12.02 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS
AND SIGNALS.
(1) The Director of Public Works is
authorized to procure and erect signs and
signals. The Director of Public Works is
hereby authorized and directed to procure,
erect, or cause to be erected and maintain
appropriate standard traffic signs, signals,
and markings conforming to the rules of this
chapter as required by state law. Signs shall
be erected in such locations and manner as
the Board shall determine will best affect the
purposes of this chapter and give adequate
warning to users of the street or highway.
(2) Removal of Unofficial Traffic
Signs and Signals. The Director of Public
Works and Police Department shall have the
authority granted by Wis. Stats. §349.09 and
are hereby directed to order the removal of a
sign, signal, marking or device placed,
maintained, or displayed in violation of this
section or Wis. Stats. §346.41. Any signs
which impose any immediate safety risk to
pedestrians, vehicular traffic, or the public at
large may be removed by the Police
Department without prior approval after
ascertaining, if possible, that permission has
not been granted by Village officials for
posting of said signs. Any charge imposed
on a premise for removal of an illegal sign,
signal, or device shall be reported to the
Board at its next regular meeting for review
and certification.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 6 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
12.03 ILLEGAL SIGNS.
(1) Erection of Signs. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §86.191(1)(2)(3)(4) are hereby
adopted and by reference made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of this statute incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter.
(2) No person shall post or fasten on
any telegraph, telephone, traffic post, or
electric pole within the Village or upon any
tree within any street or public ground in the
Village any bill, sign, notice, or advertising
device.
(a) Permission to any person to erect
and maintain poles shall not be construed to
grant the right to use or rent such poles for
advertising purposes.
(b) Section 12.03 (1) and (2) applies to
illegal signs placed in applicable highway
right-of-ways in view of pedestrians and
vehicular traffic.
12.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT WITH
A MOTOR VEHICLE.
(1) Conduct Prohibited. No person
shall, within the Village, by or through the
use of any motor vehicle, including, but not
limited to, an automobile, truck, motorcycle,
mini-bike, go-carts, snowmobile, or other
means of conveyance operated by motor,
cause or provoke disorderly conduct with a
motor vehicle.
(2) Definition.
(a) Disorderly conduct with a motor
vehicle. While operating or in control of a
motor vehicle, to engage in conduct or
activities which are violent, unreasonably
loud, dangerous to persons or property, or
otherwise against the public peace, welfare,
and safety, including but not limited to
unnecessary, deliberate, or intentional
spinning of the wheels, squealing of the
tires, revving or racing of the engine,
blowing of the horn, causing the engine to
backfire, or causing the vehicle, while
commencing to move or while in motion, to
raise one (1) or more wheels off the ground.
1. This subsection also applies to the
intentional pushing, unlawful towing or any
other intentional contact of a motor vehicle
by another motor vehicle on any highway
within the Village.
2. Specifically excluded from this
definition are legitimate, scheduled racing
events. Police officials, highway
maintenance units or authorized wrecker
services in the performance of their
respective duties are exempt from this
section.
12.05 NEGLIGENT OPERATION OF
VEHICLE. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this section, the
statutory provisions describing and defining
regulations with respect to negligent
operation of vehicle in Wis. Stats.
§941.01(1) are hereby adopted by reference
and made part of this section as if fully set
forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions or modifications of the statutes
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this section. Acts required to be
performed or prohibited by such statutes are
required or prohibited by this section.
12.06 COMPRESSION BRAKES
PROHIBITED. No person shall use motor
vehicle brakes within the Village, which are
in any way activated or operated by the
compression of the engine of any such
motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. It
shall be an affirmative defense to the
prosecution under this section that such
compression brakes were applied in an
emergency situation and were necessary for
the protection of persons and/or property.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 7 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
12.07 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
(1) This chapter shall be enforced
according to Wis. Stats. Ch. 799 and §23.33,
§66.12, §345.11-§345.61, and §350.17.
(2) Deposit.
(a) Any person arrested for a violation
of this section may make a deposit of money
as directed by the arresting officer at the
Clerk of Court’s office or by mailing the
deposit to such place.
(b) The arresting officer or the person
receiving the deposit shall notify the arrested
person, orally or in writing, that:
1. If the person makes a deposit for a
violation of a traffic regulation, the person
need not appear in court at the time fixed in
the citation and the person will be deemed to
have tendered a plea of guilty and submitted
to a forfeiture and penalty assessment if
required by Wis. Stats. 757.05(1), a jail
assessment if required by Wis. Stats. 302.46,
plus any applicable fees prescribed in Wis.
Stats. Ch. 814, not to exceed the amount of
the deposit that the court may accept as
provided in Wis. Stats. §345.37.
2. If the person fails to make a deposit
for a traffic regulation or appear in court at
the time fixed in the citation, the court may
enter a default judgment finding the person
guilty of the offense or issue a warrant for
his or her arrest.
(c) The amount of the deposit shall be
determined in accordance with the
Wisconsin Revised Uniform Traffic Deposit
Schedule established by the Wisconsin
Judicial Conference and shall include the
penalty assessment established under Wis.
Stats. 757.05(1), a jail assessment if required
by Wis. Stats. 302.46, and court costs. If a
deposit schedule has not been established,
the arresting officer shall require the alleged
offender to deposit the forfeiture established
by the Board, which shall include the
penalty assessment. Deposits for nonmoving
violations shall not include the
penalty assessment. The arresting officer or
the person receiving the deposit shall issue
the arrested person a receipt therefore as
required by Wis. Stats. §345.26(3)(b).
(3) Petition to Reopen Judgment.
Whenever a person has been convicted in
Wisconsin on the basis of a forfeiture of
deposit or plea of guilty or no contest and he
or she was not informed under Wis. Stats.
§345.27(1) and (2), he or she may, within
sixty (60) days after being notified of the
revocation or suspension of his or her
operating privilege, petition the court to
reopen the judgment and grant him or her an
opportunity to defend on merits.
If the court finds that the petitioner was
not informed as required under Wis. Stats.
§345.27(1) and (2), it shall order the
judgment reopened. The court order
reopening the judgment automatically
reinstates the revoked or suspended
operating privilege.
12.08 HEAVY TRUCK ROUTES.
(1) The following streets in the Village
are hereby designated as heavy truck routes
under the provisions of Wis. Stats. §349.17:
Birch Road from two hundred feet
(200’) south of Woodsdale Avenue north to
Riverside Drive.
Bowling Green Lane in its entirety.
Bridge Road from the Suamico River to
St. Pat’s Drive.
Brown Road from Veterans Avenue to
Velp Avenue.
Deerfield Avenue East in its entirety.
Deerfield Avenue West from Harbor
Lights Road to CTH B (Sunset Beach
Road).
Deerfield Court, East in its entirety.
Flowing Wells Court in its entirety.
Golden Arrow Road in its entirety.
Harbor Lights Road from Deerfield
Avenue East, west to Deerfield Avenue
West.
Lost Trail east of Velp Avenue.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 8 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
Norfield Road from Veterans Avenue to
Velp Avenue.
Northwood Road from six hundred feet
(600’) northwest of Hidden Pond Road to
CTH M (Flintville Road).
Oakdale Road in its entirety.
Parkfield Court in its entirety.
Pride Terrace in its entirety.
Riverside Drive from Deerfield West
Avenue to Birch Road. From St. Pat’s Drive
to CTH B (School Lane).
Side Street from CTY B to Riverside
Drive.
St. Pat’s Road from Bridge Road east to
Riverside Drive.
Summerfield Court in its entirety.
Velp Avenue in its entirety.
Veterans Avenue in its entirety.
Woodfield Court in its entirety.
All county roads as governed by the
Brown County Highway Commissioner.
CTH B (portions of Sunset Beach Road
and School Lane).
CTH IR (Reforestation Road).
CTH J (Lakeview Drive, portion of
Riverside Drive, and N. Lakeview Drive.)
CTH M (portions of Lineville Road,
Northwood Road, Fairview Road, Pinecrest
Road, White Pine Road, and Flintville
Road).
(2) Trucks Prohibited on Other than
Designated Heavy Truck Routes. It shall
be unlawful for any person or company to
operate any motor vehicle having a gross
weight of more than eight thousand (8,000)
pounds except motor buses on any street
other than on a federal or state trunk
highway or on streets designated in Section
12.08 (1) hereof, except when necessary for
the purpose of obtaining orders and
delivering and moving supplies or other
necessary commodities to or from any place
of business or residence fronting on any
such streets, and except when necessary for
the purpose of leaving or returning to the
terminal or place of garaging of any such
vehicle. When it is necessary for the
operator of such a vehicle to travel upon a
street not designated for heavy truck traffic
as provided in Section 12.08 (1) hereof, such
operator shall leave and re-enter such heavy
truck routes at the point closest to his or her
immediate destination.
(3) Truck Route Signage. The Public
Works Director shall erect or cause to be
erected appropriate signs to give notice of
the designation of the streets listed in
Section 12.08 (1) as heavy truck routes.
(4) Commercial Motor Vehicles
Prohibited from Using Certain Streets.
No person shall operate any motor truck,
road tractor, or truck tractor upon any street
that is not designated as a heavy truck route,
except for the purpose of obtaining orders
for and delivering or moving supplies or
other necessary commodities to or from any
place of business or residence fronting on
such streets.
12.09 PARKING.
(1) Parking Prohibited.
(a) Parking is prohibited on all Village
streets from November 1 to April 15,
between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m.
(b) Parking of vehicles with a gross
vehicle weight rating in excess of tenthousand
(10,000) pounds is prohibited on
all Village streets. Temporary parking of
such vehicles in front of a residence or
business is permitted for the purpose of
delivering goods or services to that
residence or business; however, in no case
shall overnight parking be permitted.
(c) Parking of boats, recreational
vehicles, motor homes, and all types of
trailers is prohibited on all Village streets.
(d) Snow Emergency. The President,
Administrator, or Public Works Director
may prohibit traffic and/or parking on streets
in certain areas to facilitate snow removal at
any time and to tow away or otherwise cause
removal of any vehicles parked in the
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 9 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
prohibited area during the snow emergency
period.
1. A declaration of snow emergency
shall include the days and times during
which traffic or parking is prohibited, and
the names of streets and/or areas affected.
2. Notice of a snow emergency will be
given either by publication in a local
newspaper, by announcement over a local
commercial television or radio station, by
placement of signs in the areas designated,
or by other appropriate or convenient means
notifying the public that traffic and/or
parking of vehicles in the designated area is
prohibited during the snow emergency.
(e) Upon any highway, area, or street
where and when stopping or standing is
prohibited by official traffic signs indicating
the prohibition of any stopping or standing.
(f) Designated Spaces. Where
individual parking spaces are marked on the
curbing or pavement, every vehicle shall be
parked entirely within the limits of the space
so designated.
(2) Nonmoving Violation and
Registration Program. Pursuant to the
provisions of Wis. Stats. §345.28(4) the
Village elects to participate in the
nonmoving traffic violation and registration
program of the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation and pay the costs established
by the Department under Wis. Stats. §85.13;
such costs shall, in turn, be assessed against
persons charged with non-moving traffic
violations. The Village Attorney shall be
responsible for complying with the
requirements set forth in Wis. Stats.
§345.28(4).
(3) Parking Prohibited at All Times.
Except temporarily for the purpose of, and
while actually engaged in, receiving or
discharging passengers and while the
vehicle is attended by a licensed operator so
that it may be moved promptly in case of an
emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic,
no person shall at any time park or leave
standing any vehicle or other equipment on
any of the following streets:
(a) Birch Road.
1. West side from Popplewood Court to
Harbor Lights Road.
2. East side from ninety-five feet (95’)
north of Harbor Lights Road to Harbor
Lights Road.
(b) Bowling Green Lane.
1. Both sides from Velp Avenue in its
entirety.
(c) Cardinal Lane. Both sides from one
hundred ten feet (110’) north of Pirates
Cove to Lineville Road (CTH M).
(d) Carolina Cherry Drive. Both sides
from Lineville Road (CTH M) in its entirety.
(e) Cottage Row. West side,
southbound from Resort Road, in its
entirety.
(f) Cotton Drive. North side from
Lakeview Drive (CTH J) to three hundred
feet (300’) west of Idlewild Road.
(g) Deerfield East. East side from one
thousand feet (1,000’) south of Harbor
Lights Road to Harbor Lights Road.
(h) Elvira Way. North side from sixtyfive
feet (65’) east of Woodland Reserve to
sixty-five feet (65’) west of Woodland
Reserve.
(i) Flintville Road (CTH M). Both sides
from Anston Road to two hundred fifty-five
feet (255’) south of Westpoint Road.
(j) Harbor Lights Road. Both sides
from Deerfield East to Lakeview Drive
(CTH J).
(k) Hook Road. North and east side
from Bayside Road in its entirety.
(l) Lakeview Drive (CTH J). Both sides
from Riverside Drive (CTH J) to Harbor
Lights Road.
(m) Lakeview Drive, North (CTH J).
Both sides from Sunset Beach Road (CTH
B) to Riverside Drive (CTH J).
(n) Longtail Beach Lane. Both sides
from Longtail Beach Road to two hundred
feet (200’) south of Longtail Beach Road.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 10 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
(o) Longtail Beach Road. Both sides
from Longtail Beach Lane to six hundred six
feet (606’) west of Longtail Beach Lane.
(p) Pirates Cove. North side from
Cardinal Lane in its entirety.
(q) Pride Terrace. South side seven
hundred sixty feet (760’) from Velp Avenue
(CTH HS) to a point one thousand fifteen
feet (1,015’) from Velp Avenue (CTH HS).
(r) Quietwoods Trail. Both sides from
Reforestation Road (CTH IR) in its entirety.
(s) Reforestation Road (CTH IR). Both
sides from Quietwoods Trail to Westview
Road.
(t) Resort Road. North side from
Bayside Road to Cottage Row.
(u) Riverside Drive.
1. North side from two hundred ninety
feet (290’) west of Longview Lane to four
hundred twenty feet (420’) west of
Longview Lane.
2. Both sides from Lakeview Drive
(CTH J) to Lakeview Drive, North (CTH J).
(v) Rockwell Lane. West side
southbound to Lineville Road (CTH M) in
its entirety.
(w) School Lane (CTH B).
1. South side from seventy-five feet
(75’) east and west of the driveways to
3171 School Lane.
2. North side from Stream Road to Pine
Lane.
(x) Side Street. West side from School
Lane (CTH B) to Riverside Drive.
(y) Sunrise Road.
1. South side east from Forest Ridge
Drive for a distance of one thousand eight
hundred feet (1,800’).
2. North side from Reforestation Road
to Forest Ridge Drive.
3. South side from Reforestation Road
for a distance of two hundred feet (200’).
(z) Sunset Beach Road. Both sides from
Lakeview Drive (CTH J) to Sunset Beach
Lane.
(a2) Timber Trail, South. Both sides
from Sunset Beach Road (CTH B) to four
hundred eighty feet (480’) north of
Snowshoe Trail.
(b2) Westpoint Road. Both sides from
Flintville Road (CTH M) to one hundred
feet (100’) west of Flintville Road (CTH M).
(4) Parking Prohibited on Odd Side
of Street. Except temporarily for the
purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
receiving or discharging passengers and
while the vehicle is attended by a licensed
operator so that it may be moved promptly
in case of an emergency or to avoid
obstruction of traffic, no person shall at any
time park or leave standing any vehicle or
other equipment on the odd numbered side
on any of the following streets:
(a) Bracton Road
(b) Bridle Path
(c) Fenmore Lane
(d) Fescue Court
(e) Fescue Way
(f) Firethorn Court
(g) Flowering Peach Drive
(h) Golden Bell Drive
(i) Grey Wolf Court
(j) Harbor Cove Lane
(k) Honey Clover Court
(l) Lucille Court
(m) Luxury Drive
(n) Moose Creek Trail
(o) Nandina Way
(p) North Gate Road
(q) Pink Dogwood Way
(r) Roberta Court
(s) Summer Breeze Court
(t) Tarragon Trail (east of Hawk Ridge
Trail to its termination)
(u) Tea Olive Court
(v) Van Hoof Road
(w) Wallenfang Lane
(x) Wisteria Circle
(y) Weston Way
(z) Yellow Jasmine Way
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 11 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
(5) Authority. Subsections (3) and (4)
do not limit the authority of the Director of
Public Works to procure and erect signs and
signals under 12.02(1) of the Suamico Code
of Ordinances.
12.10 LOW-SPEED VEHICLE (LSV).
(1) Definition.
(a) A low-speed vehicle (LSV) is
defined in Wis. Stats. 340.01(27)(h). LSVs
are four (4) wheeled, motorized vehicles that
comply with the federal safety standards
stated in 40CFR 571.3(b) and 571.500 and
which is authorized under Wis. Stats.
349.26.
(2) Use Allowed.
(a) Subject to the requirements set forth
herein, low speed vehicles may be ordered
on Village roadways under the Village’s
maintenance jurisdiction within the Village
which have a maximum speed limit of
thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less and
designated county roadways or portions
thereof with speeds of thirty-five (35) miles
per hour or less.
1. Requests for designated roadways
shall be made to the Village Health & Safety
Committee. The Committee shall take into
account traffic load and other safety
considerations when deciding whether to
designated a roadway or portion thereof as
safe for LSVs.
2. The decision of the Health & Safety
Committee shall be forwarded to the Village
Board for final approval.
(b) All operators of LSVs shall conform
to all regulations contained in this chapter,
including the provisions of state motor
vehicle laws incorporated herein, except
those provisions which by their express
terms have no application to a LSV.
(c) All operators of LSV shall have a
current and valid driver’s license issued by
the state of their domicile.
(d) No LSV may be operated on
roadways within the Village which have a
posted speed over thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(3) Appeal Procedure. Any person
may appeal or contest a citation for an
alleged violation to the Village Municipal
Court.
(4) Penalties. Any person who violates
any provision of this chapter shall be
punished by forfeiture not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000) per occurrence.
12.11 REGULATION OF GOLF
CARTS.
(1) General Authority. Pursuant to the
provisions of Sec. 349.18(1m), Wis. Stats.,
and the provisions of this subsection, the
operation of golf carts, as defined in
subsection (2) herein below, shall be
permitted on designated Village streets that
have a speed limit of 25 mph or less. Except
as provided in subsection (3) herein below,
no golf cart may cross any county trunk
highway.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Golf Cart shall mean a gas or
electrically powered vehicle whose speed
attainable in one mile does not exceed 20
miles per hour on a paved, level surface, and
that is generally designed and intended to
convey one or more persons and equipment
to play the game of golf in an area
designated as a golf course. Wis. Stats
23.33(1)(fm).
(b) Street shall mean any public street,
highway, or alley located within the
municipal boundaries of the Village of
Suamico.
(3) Highway Crossings. Pursuant to
Sec. 349.18(1m)(2) golf carts may not cross
any county trunk unless all of the following
conditions apply:
(a) The county trunk has a speed limit
of 35 miles per hour or less.
(b) The highway crossing will connect
streets within the Village designated for golf
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 12 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
cart operation under subsection (11) herein
below.
(c) The Brown County Highway
Department and the Village of Suamico
Public Works Director will have to each
approve a specific crossing area that is
properly marked and the signs necessary to
mark the crossing shall be erected and
maintained at Village expense.
(4) State Driver’s License Required.
No person may operate a golf cart on any
Village street unless they hold a current
valid Driver’s License. No person under the
age of 16 may operate a golf cart on any
roadway. A learner’s permit shall not be
considered as a valid driver’s license nor
shall any license that has been revoked,
temporarily or otherwise, or suspended for
any reason.
(5) Liability Insurance Required. As
part of the registration process, the owner of
the golf cart must provide a certificate of
insurance for such golf cart, policy term and
minimum limits of liability of $100,000 per
person, $300,000 per accident, and $5,000
medical before such registration can be
approved. Proof of insurance must be
produced to any law enforcement officer
upon request at all times.
(6) Hours of Operation. The Village
of Suamico permits the operation of golf
cart on designated Village streets from
sunrise until sunset during the months of
April 15th thru October 31st. Operation is
prohibited on designated Village streets
Monday-Friday, between the hours of 7am-
9am and 2pm-4pm while school is in
session.
(7) Traffic and Parking Regulation
Compliance. The operators of golf carts on
Village streets shall be subject to all
applicable Federal, State, and Local traffic
and parking regulations.
(a) Impeding Traffic. The operation of
a golf cart shall not impede traffic flow
while being operated on village streets.
(b) Right Side Operation. A golf cart
shall be operated on the extreme right side
of the roadway and travel with the flow of
traffic and shall be operated in single file.
(c) Yielding. Golf cart operators shall
yield the right-of-way to all other vehicular
traffic and pedestrians.
(d) Operations on Sidewalks Prohibited.
No person shall operate a golf cart on any
sidewalk, pedestrian way, public trails, or
upon the area the area between the sidewalk
and the curb line of any street.
(e) Unattended Golf Carts. No person
shall leave or allow any golf cart owned or
operated under his/her control to remain
unattended on any Village streets or public
property while the motor is running or with
the starting key left in the ignition.
(f) Speed. No golf cart may be operated
in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour.
(g) Permitting Unauthorized Person to
Operate. Any person who allows an
unauthorized person to operate a golf cart is
subject to a forfeiture under subsection 13(d)
herein below.
(8) Equipment Requirements.
(a) Headlight(s). All golf carts
operating on Village streets shall be
equipped with and display while operating,
properly functioning headlights that shall
display a white or clear light and be visible
from a distance of 500 feet. Headlight(s)
must be properly adjusted, as to not interfere
with the operation of other vehicles on the
roadway.
(b) Taillights. All golf carts operating
on Village streets shall be equipped with and
display while operating, properly
functioning taillights that shall be red in
color and be visible from a distance of 500
feet.
(c) Rear View Mirror. All golf carts
shall be equipped with a rear view mirror
capable for the operator to see traffic
approaching from the rear.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 13 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
(d) Restriction on Equipment. No golf
cart may be operated on any street unless it
conforms to all noise, registration and other
equipment requirements as stated in the
Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, or the Municipal code
of the Village of Suamico.
(e) Slow-Moving Vehicle Sign. Any
golf cart which is not able to attain the speed
of 20mph must display a slow-moving
vehicle sign as stated in Chapter 347.245(1),
Wis. Statutes.
(f) Brakes. The brakes provided by the
manufacturer of the golf cart shall be in
proper working order and it shall be
equipped with all mechanical and standard
safety features provided by the
manufacturer.
(g) Accelerator. The accelerator
provided by the manufacturer of the golf
cart shall be in proper working order and it
shall be equipped with all mechanical and
standard safety features provided by the
manufacturer and shall not have been
modified to exceed a speed of twenty (20)
miles per hour nor otherwise modified in
any way that creates a hazard.
(9) Operation Regulations.
(a) All riders must remain seated when
the golf cart is in motion.
(b) Number of occupants shall comply
with seat belt regulations if said golf cart
was originally equipped with seat belts. The
seating capacity of the golf cart will not be
exceeded.
(c) Golf carts may not be operated on
Village streets during inclement weather
such as rain, snow, fog, or when visibility
may be 500 feet or less.
(d) Golf carts may not be used for the
purpose of towing any item, trailer, cart,
other vehicle, or person, including a person
on roller skates, skis, snowboard, sled,
skateboard, or bicycle.
(10) Registration and Inspection.
Before operating on any street within the
Village, the golf cart shall first be inspected
by and registered with the Suamico Police
Department and the applicant must obtain
from the Department an annual Golf Cart
Registration Permit under the following
provisions:
(a) Inspection Requirements:
1. The golf cart can only be registered by
the owner thereof who shall provide proof of
ownership and proof of insurance, with the
minimum liability limits as listed in
subsection (5) above, at the time of
inspection.
2. The Registrant must provide proof of
a valid Wisconsin Driver’s License.
3. The golf cart must meet all equipment
requirements identified in this subsection
together with such safety and equipment
inspection requirements as the Police
Department shall establish and provided
from time to time.
(b) Golf Cart Annual Registration Fee.
The fee for the annual golf cart registration
permit from the Village shall be set by the
fee schedule as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board. The registration
sticker shall be visible from the rear of the
golf cart.
(c) Fee Waiver. The annual fee is
waived if the registrant has a valid disabled
parking permit or if used pursuant to
subsection 12(a) or 12(b) herein below.
(d) Disqualified Vehicles.
ATV’s/UTV’s, four-wheel utility vehicles
and other similar utility vehicles which are
not manufactured for operation on a golf
course and golf carts which have been
modified so that it no longer meets the
definition of a golf cart may not be
registered as a golf cart nor shall such
vehicles be operated on the public roads
within the Village of Suamico unless such
vehicles are otherwise registered with and
allowed under the motor vehicle laws of
Wisconsin or as allowed by the Village
Code of Ordinances.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 14 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
(11) Designated Golf Cart Routes:
(a) Village Streets as Listed.
1. Luxury Drive.
2. Flowering Peach Drive.
3. Van Hoof Road.
4. Pink Dogwood Way.
5. Yellow Jasmine Way.
6. Golden Bell Drive.
7. Wallenfang Lane.
8. Nandina Way.
9. Firethorn Court.
10. Tea Olive Court.
11. Grey Wolf Court.
12. Roberta Court.
13. Lucille Court.
14. Summer Breeze Court.
15. Moose Creek Trail
(b) No person may operate a golf cart
for any reason on the following Village
Streets: (The following streets are not golf
cart approved per state statute 349.18)
1. USH41/141.
2. CTH M (Lineville Road/Northwood
Road/Pinecrest Road/White Pine
Road/Flintville Road)
3. CTH J (Lakeview Drive/North
Lakeview Drive)
4. CTH B (Sunset Beach Road/School
Lane)
5. CTH IR (Reforestation Road)
6. Any street where operation is
prohibited by an official posted sign.
7. Any village street posted over 25
mph.
8. Any street not listed as a designated
golf cart route as stated in 11(a) above.
(c) Other Prohibited Areas.
1. Any Public Park.
2. Any Cemetery.
3. Any property owned or leased by the
Village of Suamico.
4. Any public jogging path.
5. Any public green space area.
(12) Exceptions. The operation of golf
carts is not subject to the provisions of this
chapter under the following circumstances.
(a) The operation of golf carts at golf
courses, private clubs or on private property,
with the consent of the owner.
(b) Suamico Police may allow any type
of golf cart to be used on any Village Street
by community and/or civic organizations for
community events, parades, festivals, or
other special events. Said exemption shall
be in writing and allowed only to be used
during such event.
(13) Enforcement.
(a) Enforcement. This chapter shall be
enforced by any law enforcement officer of
the Village of Suamico, Brown County
Sheriff’s Office, Wisconsin State Patrol, or
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
Wardens. Law Enforcement is exempt from
the provisions of this ordinance if acting in
official capacity as official police business.
(b) Route Status. Law Enforcement
Officers or the Department of Public Works
Director shall have the power to declare the
stated golf cart routes either open or closed.
(c) Route Signage/Markers. The
Suamico Public Works Director is
authorized and directed to procure, erect,
and maintain appropriate golf cart routes,
trails, and speed limit signs and other
markers as approved by the State of
Wisconsin DOT and Federal MUTCD
Guidelines.
(d) Penalty.
1. Any forfeiture for violation of this
ordinance shall conform to the forfeiture
permitted to be imposed for violation of
those similar Wisconsin Statutes or Statutes
referenced in this ordinance, as set forth in
the Uniform Deposit and Misdemeanor Bail
Schedule of the Wisconsin Judicial
Conference, including any variations or
increases for subsequent offenses, which
schedule is adopted by reference.
2. If the ordinance has no corresponding
State Statute, the penalty for violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 15 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
of at least $25 nor more than $1,000,
together with the costs of prosecution.
(14) Disclaimer and Liability.
(a) Disclaimer. Golf carts are not
designed for nor manufactured to be used on
Public Streets and the Village of Suamico
neither advocates nor endorses the golf cart
as a safe means of travel on public streets,
roads or highways. The Village of Suamico
in no way shall be liable for accidents,
injuries, or death involving the operation of
a golf cart within the Village limits.
(b) Assumption of Risk. Any person
who owns, operates, or rides upon a golf cart
on a public street, road, or highway with the
Village of Suamico limits does so at his or
her own risks and peril and assumes all
liability resulting from the operation of the
golf cart.
SUBCHAPTER II – SNOWMOBILES
12.20 STATE SNOWMOBILE LAWS
ADOPTED. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this section, the
statutory provisions describing and defining
regulations with respect to snowmobiles in
Wis. Stats. §350.02 to §350.05, §350.07 to
§350.107, §350.11, §350.12, §350.13,
§350.135, §350.15 to §350.17, §350.19 and
§350.99 are hereby adopted by reference
and made part of this section as if fully set
forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of the Wisconsin
statutes incorporated herein are intended to
be made part of this section. Acts required
to be performed or prohibited by such
statutes are required or prohibited by this
section.
12.21 APPLICABILITY OF RULES OF
THE ROAD TO SNOWMOBILES. The
operator of a snowmobile upon a roadway
shall, in addition to the provisions of Wis.
Stats. Ch. 350, be subject to, §346.04,
§346.06, §346.11, §346.14(1), §346.18,
§346.19, §346.20, §346.21, §346.26,
§346.27, §346.33, §346.35, §346.37,
§346.39, §346.40, §346.44, §346.46,
§346.47, §346.48, §346.50(1)(b), §346.51,
§346.52, §346.53, §346.54, §345.55,
§346.87, §346.88, §346.89, §346.90,
§346.91, §346.92(1), and 346.94(1) and (9).
12.22 OPERATION OF
SNOWMOBILES IN VILLAGE
RESTRICTED. It shall be unlawful to
operate any snowmobile on Village streets,
alleys, parks, parking lots, or on any public
lands or private lands or parking lots held
open to the public, except on snowmobile
routes established by the Board. The
operator shall at all times have the consent
of the owner before operation of such craft
or vehicle on private lands.
12.23 SNOWMOBILE ROUTES AND
REGULATIONS.
(1) Snowmobile Routes. Snowmobile
routes are hereby designated by the Board as
follows:
(a) West Deerfield Avenue from the
CTH B/Sunset Beach Road to Lineville
Road.
(b) Brown Road in its entirety.
(c) Veterans Avenue in its entirety.
(d) Shady Lane in its entirety.
(2) Regulations. Snowmobile routes
shall be subject to the following:
(a) Direction of Travel. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §350.04(2)(a) are hereby adopted and
by reference made part of this chapter as if
fully set forth herein. Any future
amendments, revisions, or modifications of
this statute incorporated herein are intended
to be made part of this chapter.
(b) Travel shall conform to the direction
of traffic in the nearest lane.
(c) Persons under 12. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in this
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 16 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §350.05(1) are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
(d) Persons aged 12 and over. Except
as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis.
Stats. §350.05(2) are hereby adopted and by
reference made part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any future amendments,
revisions, or modifications of this statute
incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter.
(e) Operators of all snowmobiles shall
observe all posted speed limits. No operator
shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic sign or signal unless otherwise
directed by a traffic officer.
12.24 SNOWMOBILES/WRITTEN
CONSENT OF OWNER REQUIRED.
The consent required under Wis. Stats.
§350.10(1)(f), (k), (l), and (m), and in
Section 12.23 above shall be written consent
dated and limited to the year in which the
consent is given. If the property is owned or
leased by more than one person, the consent
of each must be obtained.
12.25 SNOWMOBILE CURFEW. No
person under the age of seventeen (17) years
shall operate a snowmobile in the Village
between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. the
following day unless accompanied on the
vehicle by a parent, guardian, adult relative,
or other adult person having actual care,
custody, and control of such child.
SUBCHAPTER III - ABANDONED,
UNLICENSED, AND JUNK VEHICLES
12.30 DEFINITIONS. The following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
(1) Administrative Rule. The specific
requirements that may be created to regulate
the storage of unlicensed motor vehicles:
(a) Number of vehicles.
(b) Size of enclosures (height, width,
etc.).
(c) Color.
(d) Type of material.
(e) Location.
(f) Restrictions to certain zones only.
(g) Other conditions as specified by the
Board.
(2) Application. A written form upon
which a request is made for a permit.
(3) Enclosure. The type of construction
required to hide and harbor vehicles from
public view.
(4) Junked Vehicle. Any abandoned,
disassembled, dismantled, inoperable, or
wrecked instrument by which someone
travels or something is conveyed, either by
wheels, runners, or tracks.
(5) Licensed. Any license that is
required to be carried by any motor driven
vehicle when driven, used or propelled upon
the public highway.
(6) Owner. Considered to be the
person or persons who occupy the premises
and who may or may not be the responsible
person or persons to harbor such unlicensed
motor vehicle.
(7) Permit. The written authority given
by the Board to allow storage of unlicensed
motor vehicles.
(8) Salvage Dealers. Dealers regulated
by Wis. Stats. §175.25.
(9) Storage. The placement of a
vehicle upon real property described in
Village assessment and tax role.
(10) Unlicensed Motor Vehicle. A
vehicle required to be licensed by the State
Department of Transportation when driven
or propelled upon a public road, but is not so
licensed.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 17 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
(11) Zoned-Zoning. Any land use
control ordinance, county or Village, that
may be in force.
12.31 UNLICENSED MOTOR
VEHICLES. No unlicensed motor vehicle
shall be permitted to be stored, harbored, or
held upon any parcel of property in the
Village without a proper permit issued by
the Board for that purpose.
The Board is authorized to issue permits
to store unlicensed motor vehicles upon a
parcel of property when certain enclosure
requirements have been met. (Enclosure
requirements shall be established by an
administrative rule or zoning ordinance
adopted by the Board.) The type of
enclosure to keep stored material from the
general view of a passing public shall be
predetermined by the Board and may be
attached to this section as an amendment or
administrative rule.
12.32 ABANDONED MOTOR
VEHICLES.
(1) No person or entity shall leave
unattended any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer,
boat, mobile home, or other similar
type of property on any public street or
highway or public or private property for
such time and under such circumstances as
to cause the vehicle or property to
reasonably appear to have been abandoned.
When any such vehicle or property has been
left unattended as aforesaid without
permission of the Village or property owner
for more than twenty-four (24) hours, the
vehicle or property is deemed abandoned
and constitutes a public nuisance.
(2) Any police officer having
jurisdiction, who discovers any vehicle or
property on any public or private property
which has been abandoned, shall cause the
vehicle or property to be removed to a
suitable place of impoundment.
(3) Any vehicle or property left
unattended in violation of this section shall
be impounded until lawfully claimed or
disposed of under Section 12.35.
12.33 JUNKED VEHICLES. No junked
vehicle, or parts thereof, may be stored
outside any building on any property located
in the Village without a proper permit issued
by the Board for that purpose. No person
shall leave any junked vehicle on any street,
highway or other public property within the
Village. No person in charge or control of
any private property within the Village,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant or
otherwise, shall allow junked vehicles to
remain on such property for more than one
(1) day. The Board is authorized to issue
permits to store junked vehicles upon a
parcel of such property when certain
requirements have been met. These
requirements shall be established by
administrative rule or zoning ordinance
adopted by the Board. Such administrative
rules shall govern the enclosure of junked
vehicles for the purposes of storing junked
vehicles from the general view of the
passing public.
12.34 PERMITS REQUIRED.
(1) A written permit to store an
unlicensed or junked vehicle shall be issued
upon proper application having been made
and only after the applicant has met all the
requirements of any administrative rule or
zoning ordinance in force at the time the
application is made as to the type of
enclosure deemed necessary to be
constructed, erected, and maintained by the
owner or occupant of the property.
(2) A written permit form shall be
furnished when a permit has been authorized
to be issued by the Board.
(3) Written application forms shall be
furnished to any person upon request.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 18 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
(4) Applications for an unlicensed
vehicle storage permit or junked vehicle
storage permit shall be filed with the Clerk
at least ten (10) days prior to the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board.
(5) Any application for an unlicensed
motor vehicle storage permit or junked
motor vehicle storage permit shall be acted
upon within sixty (60) days after it was filed
with the Clerk.
(6) If the permit is issued, it shall be
issued for a period of six (6) months.
(7) If the permit is denied, the Board
shall notify the applicant of such denial.
(8) An annual permit fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board shall
be paid into the Treasury before the permit
is actually issued.
(9) An application for an unlicensed
motor vehicle storage permit or junked
motor vehicle storage permit may be
required annually.
(10) An application for an unlicensed
motor vehicle storage permit or junked
motor vehicle storage permit shall bear the
signature of either the owner or occupant of
the property for which the permit is being
sought.
12.35 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
(1) Inspection of an enclosure facility
may be executed each year before the next
year's annual permit is acted on by the
Board.
(2) Revocation of Permit. A permit to
store unlicensed or junked vehicles may be
revoked at any time that it is determined that
the permit holder is not in compliance with
the terms of this section and administrative
rules, and/or zoning ordinance, for
maintaining property storage enclosures.
(3) Removal and Impoundment.
After notice to the owner, any vehicle in
violation of this subsection may be
impounded until lawfully claimed or
disposed of under Section 12.35 (4) (c)
below; except if the Board or its designee
determines that the costs of towing and
storage charges of impoundment would
exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle
may be junked by the Village prior to
expiration of the impoundment period upon
determination by the Board or its designee
that the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or
any other reason.
(4) Disposal.
(a) Vehicles or Parts Thereof Exceeding
One Hundred Dollars ($100) in Value.
1. If the Board or its designee
determines that the value of any abandoned
vehicle exceeds one hundred dollars ($100),
the owner and lien holders of record shall be
notified by certified mail that the vehicle has
been deemed abandoned and impounded by
the Village and may be reclaimed within
fifteen (15) days upon payment of accrued
towing, storage and notice charges and if not
reclaimed, shall be sold.
2. If an abandoned vehicle exceeding
one hundred dollars ($100) in value is not
reclaimed within the period and under the
conditions provided in Section 12.35 (4)
above, it may be sold by sealed bid or at
auction. If no satisfactory bid is received,
the vehicle may be sold at private sale.
3. After deducting the expenses of
impoundment and sale, the balance of the
proceeds, if any, shall be paid to the Village
treasury.
(b) Vehicles or Parts Thereof Less than
One Hundred Dollars ($100) in Value. Any
abandoned vehicle which is determined by
the Board or its authorized representative to
have the value of less than one hundred
dollars ($100) may be disposed of by direct
sale to a licensed salvage dealer upon
determination that the vehicle is not reported
stolen.
(5) Owner Responsible for
Impoundment and Sale Costs. The owner
of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen
vehicle, is responsible for the abandonment
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 19 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
and all costs of impounding and disposing of
the vehicle, provided no costs shall be
imposed without notice thereof to the owner
and an opportunity for the owner to be
heard. Costs not recovered by the sale of the
vehicle may be recovered in a civil action by
the Village against the owner.
(6) Notice of Sale or Disposal.
Within five (5) days after the sale or
disposal of a vehicle as provided in Section
12.35 (4), the Board or its designee shall
advise the State Department of
Transportation, Division of Motor Vehicles,
of the sale or disposal on a form supplied by
the division. A copy of the form shall be
given to the purchaser of the vehicle and a
copy shall be retained on file in the Village.
(7) Public Nuisance. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as prohibiting the
abatement of a public nuisance by the
Village or its officials in accordance with
the laws of Wisconsin.
SUB CHAPTER IV - SPEED LIMITS
12.40 SPEED LIMITS. A traffic and
engineering investigation having been made
on the following described roadways in the
Village, the maximum permissible speed at
which vehicles may be operated on the
roadways, which speed is herewith
established as reasonable and safe pursuant
to Wis. Stats. §349.11 shall be as set forth
herein, and upon the erection of standard
signs giving notice thereof. Speed limits are
adopted by resolution, as approved by the
Board. Adopted speed limits are listed in
the attached Appendix B Speed Limits of
this said Code of Ordinances.
12.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY,
AND ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this ordinance,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation. Failure or refusal to
pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
12-Traffic Control Page 20 of 20 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 12
Ordinance 2008-07 Creating Section 12.10 Neighborhood Electrical Vehicles
Adopted 5-5-08
Ordinance 2008-08 Amending Section 12.23 Eliminating Harbor Lights Road from the
Snowmobile Route
Adopted 5-5-08
Ordinance 2009-09 Restoring Designated Spaces Provisions
Adopted 5-4-09
Ordinance 2009-12 Amending Section 12.08 (1)
Adopted 5-18-09
Ordinance 2010-02 Chapter 12 Parking
Adopted 1-4-10
Ordinance 2010-13 Amending Section 12.08
Adopted 4-19-10
Ordinance 2011-09 Amending Section 12.10 Relating to Low Speed Vehicles
Adopted 10-3-11
Ordinance 2018-05 Amending Chapter 12 Traffic Control
Adopted 5-21-18
Ordinance 2020-11 Amending Chapter 12 Regulation of Golf Carts
Adopted 08-17-20



























Village of Suamico
Chapter 16
16-Building Code Page 1 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
BUILDING CODE
Subchapter I – Building Code .................................................................................................... 1
16.01 General Provisions ........................................................................................................... 1
16.02 Adoption of Codes and Ordinances................................................................................ 3
16.03 Powers and Duties of the Building Inspector ................................................................ 3
16.04 Permits .............................................................................................................................. 4
16.05 Inspections ........................................................................................................................ 7
16.06 Certificate of Occupancy ................................................................................................. 8
16.07 Unsafe or Unsightly Buildings ........................................................................................ 9
16.08 Demolition of Buildings ................................................................................................... 9
16.09 Private Swimming Pools ................................................................................................ 10
16.10 Electrical Regulations .................................................................................................... 11
16.11 Plumbing Regulations .................................................................................................... 11
16.12 Erosion Control .............................................................................................................. 12
16.13 Violations ........................................................................................................................ 12
Subchapter II – House/Building Numbering .......................................................................... 13
16.20 System Established......................................................................................................... 13
16.21 Base Lines Established .................................................................................................. 13
16.22 Consistency with Village of Howard ............................................................................ 13
16.23 Odd/Even Number Assignments .................................................................................. 14
16.24 Corner Lots..................................................................................................................... 14
16.25 Buildings with Separate Occupants ............................................................................. 14
16.26 Relative Numbers ........................................................................................................... 14
16.27 Furnishing/Placement of Numbers ............................................................................... 14
16.28 Suffix Permitted ............................................................................................................. 15
16.29 Duty to Party Applying ................................................................................................. 15
16.30 Duty of Owner ................................................................................................................ 15
Subchapter III – Design Review Standards ........................................................................... 15
16.35 Design Review Standards for Commercial, Multifamily, & Industrial Dev. ........... 15
Subchapter IV – Historical Preservation ................................................................................ 29
16.40 Historical Preservation .................................................................................................. 29
16.99 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement....................................................................... 38
SUBCHAPTER I – BUILDING CODE
16.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) Title. This subchapter shall be
known as the “Building Code of the
Village.” It may also be referred to in this
section as “code”.
(2) Intent. This subchapter is adopted
under the authority granted by Wis. Stats.
§101.65. Its purpose is to:
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 2 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) Provide certain minimum standards,
provisions, and requirements of safe and
stable design, methods of construction, and
uses of materials in buildings and structures
hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged,
altered, repaired, moved, converted to other
uses, or demolished, and regulates the
equipment, maintenance, use and occupancy
of all such buildings and structures.
(b) Promote the general health, safety,
and welfare of persons occupying or using
such buildings as well as the general public.
(c) Maintain required local uniformity
with the administrative and technical
requirements of the Wisconsin Uniform
Dwelling Code.
(3) Scope and Application. The
provisions of this code shall apply to all
buildings and structures in the Village and
shall specifically include; all new
construction; all additions; alterations,
remodeling, repairs, maintenance, moving,
change of use and demolition of existing
buildings; and all electrical, plumbing,
mechanical, and heating, ventilating and air
conditioning installations (HVAC); except
as specifically exempt herein.
No work specified in this section shall
be undertaken except in full compliance
with the provisions of this code and all other
applicable local, state, and federal
regulations.
Projects not under state jurisdiction,
petitions for variance and final appeals
under Wis. Adm. Code SPS 320.19 and
20.21, respectively, shall be decided by the
Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall decide petitions for
variance per Wis. Adm. Code SPS 320.19
(Intro) so that equivalency is maintained
whenever possible.
(4) Abrogation and Greater
Restrictions. This code is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere
with any existing easements, covenants,
deed restrictions, agreements, ordinances,
rules, regulations, or permits previously
adopted or issued pursuant to laws.
Wherever this code imposes greater
restrictions, however, the provisions of this
code shall govern.
(5) Relationship to Other Regulations.
This code shall not affect violations of any
other ordinance, code, or regulation
committed prior to the effective date hereof,
and any such violation shall be governed
and shall continue to be punishable to the
full extent of the law under the provisions of
those ordinances, codes, or regulations in
effect at the time the violation was
committed. The provisions of this code
shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other ordinances or
regulations of the Village or of the State of
Wisconsin that prescribe standards other
than those provided herein. In case of
conflicts among such regulations, the most
restrictive standards shall apply.
(6) Responsibility. This code shall be
binding alike upon every owner of a
building or structure and every person who
is in charge of or is responsible for or who
causes the design, construction, alteration, or
repair of any building or structure or related
electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, or
air conditioning equipment in the Village.
(7) Workmanship. All work
performed under the scope of this code
involving the fabrication, preparation and
installation of materials, shall be conducted,
executed and completed in a workmanlike
manner so as to secure the results intended
by the regulations prescribed herein.
(8) Maintenance. All buildings and
structures and all parts thereof shall be
maintained in a safe condition, and all
devices and safeguards that were required
during the erection, alteration, addition, or
repair of any building shall be maintained in
good working order. Such maintenance
requirements shall apply to all buildings
now existing or hereafter erected.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 3 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
(9) Liability for Damages. This code
shall not be construed as assuming any
liability on the part of the Village for
damages to anyone injured or for any
property destroyed by a defect in any
building or element.
16.02 ADOPTION OF CODES AND
ORDINANCES.
(1) State Codes. The following State of
Wisconsin codes and subsequent
amendments and recodifications thereto are
hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated in this code as if fully set forth.
Violations of the regulations hereby adopted
shall be deemed a violation of this code and
shall be subject to the enforcement and
abatement procedures set forth in Section
16.13 of this code.
(a) Electrical Code SPS 316, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(b) Uniform Dwelling Code, SPS 320-
325, Wis. Adm. Code, excepting there from
SPS 320.05 (1); 320.05 (3); 320.05 (4);
320.05 (5).
(c) Licenses, Certifications, and
Registrations, SPS 305, Wis. Adm. Code.
(d) Smoke Detectors, 328, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(e) Historical Building Code, SPS 370,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(f) Plumbing Code, SPS381-387, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(g) SPS 326, 327, 361-366 & 375-379,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(h) Barrier-free design, American
National Standards Institute (ANSI)
handbook, A117.1.
(i) Wis. Stats. Ch. 101 & 145.
(2) Definitions. Inasmuch as they do
not conflict with the provisions of this code
or the state codes adopted in Section 16.02
(1), the definitions contained in Section
18.03 of the Village Zoning Ordinance are
hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if fully set forth. In
case of conflicts among such definitions, the
most restrictive shall apply.
16.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE
BUILDING INSPECTOR.
(1) State Statute Reference. The
Building Inspector shall be held to be the
same officer referred to in the Wisconsin
state statutes as “Building Inspector” and
shall have the same powers and duties. The
Building Inspector shall enforce the
provisions of this code and all other
applicable state laws and Village ordinances
relating to the construction, alteration,
repair, removal, safety and use of buildings
and permanent building equipment;
including electrical, plumbing and HVAC
installations, except as otherwise
specifically provided for in this code or by
statutory requirement. The Building
Inspector shall have full power to pass upon
any question arising under the provisions of
this code, subject to the conditions contained
herein.
(2) Rule Making Authority. The
Building Inspector shall have the power as
necessary in the interest of public health,
safety, and general welfare; to interpret and
implement the provisions of this code to
secure the intent thereof; and to designate
requirements applicable because of local
climatic or other conditions, except that such
rules and regulations can not have the effect
of waiving structural or fire performance
requirements specifically provided for in
this code or of accepted practice involving
public safety.
(3) Permits, Inspections, and
Corrections Orders. The Building
Inspector shall be responsible for the
issuance of all permits required by this code
and for the inspection of all work covered by
such permits. The Building Inspector shall
issue all noncompliance notices and
correction orders necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this code
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 4 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
and the health, safety, and general welfare of
the public.
(4) Grievances and Appeals. Any
person aggrieved by any order, ruling, or
decision of the Building Inspector may,
within thirty (30) days thereafter, appeal
such order, ruling or decision to the Suamico
Zoning Board of Appeals. Administrative
appeal procedures shall follow the
provisions set forth in Section 18.98 (3)
which are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if fully set forth.
(5) Record Keeping. The Building
Inspector shall keep official records of
applications received, permits, and
certificates issued, fees collected,
inspections completed, and notices and
orders issued. Such records shall be retained
for as long as the building or structure to
which they relate remains in existence,
unless otherwise provided for by separate
regulations. At least monthly, the Building
Inspector shall submit to the Board a written
report and statement of operations covering
the activities of the Building Inspection
Department. Such report shall also be made
available to all other interested parties and
the general public upon request.
16.04 PERMITS.
(1) Required Permits. Except as
provided in Section 16.04 (2), no person
shall excavate for, erect or construct any
building or structure or add to, enlarge,
move, improve, alter, extend, convert,
repair, remove or demolish any building or
structure or cause the same to be done or
commence any electrical, plumbing,
mechanical, HVAC or other work covered
by the scope of this code on any building or
structure without first obtaining a permit
from the Building Inspector.
(2) Exempt Work. The following work
is exempt from the permit requirements
specified in Section 16.04 (1). Not
withstanding permit requirements, however,
such work shall comply with all other
applicable rules, standards and zoning
regulations set forth in this code and the
Village Municipal Code.
(a) Alterations and repairs required for
the maintenance and upkeep of any building
or structure which;
1. Does not exceed a labor and materials
cost of two thousand dollars ($2,000) per
project.
2. Does not involve a change of
building use.
3. Does not affect structural strength,
fire safety, exits, or natural lighting.
4. Does not involve the replacement of
heating, ventilating, cooling, or other major
equipment.
(b) Residential accessory buildings and
storage sheds less than one hundred (100)
square feet in floor area.
(c) Fences.
(d) Temporary use structures as
specified in 18.03 (Definitions) of the
Village Zoning Ordinances.
(e) Buildings and structures not within
the scope of this code.
(3) Required Street Frontage. No
permit shall be issued for the construction of
any building on any parcel of land which
does not have the required frontage on or
which does not abut a dedicated public
street.
(4) Required Utilities and
Improvements. No permit shall be issued
for the construction of any building on any
parcel of land until any required public
utility services (water, sewer, electric, gas,
etc.) have been installed to the property. No
permit shall be issued until the abutting
public street has been accepted by the Board
as being completed for the purposes of
issuing said permits.
(5) Required Elevations. No permit
shall be issued for the construction of any
building on any parcel of land which may be
adversely affected by wetlands, navigable
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 5 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
streams, floodplains, drainage ways, or
storm water facilities until all required
elevations have been submitted, in USGS
datum, and reviewed for compliance with
the following standards:
(a) All residential dwellings and all
commercial buildings shall have the lowest
dwelling opening at a minimum of two feet
(2’) above any expected high water
elevation of any floodplain, wetlands,
drainage way, or storm water system.
(b) All accessory buildings shall have
the lowest opening six inches (6”) above any
expected high water elevation of any
floodplain, wetlands, drainage way, or storm
water system.
(c) The Village may require the
elevations to be established and certified by
a registered land surveyor or professional
engineer licensed in the State of Wisconsin.
(d) The permit applicant is responsible
for any and all costs involved in obtaining
the necessary elevations.
(6) Permit Applications. An
application for a permit shall be submitted
by the property owner or authorized agent
and shall be made in writing upon a form
furnished by the Building Inspector. All
permit applications shall contain:
(a) The street address and parcel
number of the land upon which the work is
proposed.
(b) The name, mailing address, and
phone number of the property owner.
(c) The name, mailing address, and
phone number of the engineer, architect,
designer, contractor or owner’s agent
responsible for the work.
(d) A general description and location
of the proposed work.
(e) The proposed use and occupancy of
all parts of the building or structure.
(f) Other information as required by law
or by the Building Inspector.
(7) Required Plans. Complete sets of
building plans as required, shall accompany
every permit application, along with a site
plan and specifications when applicable. All
plans submitted shall be legible, drawn to
scale, fully dimensioned and shall contain
sufficient information to determine
compliance with this code and all other
applicable codes and regulations. Plans
prepared in accordance with the provisions
of this code, shall bear the name of the
architect, engineer, or designer who
prepared them, and shall be of sufficient
clarity to accurately describe the nature and
character of all proposed work. Plans
requiring review and approval by other
Village departments, boards, or
commissions, or state agencies shall be
reviewed and stamped “Approved” or
“Conditionally Approved” by such
departments, boards, commissions, or
agencies prior to submittal for permits.
(8) Waiver of Plans. The Building
Inspector may waive the requirement for
filing of plans or portions thereof when the
proposed work is minor in nature, when
filing of plans would not sufficiently
describe the nature and character of the
project, or when the work involved is
adequately described on the permit
application. A detailed written description
of all work proposed may also be substituted
for plans required in Section 16.04 (7), at the
discretion of the Building Inspector.
(9) Amendment to Plans. Subject to
the limitations described in Section 16.04
(10), amendments to a plan, application or
other record accompanying the same shall
be filed at any time before completion of the
work for which the permit is sought or
issued. Such amendments shall be subject to
the same review and approval procedures as
the original plans, shall be deemed part of
the original permit application, and shall be
filed therewith.
(10) Time Limitations. A permit
application for any proposed work shall be
deemed to have been abandoned six (6)
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 6 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
months after the date of filing, except that
the Building Inspector may grant one (1) or
more extensions of time for an additional
period not exceeding ninety (90) days.
(11) Plan Review and Permit
Issuance. The Building Inspector shall
examine all permit applications, plans, and
amendments thereto within a reasonable
period of time after receiving all necessary
information. If the work described on the
application, plans and specifications
substantially conforms to the provisions of
this code and all other applicable codes,
ordinances, rules, regulations, laws, and
statutes of the Village and the State of
Wisconsin, the Building Inspector shall,
upon receipt of required permit fees, issue
applicable permits for such work and shall
sign, date, and stamp the plans
“Conditionally Approved”.
One (1) set of approved plans and
specifications shall be retained by the
Building Inspector until the work authorized
is completed. One (1) set shall be forwarded
to the Village Assessor, and one (1) set shall
be returned to the applicant who shall keep
such plans and specifications available at the
job site at all times until the work authorized
thereby is completed. Such approved plans
and specifications shall not be changed,
altered, or modified in any respect that
would involved any of the laws, ordinances,
or administrative rules referred to in this
code, or would involve the safety of the
building or its occupants, except as
specifically authorized by the Building
Inspector.
(12) Permit Posting. Except as
specifically authorized by the Building
Inspector, every permit issued pursuant to
Section 16.04 (11), shall be posted or
displayed in a conspicuous location at the
job site prior to commencement of
construction and shall remain posted until all
work authorized by such permit is
completed.
(13) Permit Expiration. Except as
specifically regulated in the Uniform
Dwelling Code SPS 320.09 (9), a permit
issued pursuant to Section 16.04 (11), shall
lapse and be void six (6) months from the
date of issuance if construction authorized
by the permit has not commenced, and no
such permit shall be valid for a period longer
than twenty-four (24) months from the date
of issuance, except where an application to
renew the permit is approved by the
Building Inspector and additional permit
fees are paid in accordance with Section
16.04 (16) of this code.
(14) Permit to Start Construction.
The Building Inspector may issue a “Permit
to Start Construction” authorizing specific
work to commence prior to submittal of
complete plans and specifications for a
building or structure and prior to issuance of
permits required by Section 16.04 (1). An
applicant for a “Permit to Start
Construction” shall agree to proceed with
site development, excavation, footing and/or
foundation work only and shall not continue
beyond such point until plans and
specifications have been reviewed and
required permits have been issued as set
forth in Section 16.04 (11). The applicant
shall further agree to make any changes
required after complete plans and
specifications have been reviewed and to
remove or replace any portion of the
building or structure which is subsequently
found to be in violation of any of the
provisions of this code. The holder of a
“Permit to Start Construction” shall proceed
with work covered by such permit without
assurance that approvals will be granted or
required permits issued for the remainder of
the building or structure.
(15) Permit Authority. The approval
of plans and specifications or the issuance of
a permit shall not be deemed or construed to
be a permit for or approval of any violation
of any of the provisions of this code. No
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 7 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
permit presuming to give authority to violate
or fail to comply with this code shall be
valid, except insofar as the work or use,
which such permit, authorizes is lawful. If,
subsequent to the issuance of a permit,
errors are discovered in the application,
plans, specifications, or execution of work,
the Building Inspector shall require
correction of such errors.
(16) Permit Fees. The following
regulations shall apply to the establishment
and collection of permit fees.
(a) Permit Fee Schedule. The Building
Inspector shall recommend appropriate fees
for all permits issued by the Building
Inspection Department and such fees shall
be approved from time to time by resolution
of the Suamico Board. A complete list of all
applicable permit fees shall be kept in the
Building Inspection Department and shall be
referred to as the “Permit Fee Schedule”.
The Permit Fee Schedule shall be considered
a supplement to this code, may be amended
from time to time, and shall be made
available to the public during normal
business hours.
(b) Payment of Permit Fees. The
applicant prior to permit issuance shall pay
required permit fees. The Building
Inspector shall collect all permit fees, keep
an accurate account of all fees collected, and
shall turn all such permit fees over to the
Treasurer on the day the permit is issued.
(c) Delinquent Permit Penalty. In the
event any work is commenced or
construction is started prior to approval or
issuance of permits by the Building
Inspector, applicable fees may, at the
discretion of the Building Inspector, be
doubled for such work.
(d) Waiver of Permit Fees. Permit fees
shall be waived for projects involving or
taking place on properties owned by the
Village.
16.05 INSPECTIONS.
(1) Required Inspections. Buildings
shall be inspected at such times and in such
a manner as may be necessary to ensure
compliance with the laws, codes,
ordinances, rules, and orders applicable
thereto, but in no case shall any electrical,
plumbing, or HVAC installation be enclosed
or any structural portion of any building or
structure be covered or concealed prior to
completion of required inspections and
approval by the Building Inspector, except
as specifically provided for in Section 16.05
(2). After the Building Inspector grants
approval, no portion of any work covered by
the inspection or included in such approval
shall be altered or changed except as
specifically authorized by the Building
Inspector.
(2) Inspection Requests. The permit
applicant or an authorized representative
shall notify the Building Inspector after
completion of each phase of construction
and shall request all inspections as itemized
in Section 16.05 (3) either orally or in
writing. The Building Inspector shall make
every reasonable attempt to complete all
inspections in a timely manner. Work shall
not proceed until required inspections have
been completed and the Building Inspector
has granted approval, except that
construction may proceed if an inspection
has not been preformed within two (2)
business days after proper notification has
been given. The Building Inspector may
also allow work to proceed when specific
circumstances prevent him from completing
an inspection within the allotted time period.
(3) Inspection Types. The following
inspections shall be completed for all
projects whenever applicable.
(a) Erosion Control Inspection. Erosion
control measures shall be inspected after
installation and concurrently with other
required inspections throughout the
construction period.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 8 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
(b) Building Sewer and Water Service
Inspection. The building sewer and water
service lines shall be inspected during
testing as set forth in Comm. 82.21 of the
Department of Commerce Plumbing Code,
and prior to being covered or concealed.
(c) Drain Tile Inspection. Below-grade
drain tile systems shall be inspected after
placement of tiles, washed stone, and sump
pits but prior to backfilling (exterior tiles) or
placement of basement slab floors (interior
tiles).
(d) Footing and Grade Beam Slab
Inspection. Footings and grade beam slabs
shall be inspected after forms are set but
prior to filling with concrete.
(e) Foundation Inspection. Foundations
shall be inspected after forms have been
removed and required insulations and
waterproofing are in place, but prior to
backfilling.
(f) Rough Inspection. General building
construction and electrical, plumbing, and
HVAC installations shall be inspected after
all rough work is finished but before such
work is covered or concealed.
(g) Insulation and Energy Inspection.
Insulation and vapor barriers shall be
inspected after installation is complete but
prior to being covered or concealed.
(h) Final Inspection. A final inspection
completed after all work included within the
scope and application of this code is
substantially complete but prior to the use or
occupancy of the building or structure or
portion thereof.
(4) Notification of Inspection Results.
The Building Inspector shall inform the
permit applicant and/or property owner of
the results of all inspections conducted.
Notification of inspection results shall be in
the form of a written notice posted in a
conspicuous place at the job site, a written
inspection report mailed or e-mailed to the
applicant and/or property owner, or verbal
communication between the Building
Inspector and the applicant, property owner,
an authorized representative or agent, or
other responsible party.
(5) Right of Entry. The Building
Inspector may, at all reasonable times in
performance of his or her duties, enter upon
any public or private premises and conduct
inspections thereof to determine compliance
with the provisions of this code. Any person
who shall deny access to a premises by the
Building Inspector or who shall interfere
with the Building Inspector in the
performance of his duties as specified in
Section 16.03, shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this code and shall be subject to
penalties and forfeitures as described in
Section 16.13.
(6) Inspection Disclaimer. Inspection
findings are intended to report conditions of
noncompliance with code standards, which
are readily apparent at the time of
inspection. An inspection does not involve a
detailed examination of the mechanical
systems or the closed structure or nonstructural
elements of the building or
premises. No guarantee or warranty of the
premises, operation, use, or the durability of
the equipment or materials not specifically
cited herein is expressed or implied.
16.06 CERTIFICATE OF
OCCUPANCY.
(1) When Required. Except as
specifically authorized by the Building
Inspector, a Certificate of Occupancy is
required prior to the occupancy or use of any
building or structure or portion thereof
hereafter erected, constructed, altered,
enlarge, moved or converted from one (1)
use to another.
(2) Notification. Upon project
completion, the property owner or
authorized agent shall contact the Building
Inspector to request a final inspection and
Certificate of Occupancy. Within five (5)
days of the request, the Building Inspector
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 9 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy or
notify the applicant in writing of the reasons
why such a certificate cannot be issued.
(3) Issuance. No Certificate of
Occupancy shall be issued until construction
is complete and the Building Inspector
conducts a final inspection and verifies that
the building or structure complies with
provisions of this code and is in conformity
with the plans and specifications upon which
approvals were granted and permits were
issued. Any Certificate of Occupancy
issued in conflict with this section or any
provision of this code shall be null and void.
(4) Temporary Occupancy. Prior to
completion of a construction project and
pending the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy, the Building Inspector may
grant approval for a temporary or partial use
or occupancy of a building or premises for a
period not to exceed six (6) months.
Temporary or partial occupancy approval
may only be granted if the building or
structure is in substantial compliance with
the provisions of this code and no
reasonable threats to the health, safety, or
welfare of the public exist. All construction
shall be completed, required inspections
conducted, and a Certificate of Occupancy
issued in accordance with the above
regulations prior to expiration of the
temporary occupancy approval.
16.07 UNSAFE OR UNSIGHTLY
BUILDINGS.
(1) Correction Orders. Whenever the
Building Inspector finds any building or
structure or any portion thereof within the
Village to be in his judgement so old,
dilapidated, poorly constructed,
inadequately maintained, or so out of repair
as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or
otherwise unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use, he or she shall order the
owner of the property to raze and remove
the building or structure or portion thereof,
or effect such repairs as are necessary to
make it safe and sanitary in accordance with
the regulations and procedures prescribed in
Wis. Stats. §66.0413 (Razing of Buildings).
(2) Emergency Measures. Where the
public safety requires immediate action, the
Building Inspector shall enter upon the
premises with such assistance as may be
necessary and cause the building or structure
to be made safe or to be removed. The
expenses of such work may be recovered by
the Village in an action against the property
owner.
16.08 DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS.
(1) Required Permits. A permit shall
be obtained from the Building Inspector in
accordance with the regulations set forth in
Section 16.04 of this code prior to the razing
or demolition of any building or structure in
the Village.
(2) Site Protection. A fence or other
approved barricade shall be provided as a
means of protection around the site prior to
demolition and shall remain in place during
razing operations.
(3) Service Connections. Before a
building or structure is demolished or
removed, the property owner or agent shall
notify all utility companies having service
connections (water, sewer, gas, etc.) within
the building or structure and all such
connections and appurtenant equipment
shall be removed, disconnected and/or
sealed and plugged in a safe and approved
manner.
(4) Site Restoration. Whenever a
building or structure is razed or demolished
hereunder; all trash, debris, and materials
resulting from such demolition shall be
removed from the property and properly
disposed of; all basements and other
excavations and depressions revealed by
such demolition shall be filled to the general
grade of the surrounding premises; and all
remaining accessory buildings and concrete
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 10 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
or asphalt surfacing shall be demolished
and/or removed, unless intended to be used
in connection with the proposed future use
of the property. All resulting vacant areas
shall be properly graded and seeded or
planted as required by the Building
Inspector.
16.09 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS.
(1) Scope and Application. No person
shall construct, install, enlarge, or alter any
private swimming pool in the Village except
in accordance with the regulations set forth
in this section.
(2) Definition. The term “Swimming
Pool,” when used in this code, shall mean
any depression in the ground, either
temporary or permanent, or a container of
water, either temporary or permanent and
either above or below ground, in which
water more than eighteen inches (18”) deep
is contained, which is used primarily for the
purpose of bathing or swimming and which
is designed to be or will be left in place
during seasons of non-use.
(3) Permits. Required permits shall be
obtained from the Building Inspector in
accordance with the regulations set forth in
Section 16.04 of this code prior to the
construction, installation, enlargement, or
alteration of any private swimming pool in
the Village.
(4) Required Plans. Each permit
application shall be accompanied by plans
showing; the proposed location of the
swimming pool on the lot or parcel,
including the distance to lot lines and
existing buildings and structures; the
location of any septic tank, drain field,
sewer lines or water lines; pool dimensions
and proposed water depth; type, height and
location of proposed fences; and location of
overhead and/or underground wiring and
power lines relative to the proposed
swimming pool.
(5) Permit Fees. Permit fees for
private swimming pools shall be as set forth
in Section 16.04 (16) of this code.
(6) Setback Regulations. All private
swimming pools shall comply with the
setback regulations set forth in Section
18.08 and Section 18.09 of the Suamico
Zoning Ordinance and the water line of all
private swimming pools shall be located at
least ten feet (10’) from any building or
structure. No private swimming pool shall
be located closer than fifteen feet (15’) from
any septic system. The minimum setback
regulations set forth in this section shall not
apply to hot tubs, spas, whirlpools,
children’s portable wading pools, and
similar recreational equipment.
(7) Fencing Regulations. Fencing
complying with the following regulations
shall protect private swimming pools:
(a) Fence Design. All private
swimming pools not enclosed within a
permanent building shall be completely
enclosed by a fence, which is of sufficient
strength to prevent access to the pool. Such
fence shall not be less than four feet (4’) in
height, shall be located no closer than three
feet (3’) to the pool, and shall be so
constructed as not to have voids, holes, or
openings larger than four inches (4”) in one
(1) dimension. Gates or doors in fences
shall be so constructed as to be capable of
being locked, and shall be closed and locked
so as to prevent unlatching by persons
outside the pool area at all times when the
pool is not in actual use. The wall of a
house or building facing a swimming pool
may be incorporated as a portion of a
required fence. A deck may be incorporated
as a portion of a required fence provided the
requirements of (a) above are incorporated
into the design including any steps provided.
(b) Exceptions.
1. Fencing shall not be required if a
structural cover, meeting the ASTM F1346-
91 Safety Standard, is installed. Such
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 11 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
covers shall be in place whenever the pool is
not in use and/or unsupervised by an adult.
2. An above ground pool with an above
grade side wall height meeting the fencing
requirements is considered complying if all
ladders are removed or locked to prevent
access.
(8) Lighting Regulations. If overhead
flood or other artificial lighting is provided
to illuminate a private swimming pool at
night, such lighting shall be shielded to
direct all such illumination on the immediate
pool area only.
16.10 ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS.
(1) Electrical Work. For the purpose
of this section the term “Electrical Work”
shall mean any act associated with the
installation, alteration, or maintenance of
electrical wiring, equipment or devices,
which ordinarily requires the use of tools.
(2) Contractor Qualifications. Only
the following persons shall be permitted to
engage in electrical work in the Village.
(a) Master Electricians. Any person
holding a valid State of Wisconsin or City of
Green Bay Master Electrician certification.
(b) Electrical Contractors. Any
electrical contracting firm, at least one (1)
full-time employee of which holds a valid
State of Wisconsin Master Electrician
certification.
(c) Homeowners. Any homeowner may
personally perform electrical work in an
owner-occupied single-family dwelling or
accessory buildings, beyond the main
building disconnect, upon proving his or her
competency to comply with all rules and
regulations as set forth in this code.
(3) Certificate of Compliance. No
electrical service or installation shall be
connected or energized by a power company
until such service or installation is inspected
for compliance with the provisions of this
code and approved by the Building
Inspector. Proof of compliance shall consist
of a certificate, signed by the Building
Inspector, and forwarded to the company
supplying the electric power.
(4) Authority to Disconnect Service.
The Building Inspector may cause the
immediate disconnection of electrical power
or service to any defective equipment or
system where he or she finds, in the exercise
of his or her sound judgement, that the
installation creates imminent danger to
persons or property or where he finds that
such electrical power may interfere with the
work of the Fire Department in emergency
situations. No person shall reconnect any
electrical equipment or service so
disconnected until necessary repairs or
alterations are completed and the Building
Inspector grants approval. The Building
Inspector may also cause the discontinuance
of electrical service to any premises to
which he or she is denied access or entry as
set forth in Section 16.05 (5) of this code.
16.11 PLUMBING REGULATIONS.
(1) Licensing. No person shall engage
in any plumbing work in the Village unless
licensed to do so in accordance with Wis.
Stats. §145.06.
(2) Ground, Storm, and Clear Water.
The following regulations shall apply to the
collection, conveyance, and discharge of
ground, storm, and clear water in the
Village.
(a) Discharge. No person shall cause,
allow, or permit any roof drain, surface
drain, sub-soil drain, or drain from any
mechanical device, gutter, ditch, pipe,
conduit, sump pump, or any other object or
thing used for the purposes of collection,
conducting, transporting, diverting, draining,
or discharging ground, storm, or clear water
from any part of any premises, to discharge
into a sanitary sewer. All such ground,
storm, and clear water drains shall discharge
into a storm sewer, a dry well, an
underground conduit leading to drainage
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 12 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
ditch, or onto the ground surface in such a
manner as will not constitute a public
nuisance as defined in Chapter 11. No
ground, storm, or clear water discharged in
accordance with this section shall be
allowed or permitted to flow on or across
any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way
between November 1 and April 15 of each
year.
(b) Building Drain Tiles. Drain tiles or
sub-soil drain piping shall be installed on
each side of building foundation walls at the
footing level to collect and convey ground
water. All drain tiles and sub-soil drain
piping shall be connected to a sump pit
which shall discharge the ground water by
sump pump or gravity means to the
municipal storm sewer where such sewer is
available in a street or public right-of-way
adjacent to or abutting the lot or parcel of
land. Where the property is not serviced by
a municipal storm sewer system or where
otherwise specifically approved by the
Board, the sump pit shall be discharged in
accordance with Section 16.11 (2) (a).
16.12 EROSION CONTROL. See
Chapter 10, Stormwater Ordinance.
16.13 VIOLATIONS.
(1) Unlawful Act. It shall be unlawful
for any person, firm, or corporation to erect
or construct any building or structure
whatever or add to, enlarge, move, improve,
alter, extend, convert, repair, remove,
demolish, use, or occupy any building,
structure, or equipment covered by the scope
of this code, or participate in any electrical,
plumbing, mechanical, HVAC or other
work, or cause, permit, or suffer the same to
be done, in conflict with or in violation of
the provisions of this code.
(2) Noncompliance Notice. The
Building Inspector shall serve a notice of
noncompliance on any person responsible
for violating provisions of this code. Such
notice shall direct the discontinuance of the
illegal action or condition and shall require
the abatement of the violation. Any person
who shall fail or neglect to comply with a
lawful order of the Building Inspector shall
be deemed guilty of a violation of this code.
(3) Stop Work Orders. If the Building
Inspector finds at any time that work on any
building or structure is being prosecuted
contrary to the provisions of this code or in
an unsafe or dangerous manner, he or she
may order such work immediately stopped
by issuing a written “Stop Work Order”.
Such order shall be posted in a conspicuous
location at the job site or shall be served
upon the property owner, the owner’s agent,
or the person responsible for the work. A
Stop Work Order shall specify the nature of
the violation and shall state the conditions
under which work will be permitted to
resume. Any person who shall continue to
work in or about a building or structure after
a Stop Work Order has been issued, except
to complete such work as he or she is
directed to perform to correct the violation
or unsafe condition, shall be deemed guilty
of a violation of this code and shall be
subject to penalties and forfeitures as
described herein.
(4) Permit Suspension or Revocation.
The Building Inspector may suspend or
revoke any approval or permit granted or
issued under the authority of this code where
he or she finds at any time that construction
or development is not in compliance with
the provisions of this code or applicable
laws, orders, administrative rules, plans or
specifications, and that the holder of the
permit has refused to comply with such
provisions after written correction orders
have been issued to him or her. The
Building Inspector may also suspend or
revoke any approval or permit where he or
she is denied access to a premises or where
such permit is obtained through false
statements or misrepresentation of facts in
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 13 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
the application or plans upon which the
approval or permit is based. No
construction activity shall take place on the
job site after suspension or revocation of a
permit, excepting such work as the Building
Inspector shall order be completed as a
condition precedent to the re-issuance of the
permit or such work as the Building
Inspector may authorize as reasonably
necessary to protect the safety and health of
the public and work already completed.
(5) Municipal Citations and
Prosecution. In the event any person, firm,
or corporation shall violate any provision of
this code or fail to comply with a lawful
order of the Building Inspector, the Village
may issue a Municipal Court citation as set
forth in Chapter 2, Chapter 25 and Section
18.99, and furthermore may request that the
Village Attorney initiate appropriate
proceedings at law or in equity to correct or
abate such violation or require the
termination or removal of the unlawful use
of such building or structure in violation of
the provisions of this code or in violation of
the order issued pursuant thereto. In any
court action or legal proceeding, the fact that
a permit was issued shall not constitute a
defense, nor shall any error, oversight or
dereliction of duty on the part of the
Building Inspector constitute a defense.
(6) Injunctions and Restraining
Orders. In addition to other enforcement
actions authorized herein, the Village
Attorney may, on behalf of the Village,
pursue enforcement of any or all parts of this
code by court action seeking an injunction
or restraining order against the person
responsible for the violation for the purpose
of ordering that person to; restrain, correct,
or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work; restrain or correct
the erection, installation, or alteration of
such building or structure; remove work in
violation of the provisions of this code;
and/or cease all occupation or use of the
building or structure or part thereof in
violation of this code or in violation of the
plans or specifications upon which an
approval, permit, or certificate was issued.
SUBCHAPTER II – HOUSE/BUILDING
NUMBERING
16.20 SYSTEM ESTABLISHED. There
is hereby established a uniform system of
numbering houses and buildings fronting on
all streets, avenues, and public ways in the
Village, and all houses and buildings shall
be numbered in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance.
16.21 BASE LINES ESTABLISHED.
Lineville Road, 1825, shall constitute the
base line for numbering along all streets
running north and south, and Bayside Road,
650, shall constitute the base line for
numbering all streets running east and west.
16.22 CONSISTENCY WITH VILLAGE
OF HOWARD. The numbering for each
street and occupancy will begin off of base
lines and for all intensive purposes and
when possible will be consistent with the
Village of Howard. The north and south
base line will be Lineville Road on the south
and 1825 will be the lowest north-south
number. The east and west base line will be
north-south line extending through Bayside
Road. The east-west reference will be 650.
To be consistent with the adjoining Village
of Howard, there will be five hundred
twenty-five (525) numbers per mile. The
one (1) exception to the north-south base
will be Velp Avenue because of the existing
numbers south of Lineville Road. A one (1)
will prefix the north-south base on Velp
Avenue or the base number will be 11825.
Every one quarter (¼) mile from the section
line will have approximately one hundred
thirty (130) numbers (sixty-five (65) per
side). Circle streets will be numbered based
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 14 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
on the direction of travel from entrance to
exit from section lines.
16.23 ODD/EVEN NUMBER
ASSIGNMENTS. All lots and houses on
the south and west side of all streets shall be
numbered with odd numbers, and all lots
and houses on the north and east side of all
streets shall be numbered with even
numbers, each commencing with the one
hundred (100) assigned to that block. Circle
streets will remain odd and even based on
where they begin.
16.24 CORNER LOTS. All lots fronting
on two (2) streets shall have an address
assigned to the street less traveled as
determined by the Building Inspection
Department. The Building Inspector shall
have the authority to change the street
assignment based on the information
submitted with the building permit.
Duplexes shall have one (1) address on each
of the streets.
16.25 BUILDINGS WITH SEPARATE
OCCUPANTS. Where any building has
more than one (1) door serving separate
occupants, a separate number shall be
assigned to each door serving a separate
occupant. Buildings fronting on two (2) or
more streets shall have a number fronting on
the main entrance, unless other entrances
serve other occupants.
16.26 RELATIVE NUMBERS. All
streets not extending through to the base line
shall be assigned the same relative numbers
as if the said street had extended to the said
base line.
16.27 FURNISHING/PLACEMENT OF
NUMBERS.
(1) The Board has caused a survey to be
made and there is hereby assigned to each
house and building located on any street,
alley, highway, or avenue in the said Village
its respective number under the uniform
system provided for this ordinance, as
shown on the map on record in the Village
Hall, and made part of this ordinance.
(2) New Construction. Effective
August 1, 1997, all new construction shall
be required to display the house numbers as
required in Sub. (4) or Sub. (5) below and
the costs of said numbers and pole will be
paid for as part of the building permit.
(3) Existing Buildings. By May 31,
1998, after the effective date of this
ordinance, the Village shall place or cause to
be placed for each existing house or building
that exists prior to August 1, 1997, the
number or numbers assigned under the
uniform system provided for in this
ordinance.
The original costs of such numbers and
pole shall be paid for by Village tax and said
numbers and pole shall be furnished by the
Village. Subsequently applied for numbers
and pole will be paid for as part of the
building permit. Effective May 31, 1998,
after placement of numbers and pole by the
Village, it shall be the responsibility of the
owner or occupant to maintain said numbers
and pole at the owners or occupants
expense.
(4) Requirements. Each individual
number shall be a minimum of two inches
(2”) by three inches (3”) in size. The
numbers must be numerals and not script.
The owner or occupant shall at all times
keep the numbers in a readable condition.
(a) Non-Sewered Districts. The
numbers of such building shall be
conspicuously displayed on a Village
approved plaque and an appropriate post,
out to the sidewalk or roadway so as to be
easily discernible and readable and can be
seen from the street plainly, with the sign no
less than five feet (5’) nor more than eight
feet (8’) above the ground. Placement must
be within the area of where the road
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 15 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
right-of-way meets the property line within
ten feet (10’) of driveway entrance on the
same side of the roadway that the building
exists. Corner lots will have the post on the
street that the address is assigned, per
Section 16.24 and within ten feet (10’) of
the centerline of the home.
(b) Sewered Districts. The numbers of
such building shall be conspicuously
displayed on the building (corner lots must
face assigned roadway) if said building is no
further than fifty feet (50’) from the
roadway so as to be easily discernible and
readable and can be seen from the street
plainly, of a contrasting color to their
background, and placed immediately above
the garage door, at the side of the main
entrance door or other appropriate location
as approved by the Village with the sign no
less than five feet (5’) above the ground. If
said building is more than fifty feet (50’)
from the roadway or if placement on
building does not meet the requirements of
being easily discernible and readable from
the roadway, said numbers must be
displayed on a pole as outlined in Section
16.27(4)(a).
(5) Shared Driveways. If two (2) or
more buildings with separate house numbers
exist that share the same entrance or
driveway, the numbers shall, if practical, be
displayed on a single pole according to the
requirements of Sub. (4). In addition, each
separate building having a house number
shall also be required to display the house
numbers meeting the same requirements of
Sub. (4) for each individual driveway that
runs off the shared driveway.
(6) Installation. The Village or its
agent will be responsible for the placing and
installation of said numbers and pole.
(7) Exceptions. The Building Inspector
may grant an exception to the pole
requirement if he or she believes it is not
feasible or practical to place the numbers on
a pole.
16.28 SUFFIX PERMITTED. Where
only one (1) number can be assigned to any
house or building the owner, occupant, or
agent of such house or building, who shall
desire distinctive numbers for the upper or
lower portion of any such house or building,
or for any part of such house or building
fronting on any street, may use the suffix
“A”, “B”, “C”, etc. as may be required.
16.29 DUTY TO PARTY APPLYING. It
shall be the duty of the Building Inspection
Department or its designee to inform any
party applying therefore, of the number or
numbers belonging to and within the limits
of said lot or property as provided in this
ordinance. In case of doubt as to the proper
number to be assigned to any lot or building,
the Building Inspection Department or its
designee shall determine the number of each
lot or building.
16.30 DUTY OF OWNER. Whenever any
house, building, or structure is to be erected
or located in said Village, it shall be the duty
of the owner to procure the number so
assigned upon said building as provided by
this ordinance. No building permit shall be
issued for any house, building, or structure
until the owner has procured from the
Building Inspection Department or its
designee the official number of the
premises.
SUBCHAPTER III – DESIGN REVIEW
STANDARDS
16.35 DESIGN REVIEW STANDARDS
FOR COMMERCIAL, MULTIFAMILY,
AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT.
(1) Design Review Authority.
(a) The Village Design Review
Standards are adopted pursuant to the
authorization contained in Wis. Stat. §61.35,
§62.23, and §61.34.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 16 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
(b) The review duties included in this
ordinance are delegated by the Suamico
Board to the Design Review Committee.
(2) Statement of Intent.
(a) To encourage growth and
development which is consistent with
maintaining rural design character and
protects and enhances the Village’s rural
appeal for citizen and visitor use and
enjoyment and protect against development
which uses standard urban and suburban
design approaches.
(b) To implement the goals and policies
of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. To
safeguard property values, protect public
and private investments and promote highquality
commercial, multifamily, and
industrial development which is consistent
with rural character.
(c) To safeguard property values,
protect the public and private investments
and promote high-quality commercial,
multifamily, and industrial development
which is consistent with rural character.
(d) To develop and apply Design
Review Standards which do not overly
restrict innovation and variety, but are
intended to facilitate and assist in focusing
on design practices which result in
development which sustain a positive rural
design character.
(e) To protect against the problem of
highway strip commercial development and
to encourage well-designed highway
clustered commercial development.
(f) To have a minimum number of
prescriptive standards and a maximum
number of performance standards to allow
flexibility in maintaining or enhancing rural
character with new development.
1. Performance Standards. Encourage
flexibility and innovation of design in which
more than one (1) solution is acceptable.
The proposals, however, must meet the
range of positive photo examples,
performance strategy for natural and cultural
resources and the criteria listed for each of
the relevant Design Review Standards.
2. Prescriptive Standards. Dictate a
specific type of design condition which is a
requirement that is deemed necessary to
meet rural character.
(g) To encourage landscape design
which compliments the natural landscape,
improves the general appearance of the
Village and utilizes locally native plant
species.
(h) To protect adjacent landowners from
adverse or inappropriate aesthetic impact
problems of new development which is not
consistent with rural design character.
(i) To establish a formal review process,
which includes appropriate criteria for
design review related to new or remodeled
buildings, site protection, landscaping and
site development.
(j) To maintain the appearance of design
approved developments throughout the
entire life of the development.
(3) Applicability.
(a) The provisions of this ordinance are
a furtherance of the land use and
development controls of land in the Village.
(b) All new commercial, multifamily,
and industrial development within the
Village is subject to design review. New
development includes one (1) or more of the
following types of development; building,
landscaping, signage, or parking areas.
Landscaping is subject to design review
when new buildings, exterior alterations,
signage or parking is proposed. New
development does not include landscaping
for minor additions to existing landscaping.
(c) Design review approval is required
prior to the issuance of a building permit for
new commercial, multifamily, and industrial
development or for exterior wall and roof
alterations to existing commercial,
multifamily, and industrial development not
previously subject to design review.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 17 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
(d) Design review approval is required
for exterior wall and roof alterations to
existing commercial, multifamily, and
industrial development which had not
previously been subject to design review.
Painting and the replacement of roofing are
not considered design alterations if earth
tone colors are used.
(4) Design Review Standards.
(a) Performance Strategy for Natural
Resource Design Review. Natural resources
are significant in maintaining high quality
aesthetic character for the Village. The
Village’s desired future condition for
commercial, multifamily, and industrial
development, is to locate and design new
development which respects sensitive
natural resources and places the
development within or visually related to a
forested or wetland setting in which the new
development visually compliments the
overall naturalness. This is contrasted by
development which dominates the setting
and appears inconsistent with Suamico’s
rural character.
(b) Performance Strategy for Cultural
Resource Design Review. A range of
development types (buildings/parking) is
acceptable if they are sensitive to the
Village’s natural resources and contribute to
the stated desirable living conditionsuncongested
living; beauty, peace, and
quiet; unspoiled rural atmosphere; lack of
commercialism; a close friendly community
feeling. There is not one (1) architectural
style or overall historic setting which always
needs to be met. However, the desired
future condition for new development is to
fit into the existing rural character through
building design and the use of materials,
colors, landscaping, and signage which
compliment naturalness, open space, a clean
appearance and maintain visual order.
In applying the standards and strategies,
the applicant has the burden of showing that
the proposed development contains the
necessary design qualities which will meet
the Natural and Cultural Resource Strategies
Design Standards while providing a
sustainable positive rural character.
(5) Open Space/Natural Resources
Design Standards. The intent of this
section is to ensure that adequate open space
and natural resources are incorporated into
design solutions to provide an overall
appearance of rural character.
(a) Where open space, natural
resources, or topographic patterns contribute
to the beauty and utility of the area, they
shall be incorporated into the design of the
new development.
(b) Minimum green space which is
required to be maintained on a given parcel
shall typically be thirty percent (30%).
However, its location and quality in which
the green space is incorporated into the
design of the development may allow
reduction of that to twenty-five percent
(25%). Combining of areas/parcels will be
considered in the overall green space
provided they are under the same ownership
and development is accruing on all parcels
or in the same planned development overlay.
(c) To the extent possible, existing
topographic grades will be incorporated into
the design. However, when grading or
contouring the site, the finished grades
should appear naturally to the site and
surrounding area, protect the natural
resources and adjacent properties.
(d) Roadside trees are very important to
the rural character of the community and
shall be incorporated into the site plan if at
all possible.
(e) Waterfront development needs to be
especially sensitive to water quality and
riparian vegetation management. The
design emphasis needs to demonstrate the
maximum protection of the natural shoreline
along with transition area forest
preservation. A minimum amount of
impervious development, along with a
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 18 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
minimum level of lawn area, would best
meet the environmental and aesthetic
qualities of rural character.
(6) Existing Built Environment
Design Standards. The intent is to
maintain the existing built environment
which respects the design review standards
and use these examples to serve as a base
from which appropriate design solutions are
proposed for commercial, multifamily, and
industrial development.
(a) Existing development can serve as a
justification for new development only to
the extent that the existing development
meets the Design Review Standards.
(b) Existing development which does
not meet the Design Review Standards is
encouraged to make changes towards the
approved standards. However, this
ordinance does not require changes unless
the existing development meets the
conditions in Section 16.35 (3).
(7) Relationship of Building to Site
Design Standards. The intent of this
section is to incorporate into a site plan the
design standards for commercial,
multifamily, and industrial development. In
particular, the site plan should integrate
natural resources, buildings, parking, and
landscaping into a functional and aesthetic
solution which respects desired rural
character.
(a) The areas of green space must be
located to provide resource protection,
transitions between adjacent sites and as a
visual transition between the public roads
and the building or parking lot.
(b) The arrangement of all functions,
uses, and improvements must be designed to
reflect positive rural characteristics.
(c) Where appropriate, the design
solution should incorporate existing natural
features such as forested areas, streams,
wetlands, and topography.
(d) The size, shape, scale, and location
of the structure(s) need to be architecturally
compatible with the existing site features.
(e) Where appropriate, the site design
needs to integrate the proposed
landscaping/open space into the adjacent
landscaping, open space or forested area.
(f) All mechanical equipment (HVAC,
exhaust fans, etc.) shall be shielded from
view by the use of fencing, landscaping, or
possibly matching paint on roof top units.
Other solutions may be considered.
(g) Place underground all newly
installed utility services and service
revisions necessitated by exterior alterations.
(h) Landscape buffers will be required
between all commercial and residentially
zoned properties. Buffers may consist of:
1. A twenty foot (20’) wide area with a
variety of evergreen and deciduous trees and
shrubs.
2. A berm and fence with plantings.
3. A berm with hedge type plantings.
4. Other solutions as determined
appropriate by the committee.
(i) Parking areas need to be carefully
designated to fit the site and with sensitivity
to location, size, and perimeter screening.
This is especially critical if the Village is to
maintain rural character rather than an urban
community appearance. The Committee
will review parking area site design
performance which includes the following:
1. In cases where quality forestland
exists, existing trees are preserved between
the parking area and the right-of-way.
2. The location of the parking areas
relative to the public roads and buildings
should be placed at the side or rear of the
building and away from direct public view.
3. When options of side yard and rear
yard parking do not exist, front yard parking
(between the building and public road) will
require an effective landscape setback which
includes extensive landscaping.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 19 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
4. Parking areas with ten (10) or more
spaces will require perimeter landscaping to
visually reduce the adverse parking area
impacts.
(j) New developments with large
parking space requirements will need to
demonstrate that they will not provide an
urban parking lot appearance. This will
require design attention which locates the
parking in the least visual impact area,
includes extensive perimeter landscaping,
interior plant islands, maintains existing
vegetation where appropriate and
incorporates several smaller parking areas to
meet parking space requirements.
Landscape islands shall be incorporated into
all parking areas in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) square feet. Required islands shall
be a minimum of ten percent (10%) of total
parking area.
(k) Trash receptacles shall be kept in
enclosures constructed of the same materials
as the main structure. Enclosures shall be
large enough to conceal trash from view.
(8) Building Design Standards. The
intent is to not restrict developments to a
predetermined architectural style. However,
for approval, new developments must meet
the design standards by clearly
demonstrating how the building design
maintains or enhances rural character. The
building design must avoid presenting an
appearance of either monotonous similarity
or excessive dissimilarity with appropriate
existing structures. The building standards
are intended to prevent these extremes.
(a) Architectural style is not restricted.
However, extremes of style which do not fit
rural character are to be avoided.
(b) Building architecture needs to
compliment, rather than dominate the rural
character setting of the Village, such as:
1. Wood, brick, stone, and other
“natural” materials are strongly preferred.
2. Earth tone colors are strongly
preferred and color accents must be visually
compatible.
3. Roofs with darker earth tone colors
are expected.
4. Buildings which maintain colors,
style, and setting of an earlier era will be
considered.
(c) All sides of a structure shall receive
full design consideration. A facade
unrelated to the rest of the building is not in
keeping with acceptable design.
(d) All visually pitched roofs shall have
a minimum of a six inch (6”) fascia.
(e) All projections and mechanical
details such as louvers, exposed flashing,
flues, vents, gutters, and downspouts are to
be recognized as architectural features and
shall be treated to match the color of the
adjacent surface or an approved
complimentary color.
(f) The design must avoid a monolithic
(“big box”) appearance of frontages and
rooflines. The large “box” massing of such
a structure must be diminished by breaking
up building sections or by the use of such
elements as variable planes, projections,
bays, dormers, setbacks or changes in
roofline.
(g) If the project is likely to become a
Village landmark, or if it is in a visually
prominent area or if it is located so as to
become part of the Village’s gateway, the
design must acknowledge the special impact
the project would have on the entire
community by addressing the design
solution in an exemplary manner.
(h) The signage and lighting fixtures
must be compatible with the architectural
design.
(i) The clustering of smaller, visually
compatible, commercial structures is desired
over singular large structures.
(j) In very limited situations, smaller
isolated retail buildings may contrast in
color (i.e., white) or style (English Tudor) or
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 20 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
theme (“Christmas House”) with the more
dominant rural character expectation.
However, in these limited situations, the
applicant must explain why these design
expressions are essential to their business
and demonstrate that the new development
will:
1. Include a landscaped backdrop or
become part of a rural setting.
2. Include well maintained landscaping.
3. Be visually separated from other
areas (i.e., not part of visually continuous
highway development pattern).
4. Be a very small structure and present
a “cottage-like” appearance.
(k) New building development must
avoid:
1. The look of franchise architecture.
2. Buildings which advertise by
appearance (i.e., storage buildings).
3. Buildings which demand visual
attention through the use of bold colors and
materials which are not found to be positive
in meeting rural character.
4. Buildings in commercial or industrial
areas with the appearance of large metal
buildings which lack design details or are
otherwise without the positive attributes of
rural character.
5. The appearance of the “big box”
visual character.
(9) Landscaping Design Standards.
The intent is to provide a landscape design
which preserves existing natural vegetation
and incorporates additional locally native
plants which compliment the plant
communities and ecosystem of the area.
The aesthetic intent is to improve the
appearance of all areas through
incorporating green space into the
development in ways that harmonize and
enhance the natural as well as the manmade
environment and respect the principles of
naturalistic landscaping. The design review
plan should indicate:
(a) A dominant visual character for the
landscape design which maintains or creates
a strong appearance of rural character. It
should avoid a design concept which creates
a suburban or urban visual character.
(b) The size, species, and location of
plant materials to be retained or placed on
the site.
(c) Areas to remain “in natural state”
shall be identified on the site plan. All other
areas shall be properly maintained as
designated on the plan.
(d) The percentage of the site which will
be maintained in green space and the green
space setback distance between the highway
property line and the building and/or parking
lot.
(e) As appropriate, planting concepts
which meet the needs of front yard
plantings, building entry plantings, building
corner plantings, larger parking lot interior
plantings, plantings related to signage and
buffer plantings at the property edge which
effectively screen within three (3) years
what the Committee deems incompatible
land uses.
(f) The planted size of shade trees
should be not less than one inch (1”)
diameter (measured six inches (6”) above
ground) and eight feet (8’) in height;
conifers (evergreen trees) should be at least
four feet (4’) in height. Shrubs should be of
good nursery stock and provide effective
landscape development within three (3)
years of planting.
(g) Plant material which provides
interest in structure, texture, color, and its
ultimate growth pattern. Trees and shrubs
which are exotic cultivars and provide
highly showy aesthetic patterns, such as red
or bronze summer foliage or variegated leaf
patterns, are to be avoided.
(h) Plants which are native to the area
and provide a rural appearance:
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 21 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
Botanical Name Common Name
Trees
Acer rubrum Red Maple
Acer saccharinum Silver Maple
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
Acer spicatum Mountain Maple
Amelanchier (several spp.) Shadblow
Betula alleghaniensis Yellow Birch
Betula papyrifera Paper Birch
Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam
Carya cordiformis Butternut Hickory
Carya ovata Shagbark Hickory
Crataegus sp. Hawthorn
Fagus grandifolia American Beech
Fraxinus americana White Ash
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green Ash
Juglans cinerea Butternut
Ostrya virginiana American Hophornbeam
Populus balsamifera Balsam Poplar
Populus grandidentata Bigtooth Aspen
Populus termuloides Quaking Aspen
Prunus Americana American Plum
Prunus pensylvanica Pin Cherry
Prunus serotina Black Cherry
Prunus virginiana Common Chokecherry
Quercus alba White Oak
Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
Quercus ellipsoidalis Northern Pin Oak
Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak
Quercus rubra Red Oak
Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac
Rhus typhina Staghorn Sumac
Tilia americana American Linden
Shrubs
Cornus alernifolia Pagoda Dogwood
Cornus racemosa Gray Dogwood
Cornus rugosa Round Leaved Dogwood
Hamamelis virginiana Common Witchhazel
Juniperus communis Common Juniper
Ribes americanum Wild Black Currant
Rosa Carolina Carolina Rose
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 22 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
Rubus occidentalis Blackcap Raspberry
Salix discolor Pussy Willow
Salix humilis Prairie Willow
Salix lucida Shining Willow
Sambucus canadensis Elderberry
Shepherdia canadensis Buffaloberry
Spiraea alba Meadow Sweet
Symphoricarpos albus White Snowberry
Vaccinium angustifolium Low Bush Blueberry
Vaccinium myrtilloides Canada Blueberry
Viburnum acerifolium Maple-Leaved Arrowwood
Viburnum lentago Nannyberry
Viburnum trilobum American Cranberry Bush Viburnum
Evergreens
Abies balsamea Balsam Fir
Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar
Pinus banksiana Jack Pine
Pinus resinosa Red Pine
Pinus strobus White Pine
Picea Glauca White Spruce
Tusga canadensis Canada Hemlock
Thuja occidentalis Eastern Arbor Vitae
Vine
Clematis virginiana Virgin’s Bower
Vitis riparia Riverbank Grape
Ground Cover
Chamaedaphne calyculata Leatherleaf Fern
Gaultheria procumbens Wintergreen
Other varieties may be approved upon
demonstration by a certified landscape
designer that the variety fits well with the
landscape design.
(10) Exterior Lighting Design
Standards. The intent of the exterior
lighting design standards are to provide the
necessary lighting which reflects rural
character by intensity, location, placement,
color, and overall design integration with the
total development, rather than lighting
which is typical of urban conditions.
(a) All exterior lighting should balance
onsite needs of safety, security, and aesthetic
affects, without adverse effect upon
neighborhood properties, especially
residential property.
(b) All exterior lighting shall be part of
the architectural and landscape design
concept in color, location, and type of
lighting.
(c) In general, the height of exterior
lighting fixtures shall not exceed the height
of the building to which it relates. Parking
lot lights shall not exceed twenty-five feet
(25’) tall and would typically be of the sharp
cut-off type. All service wall packs shall be
shielded or directed downward.
(d) The height, location, and direction
of lighting must be designed and located
such a manner as to be shielded from the
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 23 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
direct view of the highway user and shielded
above to reduce night sky illumination.
(e) Sign lighting concepts which
provide direct illumination from a shielded
light source, rather than interior sign lighting
are preferred.
(11) Signage Design Standards. The
intent is to encourage creative, distinct, and
effective signs which are appropriate for the
individual proprietors, yet meet the
community design standards for rural
character and promote a positive signage
image. The design standards are intended to
foster signage which respects the residential,
rural, and scenic open space character of the
Village. Sign design review is limited to the
aesthetic and appropriateness of sign
appearance and is separate from the
conditions included in the Village’s sign
ordinance. The following concepts and
standards will be used to review signs for
design approval:
(a) Identification of businesses from
moving cars must be balanced with the
visual impact of signs on the rural
landscape. Restraint in site design can aid in
identification. Since small, simple signs
identify business with less confusion,
limiting counterproductive sign competition
protects the quality of the landscape.
(b) Every sign shall be designed as an
integral architectural element of the building
and site to which it principally relates and
where appropriate to rural character, shall be
compatible with signs on adjoining premises
and not compete for attention.
1. Sign Type. The first (1st) step in site
design is selecting the most appropriate type
of sign. The three (3) most common types
of signs are wall signs, projecting signs, and
free standing signs. The choice of sign type
depends upon the surroundings and the
attention one desires to attract. For
example, free standing signs are best used in
situations where there is a large setback
from the road, where the attention of people
in fast-moving vehicles is being sought, or
where there are several uses in one (1)
building or complex. Projecting signs and
wall signs are best used where the attention
of people in slow-moving vehicles or
pedestrians is desired. Free standing style
signs are preferred and elevated free
standing signs are discouraged.
2. Sign Message. Whatever sign type is
used, simplicity is the key factor to good
design and readability. An effectively
designed sign utilizing bold, easilyrecognized
symbols and clear crisp lettering
will identify a business or activity efficiently
and attractively, enhance the area in which it
is located and compliment the general
appearance of the Village. Pictures and
symbols can add individuality and character
to signs in addition to making them easier to
read. The most common problems in
commercial areas are an overabundance of
signs that are often excessively large, all of
which contributes to “sign overload.” This
creates a visually chaotic situation in which
no one (1) sign gains the advantage, since
the competing signs tend to cancel each
other out in an unsuccessful bid to catch the
buyer’s eye.
3. Sign Color. Restraint should be
exercised when selecting colors. On most
signs, no more than three (3) colors should
be used; one (1) for background (preferably
dark), a contrasting color for the lettering
and a third (3rd) color perhaps for emphasis
(such as for borders, motifs, or shading
lettering to give it a three-dimensional look).
Exceptions occur when an illustration is
incorporated in the sign. In such cases, it is
important that complimentary colors be
used. In selecting the principle colors for a
sign, colors which compliment the general
tone of the building as needed.
4. Sign Materials. Signs made of wood
or other natural materials are preferred.
Bases of free standing signs shall be of like
materials to the building.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 24 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
5. Signage Landscaping. Free standing
signs will generally require low and medium
height plants to provide a positive design
appearance for the sign and site appearance.
6. Master Sign Plan. When more than
one (1) sign is proposed for a parcel, the
applicant must submit for approval all of the
proposed and existing signage. The intent is
to develop and follow a coordinated sign
plan with regard to:
a. Color scheme.
b. Lettering or graphic style.
c. Lighting.
d. Location on each building or the site.
e. Signage material.
f. Sign proportions.
(12) Relationship to Adjacent Sites
Design Standards. The intent of this
section is to achieve design appearance
compatibility among separate individually
owned parcels which visually appear as one
(1) continuous development. The applicant
has the burden of clearly demonstrating how
the proposed project has the aesthetic
qualities to meet the visually continuous
compatibility test. Design solutions might
include:
(a) Proposing a building which is
similar, or compatible, in design style,
materials, color, and landscaping with the
adjacent development which meets the
intent of positive rural character.
(b) Situations in which the architectural
expressions are different and yet acceptable
to the standards, strive for a strong
landscape transition between properties
using trees and shrubs or existing natural
vegetation which reduces the visual
dominance of the buildings.
(c) Situations in which the land uses are
incompatible or the adjacent development is
below the minimum standards for rural
character. In this case, the new development
should develop a landscape plan or utilize
existing vegetation to fully buffer the
adjacent property from view.
(d) Project features which are judged to
have negative visual impacts upon adjacent
properties, such as parking lots, service
entrances, loading zones, mechanical
equipment, and storage areas, shall be
buffered from view of adjacent properties.
(13) Application, Appeal, Completion,
and Performance Assurance. The
applicant must obtain a copy of this
document and review the “Design
Assessment Photos” for both positive and
negative examples of rural development
character. The photos are available for
review at the Village Hall or as directed.
(a) Application Process.
1. Applicants must submit a completed
application and eight (8) copies of the
required information listed in Section 6 to
the Zoning Administrator fourteen (14) days
before the regularly scheduled public
meeting of the Committee.
2. The Committee has forty-five (45)
days from the time a completed application
is received to act on the application. A
completed application must respond to all of
the appropriate requirements of this
ordinance. Failure to approve/deny the
application in the required time will result in
the automatic design approval of the project
as submitted. However, the Committee may
elect to defer official action which goes
beyond thirty (30) days, if more information
is needed and the applicant agrees to the
extension.
3. The applicant must be available to
present and explain how the project meets
the design conditions of rural character. The
Committee reviews the materials and
approves as presented, approves it with
conditions, or denies the applicant’s project
proposal.
(b) Appeal Process. The intent is to
reach design review agreement between the
applicant and the Committee. In the event
that the applicant finds the decision or action
inappropriate, an appeal may be taken to the
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 25 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
Board. Such an appeal shall be initiated by
a written request to be placed on the Board
agenda for consideration. The appeal must
include the action being questioned and the
specific grounds upon which the appeal is
made. Such request must be received by the
Board no later than thirty (30) days after the
date of denial. The Board shall conduct a
review and within thirty (30) days make a
finding which either affirms, affirms with
conditions, reverses or reverses with
conditions. The finding by the Board shall
be final, subject to judicial review.
(c) Completion Requirement. The
applicant must begin, and substantially
complete, an approved project within two
(2) years from the date of final approval. If
the project is not completed within the
required time, the design review approval
expires.
(d) Performance Assurance.
1. Landscaping or other site
improvement required pursuant to an
approved design review plan shall be
installed prior to the issuance of Certificate
of Occupancy or final inspection, unless the
property owner submits a performance
assurance device, equal to ten percent (10%)
of construction costs, committing the
installation of landscaping or other site
improvement within nine (9) months. In no
case shall the property owner delay
completion for more than nine (9) months
from occupancy.
2. Performance assurance devices shall
take the form of one (1) of the following:
a. Cash.
b. An irrevocable letter of credit, the
form of which is approved by the Village
Board, from a financial institution stating
that the money is held for the purpose of
development of the landscaping or other
specified site improvements.
3. If a performance assurance device is
employed, the property owner shall provide
the Village with a non-revocable notarized
agreement granting the Village and its
agents the right to enter the property and
perform any required work remaining
undone at the expiration of the assurance
device.
4. If the property owner fails to carry
out provisions of the agreement and the
Village has reimbursable costs or expenses
resulting from such failure, the Village shall
call on the performance device for
reimbursement. If the amount of the
performance device exceeds the cost and
expense incurred by the Village, the
property owner shall be liable to the Village
for the difference.
5. The Committee may elect to require a
performance device prior to issuance of a
building permit in situations in which
extensive landscaping is needed, locations
are deemed visually sensitive or where there
is a poor history of compliance.
(14) Submission Requirements. The
intent of this section is to provide the
Committee with sufficient information to
make an informed design review decision
and maintain a clear record of the decision.
(a) Required Documents.
1. A completed application form
supplied by the Village.
2. As appropriate, drawings and other
documentation which illustrates in scale and
relationship to project components, the
features of the design. This must be
documented in a manner which can be
clearly understood by the Committee. The
determination of necessary documentation
will be established by the Committee.
3. A site plan and specifications are
required which contain the following
information (this may require a separate site
plan, landscape plan and architectural plan):
a. Scale (i.e. one (1) inch=twenty feet
(20’) and north arrow.
b. Address of site/development
name/owner/designer.
c. All property lines.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 26 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
d. Proposed access to the site, onsite
parking stalls and adjacent roads. Also,
delineate traffic flow (with directional
arrows) and directional signage, if any, that
is considered essential.
e. Indicate areas with existing natural
vegetation and basic information about
species, size, and condition.
f. Indicate areas in which existing
vegetation will need to be removed.
g. Locations of existing buildings to
remain and proposed building for the site,
and all buildings on adjacent sites which are
within fifty feet (50’) of the development
site’s boundaries. Also, the external
dimensions and distances of all buildings
from the property line.
h. Accurate location of all proposed
landscaping which indicate the planned
species (both common and scientific names
are preferred); tree size (a measurement of
tree diameter six inches (6”) above ground)
and height of proposed conifer trees and
shrubs.
i. The location, height, size, and design
of all proposed signage.
j. Surface material proposed for the
parking, storage, and access drives.
k. Exterior lighting concept and
location.
l. Location and screening proposal for
all dumpsters, storage areas, and service
areas.
m. The location of all present and
proposed utility systems including;
1. Wastewater system.
2. Water supply.
3. Telephone, cable, or electrical
systems (indicate whether underground).
4. Storm drainage system (drain lines,
culverts, catch basins) and direction of
surface water flow for the developed
portions of the site.
n. Basic dimensions of buffers and
setbacks.
o. Approximate percentage of the parcel
in green space (both natural and landscaped)
and percentage in impervious space
(building, parking, surfaced storage, and
drive access).
p. Provisions for handicapped persons
under requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
q. Stormwater containment/detention.
4. Elevations. Complete exterior
elevations of all proposed buildings and
existing buildings if they are joined to new
development.
a. Exterior elevations of all sides of the
building to show architectural detail.
b. Appropriate scale drawings (usually
one-quarter inch (¼”) equals one foot (1’)).
c. All signs to be mounted on the
building.
d. Designation of the type of material
and color to be used on the exterior.
5. Material samples need to be
presented at the Committee meeting,
including color and material type for walls
and roof.
(b) Discretionary Information. In some
situations, less information may be required
than indicated in Section 16.14 (13) (a).
However, in situations where developments
are large or complex, or are in
environmentally sensitive areas, or are in
visually sensitive areas, it will require
additional submission material to provide
the Committee with a complete
understanding of the nature of the proposed
project. This may include, but is not limited
to:
1. Site photographs depicting the site
and its relationship to adjoining sites.
2. A landscape plan showing all existing
natural land features, trees, forest cover, and
water sources, plus all proposed changes to
these features including size and type of
plant material. Water sources will include
ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, floodplains,
and drainage retention/detention areas.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 27 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
3. Sites with steep slopes or unique
natural features may require mapped
contours at two foot (2’) intervals.
4. Location and species of trees and the
condition for forested areas undergoing new
development.
5. Architectural renderings of
preservations and elevations in full color.
(15) Relationship to Other
Ordinances. The intent of the Design
Review Standards Ordinance is to have full
support, cross-listing and integration among
the appropriate Village codes. This is
especially important among the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan and Zoning
Ordinance.
(a) Nothing included in this ordinance
shall supplant, alter, replace, or amend in
any way existing zoning requirements, sign
requirements, construction codes, or other
criteria as established by the Village for
purposes of zoning, signage, and building
permit application.
(b) In the event of any changes,
alterations, or deviation from the project’s
initial design review approval during the
state application process, or thereafter, such
changes must be resubmitted to the
Committee for design review
reconsideration and, as necessary, reapproval.
(16) Maintaining Approved Design
Conditions. The intent of the appropriate
design review elements of natural resources,
site design, building design, landscaping,
lighting, and signage is that they will be
maintained in a continued good appearance
to sustain an overall high quality rural
character. However, even the best initial
designs can be compromised by improper
and inadequate maintenance. Such
maintenance problems decrease property
values and provide negative impact on the
entire Village. Therefore, it is a necessary
function of design review to be concerned
about continuing maintenance. For some
design elements it will start with the
selection of appropriate materials which can
sustain the weather and low to moderate
levels of maintenance. For other design
elements, annual design maintenance will be
essential. For still others, such as landscape
plants, careful maintenance is essential and
with plant failure, it will be necessary to
replace dead trees and shrubs. The
accumulation of debris, trash, and rubbish
needs to be avoided.
Developments which receive design
approval are expected to continue to
maintain, or improve, the property
appearance as judged by the design review
criteria throughout the active life of the
development including: short-term,
seasonal, or long-term closure. It is within
the responsibilities of the Village’s design
review authority to ensure the maintenance
of approved design conditions.
(17) Enforcement. The Zoning
Administrator, under the authority of the
Board, shall be the enforcing official. The
penalty for violating any portion of this
ordinance will be as approved from time to
time by resolution of the Board.
(18) Definitions. Unless specifically
defined elsewhere in the Design Review
Standards Chapter, definitions are provided
to clarify the following commonly used
terms:
(a) Appearance. The outward aspects
of the development which are visible to the
public and adjacent properties.
(b) Architectural Compatibility. The
aesthetic design of a building or group of
buildings which includes the site design,
landscape development, and signage which
meets the conditions of the rural character
and compliments rather than dominates a
rural setting.
(c) Big Box Design. Buildings which
present a large monolithic appearance of
frontages and rooflines and otherwise lack
the various planes, projections, bays,
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 28 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
dormers, setbacks, and rooflines to provide
pedestrian scale design for onsite users and
appropriate rural character.
(d) Buffer Plantings. An area of land
identified on a site plan in which
landscaping is used to provide a transition
between use areas to effectively reduce the
environmental, aesthetic, and other impacts
of one (1) type of land use upon another.
(e) Citizen-Based. A process of
decision-making in which citizens and
committee members decide what is
appropriate in determining rural character
design standards.
(f) Committee. Suamico Design Review
Committee.
(g) Clustered Highway Commercial. A
development pattern in which uses,
buildings, and parking are grouped or
“clustered” rather than spread evenly along
highways.
(h) Commercial Development. For the
purposes of this ordinance, it includes the
full range of uses identified under all
business, commercial, and public zonings.
(i) Design Assessment Photos. These
are citizen photos which illustrate positive
and negative design for architecture,
signage, landscaping, and natural features
and are approved as representative examples
of development that either contributes
towards or detracts from rural character.
(j) Design Review Standards. A series
of design activities, listed under Section 7,
which describe the standards by which new
development will be judged for
appropriateness in meeting rural character.
(k) Design Review Standards
Committee. A committee established by the
Board to conduct assigned responsibilities in
land use planning which includes design
review.
(l) Design Review Vocabulary. A
combination of photos and text which
communicates citizen design expectations
for new development.
(m) Forestland. The existing native
plant community which includes trees,
shrubs, and ground cover.
(n) Franchise Architecture. Buildings
which follow the prototypical corporate
design standards and present an appearance.
(o) Franchise Sign. Signs which adhere
to prototypical corporate design standards
and are expected to be the same for urban
and rural settings.
(p) Industrial Development. The full
range of industrial land uses recognized in
the zoning ordinance.
(q) Green Space. The space reserved
for the planting of turf, ground covers,
perennials, annuals, shrubs, or trees.
(r) Landscaping. Any combination of
living plants (such as grass, ground cover,
shrubs, trees) and nonliving landscape
material (such as rocks, pebbles, sand,
mulch, fences, or pedestrian paving
materials).
(s) Mechanical Equipment. Equipment,
devices, and accessories, used for heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, and similar
purposes which can create an adverse visual
impact without appropriate screening or
design.
(t) Multifamily. For the purposes of this
ordinance, it includes apartments,
condominium, Village houses and other
forms of attached or higher density housing.
Single family and duplexes are not included
under design review.
(u) Native Plants. Any plant species
with a geographic distribution indigenous to
the Village. Plant species indigenous to
areas outside the Village and introduced by
humans are not native vegetation.
(v) Natural Landscape Design
(Naturalistic Landscaping). A planting
concept in which the choice of species and
placement provides an aesthetic appearance
of a native community or looks natural.
(w) Negative Design Features.
Conditions which reviewers tend to find
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 29 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
negative in appropriateness for rural
character (see Figure 5).
(x) Performance Assurance. A process
which will ensure the completion of
landscaping or the site improvements in
situations where the applicant fails to
complete the activity in a reasonable period.
(y) Performance Standards. Area
design standards for development which
encourages flexibility and innovation of
design in which more than one (1) solution
is possible; however, the development must
meet the range of positive photo examples,
performance strategies and relevant design
review standards.
(z) Performance Strategies. Natural and
cultural resource strategies which are
established to guide new development
towards a desired future condition for the
Village (see Section 7).
(a1) Positive Design Features.
Conditions which viewers tend to find
positive in appropriateness for rural
character (see Figures 3 and 4).
(b1) Prescriptive Standards. Design
standards which generally dictate a specific
type of design condition as a requirement of
approval in meeting appropriate rural
character development.
(c1) Rural Character. The feeling
associated with northern Wisconsin based
on a unique identity and other memorable
qualities in which the image of development
provides the observer with strong visual and
experiential images illustrated in the positive
design assessment photos and lacks
dominant urban and suburban visual
characteristics. Designs that tend to blend
with the landscape as opposed to standing
out.
(d1) Screening. A structure or planting
which conceals from public view the area
behind such structure or planting.
(e1) Site Plan. A plan prepared to scale,
showing accurately and with complete
dimensioning the boundaries of a site and
the location of all buildings, structures, uses,
and principle site design features proposed
for a specific parcel of land.
(f1) Strip Highway Commercial. A
linear “strip” of development which tends to
front on both sides of well-traveled roads
and extend inward for one (1) parcel.
Generally, designed with high vehicular
access, excessive signage, limited
landscaping, franchise, or uncoordinated
architecture and an area primarily developed
for auto uses.
(g1) Village. Refers to Village, County
of Brown, Wisconsin.
(h1) Board. Refers to the governing
body of the Village.
SUBCHAPTER IV – HISTORICAL
PRESERVATION
16.40 HISTORICAL PRESERVATION.
(1) Purpose and Intent. It is hereby
declared a matter of public policy that the
protection, enhancement, perpetuation and
use of improvements or sites of special
character or special architectural,
archaeological or historic interest or value is
a public necessity and is required in the
interest of the health, prosperity, safety and
welfare of the people. The purpose of this
section is as follows.
(a) Protect, Enhance, and Preserve
History. Effect and accomplish the
protection, enhancement, and preservation
of such improvements, sites and districts
which represent or reflect elements of the
Village’s cultural, social, economic, political
and architectural history.
(b) Safeguard Heritage. Safeguard the
Village’s historic, prehistoric and cultural
heritage, as embodied and reflected in such
historic structures, sites and districts.
(c) Foster Civic Pride. Stabilize and
improve property values, and enhance the
visual and aesthetic character of the Village.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 30 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
(d) Protect Attractions. Protect and
enhance the Village’s attractions to
residents, tourists and visitors, and serve as a
support and stimulus to business and
industry.
(e) Stabilize Property Values. Stabilize
and improve property values.
(f) Improve Character. Improve and
enhance the visual and aesthetic character of
the Village.
(g) Educate the Public. Educate the
public regarding the need and desirability of
a Village historic preservation program and
its enhancement of the quality of life.
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of
this section the following definitions shall
apply.
(a) Certificate of Appropriateness. The
certificate issued by the Commission
approving alteration, rehabilitation,
construction, reconstruction or demolition of
a historic structure, historic site or any
improvement in a historic district.
(b) Commission. The Historic
Preservation Commission created under this
section.
(c) Historic District. An area
designated by the Board on recommendation
of the Commission that contains two (2) or
more historic improvements or sites.
(d) Historic Site. Any parcel of land of
historic significance due to a substantial
value in tracing the history or prehistory of
man, or upon which a historic event has
occurred, and which has been designated as
a historic site under this section, or an
improvement parcel, or part thereof, on
which is situated a historic structure and any
abutting improvement parcel, or part
thereof, used as and constituting part of the
premises on which the historic structure is
situated.
(e) Historic Structure. Any
improvement which has a special character
or special historic interest or value as part of
the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the Village, state or nation
and which has been designated as a historic
structure pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
(f) Improvement. Any building,
structure, place, work of art or other object
constituting a physical betterment of real
property, or any part of such betterment,
including streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs,
lighting fixtures, signs and the like.
(g) Improvement Parcel. The unit of
property which includes a physical
betterment constituting an improvement and
the land embracing the site thereof, and is
treated as a single entity for the purpose of
levying real estate taxes, provided, however,
that the term “Improvement Parcel” shall
also include any unimproved area of land
which is treated as a single entity for such
tax purposes.
(h) Board. Village Board of Trustees of
the Village of Suamico.
(3) Historic Preservation Commission
Composition. A Historic Preservation
Commission is hereby created pursuant to
Code Section 2.07 (4) (e).
(4) Historic Structure, Historic Site,
and Historic District Designation
Criteria. The Commission may adopt
specific operating guidelines for historic
structure, historic site, and historic district
designation providing such are in
conformance with the provisions of this
ordinance. For purposes of this ordinance, a
historic structure, historic site, or historic
district designation may be placed on any
site, natural or improved, including any
building, improvement or structure located
thereon, or any area of particular historic,
architectural, archaeological or cultural
significance to the Village such as historic
structures, sites, or districts which meet the
following criteria.
(a) Exemplify History. Structures, sites,
or districts which exemplify or reflect the
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 31 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
broad cultural, political, economic or social
history of the nation, state or community.
(b) Identified with Historic Personages
or Events. Structures, sites, or districts
which are identified with historic personages
or with important events in national, state or
local history.
(c) Embody Distinguishing
Architectural Characteristics. Structures,
sites, or districts which embody the
distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural type or specimen inherently
valuable for a study of a period, style,
method of construction, or of indigenous
materials or craftsmanship.
(d) Representative of Notable Work.
Structures, sites, or districts are
representative of the notable work of a
master builder, designer or architect who
influenced his or her age.
(e) Yield Important Information.
Structures, sites, or districts which have
yielded, or may be likely to yield,
information important to prehistory or
history.
(5) Powers and Duties. Authority and
activities of the Commission shall be
advisory to the Board. The basic function of
the Commission shall be the development of
public support and the location and
identification of historic sites, historic
structures, and historic districts. The duties
of the Commission shall be as follows.
(a) Designation. Upon request of the
property owner, the Commission shall have
the power, subject to Section 16.40 (6),
below, to designate historic structures and
historic sites and to recommend designation
of historic districts within the Village limits.
Such designations shall be made based on
Section 16.40 (4) above. Historic districts
shall be approved by the Board. Once
designated, such historic structures, sites and
districts shall be subject to all the provisions
of this ordinance.
(b) Regulation of Construction,
Reconstruction, Alteration, and Demolition.
1. No owner or person in charge of a
historic structure, historic site or structure
within a historic district shall reconstruct,
alter or demolish all or any part of the
exterior of such property or construct any
improvement. Upon such designated
property or properties or cause or permit any
such work to be performed upon such
property to demolish such property unless a
Certificate of Appropriateness (C of A) has
been granted by the Historic Preservation
Commission. Also, unless such certificate
has been granted by the Commission, the
building inspector shall not issue a permit
for any such work.
2. Upon filing of any application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness with the
Commission, the Commission shall approve
the application unless:
a. In the case of a designated historic
structure or historic site, the proposed work
would detrimentally change, destroy or
adversely affect any exterior feature of the
improvement or site upon which said work
is to be done;
b. In the case of the construction of a
new improvement upon a historic site, or
within a historic district the exterior of such
improvement would adversely affect or not
harmonize with the external appearance
other neighboring improvements on such
site or within the district;
c. In the case of any property located in
a historic district, the proposed construction,
reconstruction exterior alteration or
demolition does not conform to the purpose
and intent of this section and to the
objectives and design criteria of the historic
preservation plan for said district;
d. The building or structure is of such
architectural or historical significance that
its demolition would be detrimental to the
public interest and contrary to the general
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 32 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
welfare of the people of the Village and
state;
e. The building or structure is of such
old and unusual or uncommon design,
texture, and/or material that it could not be
reproduced without great difficulty and/or
expense;
f. Except as provided herein, in the case
of a request for the demolition of a
deteriorated building or structure, any
economic hardship or difficulty claimed by
the owner is self-created or is the result of
any failure to maintain the property in good
repair. Upon the request for a demolition
permit for a structure determined to be unfit
for human habitation, occupancy, or use by
any unauthorized public official or agency,
the Commission may defer the granting of
approval for a period of up to six (6) months
from the time of such application, during
which time the Commission and the
property owner shall undertake serious and
continuing discussions for the purpose of
finding a method to save such property.
During such period, the property owner and
the Commission shall cooperate in
attempting to avoid demolition of the
property. At the end of this six (6) month
period, if no mutually agreeable method of
saving the subject property bearing a
reasonable prospect of eventual success is
under way, or if no formal application for
funds from and governmental unit or
nonprofit organization to preserve the
subject property is pending, the building
inspector may issue the permit to demolish
the subject property without the approval of
the Commission. If such mutually agreeable
method of for saving the subject property is
not successful or no such funds to preserve
the subject property have been obtained and
available for disbursement within a period of
two (2) months following the end of such six
(6) month period, the building inspector may
issue the permit to demolish the subject
property without the approval of the
Commission.
3. In addition, in determining whether to
issue a Certificate of Appropriateness, the
Commission shall consider and may give
decisive weight to any or all of the following
standards:
a. A property shall be used for its
historic purpose or be placed in a new use
that requires minimal change to the defining
characteristics of the building and its site
and environment.
b. The historic character of a property
shall be retained and preserved. The
removal of historic materials or alteration of
features and spaces that characterize a
property shall be avoided.
c. Each property shall be recognized as
a physical record of its time, place, and use.
Changes that create a false sense of
historical development, such as adding
conjectural features or architectural elements
from other buildings, shall not be
undertaken.
d. Most properties change over time.
Those changes that have acquired historic
significance in their own right shall be
retained and preserved.
e. Distinctive features, finishes, and
construction techniques or examples of
craftsmanship that characterize a property
shall be preserved.
f. Deteriorated historic features shall be
repaired rather than replaced. Where the
severity of deterioration requires
replacement of a distinctive feature, the new
feature shall match the old in design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities and, where
possible, materials. Replacement of missing
features shall be substantiated by
documentary, physical, or pictorial
evidence.
g. Chemical or physical treatments, such
as sandblasting, that cause damage to
historic materials shall not be used. The
surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate,
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 33 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible.
h. Significant archeological resources
affected by a project shall be protected and
preserved. If such resources must be
disturbed, mitigation measures shall be
undertaken.
i. New additions, exterior alterations, or
related new construction shall not destroy
historic materials that characterize the
property. The new work shall be
differentiated from the old and shall be
compatible with the massing, size, scale, and
architectural features to protect the historic
integrity of the property and its
environment.
j. New additions and adjacent or related
new construction shall be undertaken in such
a manner that if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic
property and its environment would be
unimpaired.
4. If the Commission determines that
the application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness and the proposed changes
are consistent with the character and features
of the property or district, it shall issue the
Certificate of Appropriateness. The
Commission shall make this decision within
forty-five (45) days of the filing of the
application. Failure of the Commission to
act upon a requestor a Certificate of
Appropriateness within forty-five (45) days
shall result in the issuance of such
certificate.
5. Agencies of the Village and all public
utility and transportation companies
undertaking projects affecting historic
structures, historic sites, or historic districts
shall be required to obtain a Certificate of
Appropriateness prior to initiating any
changes in the character of street paving,
sidewalks, utility installations, lighting,
walls, fences, structures, and buildings on
property, easements, or streets owned or
franchised by the Village.
6. The issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirement of obtaining
other permits and approvals required by the
Village, or any other governing agencies. A
building permit or other municipal permit
shall be invalid if it is obtained without the
presentation of the Certificate of
Appropriateness required for the proposed
work. Insofar as they are applicable to a
historic structure, historic site, or
improvement in a historic district designated
under this section, any provision of the
plumbing code, electrical code, or building
or housing of the Village shall apply unless
waived by the appropriate state or Village
officials. The Commission may support or
propose such waivers before the appropriate
state or Village appeals body.
7. Compliance with certificates of
appropriateness shall be started within
twelve (12) months after the issuance of the
certificate, and the work shall conform to the
provisions of the certificate. The Village
may inspect the work during and after
construction in order to assure compliance.
Failure to comply with a Certificate of
Appropriateness or failure to obtain a
Certificate of Appropriateness shall be a
violation of this section. In addition to other
penalties and remedies, the Village shall
issue a stop work order, and all work shall
cease on the designated property. No
additional work shall be undertaken as long
as such stop work order shall continue in
effect.
8. Ordinary maintenance and repairs
may be undertaken without a Certificate of
Appropriateness provided that the work
involves repairs to existing features of a
historic structure or site or the replacement
of elements of a structure with pieces
identical in appearance and provided that the
work does not change the exterior
appearance of the structure or site and does
not require the issuance of a building permit.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 34 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
(c) Appeals. Should the Commission
fail to issue a Certificate of Appropriateness
due to the failure of the proposal to conform
to the guidelines, the applicant may appeal
such decision to the Board within thirty (30)
days. The Board will hear and decide all
appeals within forty-five (45) days of
receiving the written notice of appeal. In
addition, if the Commission fails to issue a
Certificate of Appropriateness, the
Commission shall, with the cooperation of
the applicant, work with the applicant in an
attempt to obtain a Certificate of
Appropriateness within the guidelines of this
ordinance.
(d) Recognition of Historic Structures,
Sites, and Districts. At such time as a
historic structure, site or district has been
properly designated, the Commission, in
cooperation with the property owner, may
cause to be prepared and erected on such
property at Village expense, a suitable
plaque declaring that such property is a
historic structure, site or district. Such
plaque shall be so placed as to be easily
visible to passing pedestrians. The plaque
shall state the accepted name of the historic
property, the date of its construction, and
other information deemed proper by the
Commission.
(e) Other Duties. In addition to those
duties already specified in this section, the
Commission shall:
1. Work for the continuing education of
the citizens about the historical heritage of
the Village and the historic properties
designated under the provisions of this
chapter.
2. Cooperate with the State Historic
Preservation Officer and the State Historic
Preservation Review Board in attempting to
include such properties hereunder
designated as landmarks or landmark sites,
or historic districts in the National Register
of historic places and the State Register of
Historic Places.
3. As it deems advisable, receive and
solicit funds for the purpose of historic
preservation in the Village. Such funds shall
be placed in a special Village account for
such purpose.
4. Conduct studies and surveys of
neighborhoods, areas, places, structures, and
improvements within the Village for the
purpose of determining those of a distinctive
character or special historic, aesthetic,
architectural, or cultural interest or value,
and of compiling appropriate descriptions,
facts, and lists.
5. Cooperate with and enlist assistance
from the National Trust for Historic
Preservation, the State Historical Society,
and other agencies, groups, or individuals
active in the field of historic and cultural
preservation.
6. Work on a voluntary basis with the
owners of historic sites and structures
advising them on the benefits, problems, and
techniques of preservation and encouraging
their participation in preservation activities.
7. Recommend to the Village Board
names attributed to Suamico’s history that
may be used in the naming of new public
developments, and roads included as part of
new public developments.
(6) Procedures.
(a) Designation of Historic Structures
and Historic Sites.
1. The Commission may, after notice
and public hearing, designate historic
structures and historic sites, or rescind such
designation or recommendation, after
application of the criteria in Section 16.40
(4) above. At least seven (7) days prior to
such hearing, the Commission shall notify
the owners of record, as listed in the office
of the Assessor, who are owners of property
in whole or in part situated within five
hundred feet (500’) of the boundaries of the
property affected. These owners shall have
the right to confer with the Commission
prior to final action by the Commission on
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 35 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
the designation. Notice of such hearing
shall also be published as a Class 1 Notice
under the Wisconsin state statues. The
Commission shall also notify the following:
Department of Public Works, Fire
Department, Police Department, Building
Inspection Department, and Planning
Commission. Each department may respond
to the Commission with its comments on the
proposed designation or rescission.
2. The Commission shall then conduct
such public hearing and, in addition to the
notified persons, may hear expert witnesses
and shall have the power to subpoena such
witnesses and records as it deems necessary.
The Commission may conduct an
independent investigation into the proposed
designation or rescission. Within ten (10)
days after the close of the public hearing, the
Commission may designate the property as
either a historic structure, or a historic site,
or rescind the designation. After the
designation or rescission has been made,
notification shall be sent to the property
owner or owners. Notification shall also be
given to the Clerk, Building Inspection
Department, Planning Commission, and the
Village Assessor. The Commission shall
cause the designation or rescission to be
recorded, at Village expense, in the County
Register of Deeds office.
3. Appeal. Any designation or
recommendation of the Commission with
respect to historic structures and historic
sites may be appealed to the Board within
thirty (30) days of any final action of the
Commission. The Board shall hear and
decide all appeals no later than forty-five
(45) days from the date that the Board
receives written notice of appeal.
(b) Designation of Historic District.
1. For preservation purposes, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall
select geographically defined areas within
the Village to be designated as historic
districts and shall, with the assistance of the
Village Community Development
Department, prepare a historic preservation
plan in ordinance form for each area. A
historic district may be designated for any
geographic area of particular historic,
architectural or cultural significance to the
Village, which:
a. Exemplifies or reflects the broad
cultural, political, economic, or social
history of the nation, state, or community;
b. Is identified with historic personages
or with important events in national, state, or
local history;
c. Embodies the distinguishing
characteristics of architectural types of
specimens inherently valuable for the study
of a period or periods, styles, methods, or
construction, or of indigenous materials or
craftsmanship;
d. Is representative of the notable works
of master builders, designers, or architects
who influenced the age; or
e. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield,
information to history or prehistory.
2. Each historic preservation plan
prepared for or by the Historic Preservation
Commission shall include a cultural and
architectural analysis supporting the historic
significance of the area, the specific
guidelines for development, and a statement
of preservation objectives.
3. Guideline criteria to be considered in
the development of historic district plans are
as follows:
a. Regulation of construction,
reconstruction, alteration, and demolition
shall conform to the criteria and standards in
Subsection 16.40 (5) (b) 1-3.
b. All new structures shall be
constructed to a height visually compatible
with the building and environment with
which they are visually related.
c. The gross volume of any new
structure shall be visually compatible with
the buildings and environment with which it
is visually related.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 36 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
d. In the street elevation of a building,
the proportion between the width and height
in the facade should be visually compatible
with the building and environment with
which it is visually related.
e. The proportions and relationships
between doors and windows in the street
facade should be visually compatible with
the buildings and environment with which it
is visually related.
f. The rhythm of solids to voids, created
by openings in the facade, should be visually
compatible with the buildings and
environment with which they are visually
related.
g. The existing rhythm created by
existing building masses and spaces between
them should be preserved.
h. The materials used in the final facade
should be visually compatible with the
buildings and environment with which they
are visually related.
i. The texture inherent in the facade
should be visually compatible with the
buildings and environment with which it is
visually related.
j. Colors and patterns used on the facade
(especially trim) should be visually
compatible with the buildings and
environment with which they are visually
related.
k. The design of the roof should be
visually compatible with the buildings and
environment with which it is visually
related.
l. The landscape plan should be
sensitive to the individual building, its
occupants and their needs. Further, the
landscape treatment should be visually
compatible with the buildings and
environment with which it is visually
related.
m. The street facade should blend with
other buildings via directional expression.
When adjacent buildings have a dominant
horizontal or vertical expression, this
expression should be carried over and
reflected.
n. Architectural elements should be
incorporated as necessary to relate the new
with the old and to preserve and enhance the
inherent characteristics of the area.
4. Review and Adoption Procedure.
a. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall hold a public hearing
when considering the plan for a historic
district. Notice of the time, place and
purpose of the public hearing shall be given
by publication as a Class 1 Notice under the
Wisconsin statutes. Notice of the time,
place, and purpose of the public hearing
shall also be sent by the Clerk to the owners
of record, as listed in the office of the
Village Assessor, who are owners of the
property within the proposed historic district
or are situated in whole or in part within five
hundred feet (500’) of the boundaries of the
proposed historic district. Said notice is to
be sent at least seven (7) days prior to the
date of the public hearing. Following the
public hearing, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall vote to recommend, reject
or withhold action on the plan. This
recommendation shall be forwarded to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and then
the Board.
b. The Planning Commission shall
review the historic district plan and make a
recommendation to the Board. The
Planning Commission shall make its
recommendation on the historic district plan
within forty-five (45) days.
c. The Board upon receipt of the
recommendation from the Historic
Preservation Commission and Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing,
notice to be given as noted in Subparagraph
a. above and sha1l following the public
hearing either designate or reject the historic
district designation of the historic district
shall constitute adoption of the plan in
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 37 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
ordinance form prepared for that district and
direct implementation of said plan.
d. Appeal to Board of Appeals. All
determinations of the Board pursuant to the
designation of a historic district are subject
to appeal to the Board of Appeals pursuant
to Section 16.40 (3) of the Village of
Suamico Municipal Code.
(7) Interim Control. No building
permit shall be issued by the building
inspector for alteration, construction,
demolition, or removal of a nominated
historic structure, historic site, or any
property or structure within a nominated
historic district from the date of the meeting
of the Historic Preservation Commission at
which a nomination form is first presented
until the final disposition of nomination by
the Historic Preservation Commission or the
Board unless such alteration, removal or
demolition authorized by formal resolution
of the Board as necessary for public health,
welfare or safety. In no event shall delay be
for more than one hundred eighty (180)
days.
(8) Conformance with Regulations.
(a) Every person in charge of a historic
structure, historic site, or improvement in a
historic district shall maintain same or cause
or permit it to be maintained in a condition
consistent with the provisions of this
ordinance. The common council may
appoint the building inspector or any other
individual or group of individuals to enforce
this chapter. During the period of the
certificate, the duties of the inspection
officer may include periodic inspection at
intervals provided by the common council of
designated historic structures, historic sites,
and historic districts.
(b) Every person in charge of an
improvement on a historic site or in a
historic district shall keep in good repair all
of the exterior portions of such improvement
and all interior portions thereof which, if not
so maintained, may cause, or tend to cause,
the exterior portions of such improvement to
fall into a state of disrepair, including, but
not limited to:
1. The deterioration of exterior walls or
other vertical supports;
2. The deterioration of roofs or other
horizontal members;
3. The deterioration of external
chimneys;
4. The deterioration or crumbling of
exterior plasters or mortar;
5. The ineffective waterproofing of
exterior walls, roofs, and foundations,
including broken windows or doors;
6. The peeling of paint, rotting, holes,
and other forms of decay;
7. The deterioration of surrounding
environment; e.g., fences, gates, sidewalks,
steps, signs, accessory structures, and
landscaping;
8. The deterioration of any features so
as to create or permit the creation of any
hazardous or unsafe condition or conditions;
or
9. All interior portions thereof which
may cause the exterior to deteriorate or
become damaged or otherwise to fall into a
state of disrepair.
(c) The purpose of this section is to
prevent the demolition of a building or
structure by neglecting it and permitting
damage to it by weather or vandalism.
(d) The Building Inspector shall give
the Commission notice of properties which,
in his or her opinion, are unfit for human
habitation, occupancy, or use prior to
issuance of any raze orders under state
statutes or municipal ordinances.
(e) Insofar as they are applicable to a
historic structure, historic site, or
improvement in a historic district designated
under this section, any provision of the
Universal Dwelling Code and Suamico
Building Code and outdoor signs and
outdoor advertising structures regulations of
the general ordinances may be varied or
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 38 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
waived, on application, by the appropriate
board having such jurisdiction over such
chapter or, in the absence of such board, by
the Zoning Administrator, provided such
variance or waiver does not endanger public
health or safety.
(9) Emergency Conditions. In any
case where the building inspector
determines that there are emergency
conditions dangerous to life, health, or
property affecting a historic structure, site,
or a property in a historic district, the
Village may order the remedying of these
conditions without the approval of the
Commission. The Village shall promptly
notify the Commission of the action being
taken. When the emergency conditions do
not require demolition, the Village shall
make every effort to carry out the intent of
this chapter and to use the design guidelines
of the Commission when remedying the
emergency conditions.
16.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY,
AND ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this ordinance,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation. Failure or refusal to
pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
16-Building Code Page 39 of 39 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 16
Ordinance 2008-13 Amending Chapter 16 Building Code
Adopted 6-2-08
Ordinance 2008-19 Creating Section 16.40 Historical Preservation
Adopted 7-14-08
Ordinance 2009-14 Amending Section 16.12 Erosion Control
Adopted 7-6-09
Ordinance 2010-14 Amending Chapter 16 to Revise Section 16.27(4) Requirements
Adopted 6-7-10
Ordinance 2010-16 Amending Chapter 16 Subchapter IV Adding to 16.40(5)(e)
Adopted 7-19-10
Ordinance 2011-07 Amending Chapter 16, Building Code
Adopted 6-20-11
Ordinance 2013-04 Amending Chapter 16, Building Code
Adopted 4-1-13
Ordinance 2014-03 Amending Chapter 16.09 Private Swimming Pools
Adopted 1-6-13
Ordinance 2017-04 Amending Chapter 16, Building Code
Adopted 6-5-17
Village of Suamico
Chapter 17
17-Subdivision Code Page 1 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
17.01 Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 1
17.02 General Provisions ........................................................................................................... 2
17.03 Conservation by Design Subdivisions ............................................................................ 5
17.04 Procedures for Dividing Land ........................................................................................ 9
17.05 Technical Requirements for Plats and Certified Surveys .......................................... 12
17.06 Required Improvements ................................................................................................ 14
17.07 Design Standards ........................................................................................................... 16
17.08 Inspections and Permits ................................................................................................ 20
17.99 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement....................................................................... 20
17.01 INTRODUCTION.
(1) Authority. The Suamico Board,
pursuant to the authority granted by Wis.
Stats. §236.45, adopts the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Title. This chapter shall be known
as, referred to, or cited as the "Subdivision
and Alternative Development Ordinance,
Village, Wisconsin".
(3) Purpose and Intent. The purpose
of this chapter is to regulate and control the
residential division of land within the
Village for the following purposes:
(a) To promote public health, safety and
general welfare.
(b) To further the orderly layout and use
of land.
(c) To prevent the overcrowding of
land.
(d) To further the orderly flow of traffic
to and from the streets and highways.
(e) To facilitate adequate provision for
public infrastructure.
(f) To facilitate enforcement of
community development standards set forth
herein and on the official map of the
Village.
(g) To facilitate implementation of
community development standards set forth
in the community’s Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Abrogation and Greater
Restrictions. It is not intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing easements,
covenants, deed restrictions, agreements,
ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to
law. However, whenever this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions
of this chapter shall govern. This section
shall not preclude the Village from
maintaining any appropriate action to
prevent or remove a violation of this chapter
including injunctive relief.
(5) Interpretation. The provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any power granted by
the Wisconsin statutes.
(6) Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of
this chapter shall include all lands within the
Village subdivided as defined in Section
17.02(2) after the effective date of this
ordinance. However, in no instance shall
the provisions of this chapter apply to:
(a) Transfer of interests in land by will
or pursuant to court order.
(b) Leases for a term not to exceed ten
(10) years, mortgages or easements.
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 2 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
(c) Sale or exchange of parcels of land
between owners of adjoining property if
additional lots are not thereby created and
the resultant lots are not reduced below the
minimum sizes required by these regulations
or other applicable laws or ordinances.
(d) A division of land resulting in
parcels more than ten (10) acres.
(7) Compliance. All divisions of land
resulting in lots less than ten (10) acres shall
comply with this chapter.
(a) Applicable local ordinances.
(b) The provisions of Wis.
Stats. Ch. 236.
17.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) Rules. In this chapter, the rules and
definitions contained in this section shall be
observed and applied, except when the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
(a) Words used in the present tense shall
include the future and words used in the
singular number shall include the plural
number and the plural, the singular.
(b) The word "shall" is mandatory and
not discretionary.
(c) The words "may" and “should” are
permissive.
(d) The masculine gender includes the
feminine and neuter.
(e) Conservation by design subdivisions
are optional.
(2) Definitions. The following
definitions shall apply in interpreting this
section. Other definitions contained in the
Brown County Subdivision and Platting
Regulations, Ch. 21 of Brown County
Ordinances, effective December 13, 2001
unless contrary to the definitions herein shall
also be considered.
(a) Active Recreation Facilities–Formal
prescribed sites for leisure activities
requiring some constructed facilities and
organized activity.
(b) Adjusted Tract Acreage–The
resulting area of a parcel of land after the
primary conservation areas (typically
wetlands, floodways, and slopes exceeding
twenty-five percent (25%) are deducted.
(c) Alley–A public or private right-ofway,
which provides secondary access to
abutting properties.
(d) Arterial Street–A street used or
intended to be used primarily for fast or
heavy through traffic. Arterial streets shall
include freeways and expressways, as well
as standard arterial streets, highways and
parkways.
(e) Block–A group of lots existing
within well defined and fixed boundaries,
usually being an area surrounded by streets
or other physical barriers, and having an
assigned number, letter or other name
through which it may be identified.
(f) Building–Any structure built for the
support, shelter, or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels, or movable property of
any kind and which is permanently affixed
to the land.
(g) Building Setback Line–A line
parallel to the street line or waterline,
defined by the Village Zoning Ordinance,
defining the area between the property line
and the building setback line where
buildings may not be erected.
(h) Certified Survey Map–As defined in
Wis. Stats. §236.34 and may be referred to
as a CSM.
(i) Collector Street–A street intended to
provide both land access service and traffic
circulation. They also collect traffic from
minor streets and channel it onto the arterial
street system.
(j) Conservation Subdivision–A land
division or housing development that is
characterized by compact lots that are
surrounded by, or interspersed with,
preserved open space, where the natural
features of the land are preserved to the
greatest extent possible.
(k) County Plat–A map of a division of
land prepared in the same manner as
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 3 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
required in Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, except that
all reviews are completed at the local level,
in accordance with the terms of this section
and where:
1. The act of division creates five (5) or
more lots of which no more than four (4)
lots are one and one half (1½) acres or less
in area; or
2. Five (5) or more lots, of which no
more than four (4) lots one and one half
(1½) acres or less in area, are created by
successive division within a period of five
(5) years.
(l) Cul-De-Sac–A short minor street
having one (1) end open to traffic and the
other end terminated by a vehicular
turnaround.
(m) Development–The act of
constructing buildings and/or site
improvements.
(n) Improvement, Public–Any sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water
main, roadway, park, parkway, public
access, sidewalk, trail, pedestrian way,
planting strip, off-street parking area or
other facility for which the county or Village
may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation.
(o) Land Division–The dividing of land,
which results in a subdivision, re-plat or
certified survey map.
(p) Lot–A buildable parcel of land
represented and identified in a land division
as defined herein and in accordance with the
Village Zoning Ordinance.
(q) Lot, Corner–A lot abutting two (2)
or more streets at their intersection provided
that the corner of such intersection shall
have an angle of one hundred thirty-five
degrees (135°) or less, measured on the lot
side.
(r) Lot, Flag–A lot, which consists of a
long narrow access area leading to a larger
parcel of land. The access resembles a
flagpole and its width is less than the
minimum lot width for that specific zoning
district and the larger buildable area
resembles the flag.
(s) Lot, Through–A lot which has a pair
of opposite lot lines along two (2)
substantially parallel streets and which is not
a corner lot. On a "through lot" both street
lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
(t) Minor Street–A street used or
intended to be used primarily for access to
abutting properties.
(u) Outlot–A parcel of land not intended
for development and so designated on the
plat, re-plat or certified survey map.
(v) Parent Parcel–The existing parcels
of record, as identified by individual tax
parcel numbers. Effective on date of this
ordinance.
(w) Preliminary Plat–A map showing
the salient features of a proposed
subdivision submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for purposes of
preliminary consideration so described in
Section 17.05 (3) of this chapter.
(x) Primary Conservation Areas–
Environmentally sensitive areas of a site that
are restricted from development by reason of
a federal, state, county law or regulation, or
by the Suamico Zoning Ordinance.
(y) Public Way–Any public road, street,
highway, walkway, drainage way or part
thereof.
(z) Re-Plat–The process of changing of
the map or plat, which changes, the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or
part thereof. The legal dividing of a large
block, lot or outlot within a recorded
subdivision plat without changing exterior
boundaries of said block, lot or outlot is not
a re-plat.
(aa) State Plat–A map of a subdivision
as defined within Wis. Stats. §236.02(12)
and prepared in accordance with Wis. Stats.
Ch. 236.
(bb) Subdivider–Any person,
corporation, limited liability corporation,
partnership, limited liability partnership,
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 4 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
association, individual, firm, trust or agent
acting on the seller's behalf thereof dividing
or proposing to divide land resulting in a
land division.
(cc) Subdivision–The division of a lot,
parcel or tract of land by a subdivider where
the division creates more than four (4) new
parcels from the parent parcel.
(dd) Surety Bond–A bond guaranteeing
performance of a contract or obligation of a
developer. Possible forfeiture of bond can
occur if such contract or obligation is
unfulfilled by the subdivider.
(ee) Village–Reference to Village shall
mean the Village including the Board,
Administrator, Clerk or any other designated
Village committee.
(ff) Village Administrator–The
individual hired by the Board to act as the
Village’s Chief Administrative Officer.
(3) Dedication and Reservation of
Land.
(a) Whenever a tract to be subdivided
includes a proposed street, highway, or
parkway or a proposed site for a park,
playground, school or other public use or
facility as indicated on any officially
adopted map or area development plan, such
space shall be suitably incorporated by the
developer into his or her subdivision plat
after the proper determination of its
necessity by the Village Planning and
Zoning Commission and/or the appropriate
body or public agency involved in the
acquisition and/or use of each site.
(b) If potential public accesses are
included within a plat, the Village Planning
and Zoning Commission shall refer the plat
to the public body concerned with the
acquisition for its consideration and report.
The Village Planning and Zoning
Commission may propose alternate areas for
such acquisition and shall allow the public
body concerned thirty (30) days for reply.
The reply of the public body, if affirmative,
shall include a map showing the boundaries
and areas of the parcel to be acquired and an
estimate of the time required to complete the
acquisition.
1. Upon receipt of an affirmative report,
the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission shall notify the property owner
and shall designate on the preliminary and
final plat that area proposed to be acquired
by the public body.
2. On preliminary and final plats in
which land is designated for acquisition by a
governmental unit or subdivision thereof,
the land owner shall give written notice of
its intent to develop such property to the
governmental unit. Such notice to the
governmental unit of intent shall be
accomplished by a sketch plan of the
proposed development and a tentative
schedule of construction. The governmental
unit shall have up to one (1) year from the
date of notice to obtain an accepted offer to
purchase agreement from the property
owner, or to initiate eminent domain
acquisition. Otherwise, the designation of
the property as “to be acquired for public
purposes” shall be removed from the plat
and the official map and the owner shall
then be free to develop said property.
Nothing herein shall prevent property on a
plat as being designated as dedicated if
accepted by the Village.
3. Whenever a preliminary plat includes
a proposed dedication of land to public use
and the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission finds that such land is not
required or not suitable for public use, the
Village Planning and Zoning Commission or
the Board may refuse to approve such
dedication.
4. When a final plat of a subdivision has
been approved by the Board and other
required public bodies and the plat is
recorded, that approval shall constitute
acceptance for the purpose designated on the
plat of all lands shown on the plat as
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 5 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
dedicated to the public including street
rights-of-way and common open space.
(4) Land Suitability.
(a) No land shall be divided for a use,
which is determined to be unsuitable based
upon Village, county, state and/or federal
law. Staff for the Village shall make initial
determinations of land suitability and shall
require documentation relative to the
suitability of land for development from the
developer based on Village, county, state
and/or federal law.
(b) If determined to be unsuitable, the
staff shall, in writing, state the facts upon
which its conclusion is reached. Appeals of
land suitability determinations shall be
brought before the Board, which may affirm,
modify, or withdraw the determination of
unsuitability.
(c) All lots proposed for development
must have a minimum developable area as
defined by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and/or the Board.
(d) Geotechnical engineering reports
may be required at staff discretion for all
structures to be built on, or within twenty
feet (20’) of slopes twenty-five percent
(25%) or greater. Such reports will include
soil information and classification,
conclusions regarding slope stability with
structural surcharge, detailed slope
stabilization practices if applicable and
project erosion control practices.
Engineering reports are required to be
certified by a professional engineer licensed
in the State of Wisconsin.
(5) Erosion Prevention Requirements.
In addition to stormwater drainage
requirements contained elsewhere in this
chapter, when a proposed subdivision or
certified survey map is located in an area
having the potential to cause soil erosion
and sedimentation problems, the Village
may require that the subdivider prepare a
detailed erosion and sediment control plan.
(a) The plan shall detail all proposed
grading techniques, land division design,
landscaping, vegetative cover, berms,
sediment basins, and other storm drainage
and surface water runoff measures to reduce
erosion and sedimentation caused by surface
water runoff.
(b) Erosion and sediment control plans
shall be submitted to the Village Planning
and Zoning Commission who shall transmit
them, where appropriate, to the Brown
County Planning Department for review and
comment.
(c) Guidelines, standards and
specifications which should provide a
framework for the development, review and
implementation of erosion control, are
contained in the Wisconsin Construction
Site Best Management and Practice
Handbook.
(d) The Village may require that some
or all of the erosion and sediment control
measures, including those recommended by
Brown County, become a restrictive
covenant on the final plat or certified survey
map.
(e) In addition, a side and/or rear
building setback limit may be added when a
severe slope or unstable soil types exist on
the proposed land divisions.
17.03 CONSERVATION BY DESIGN
SUBDIVISIONS.
(1) Conservation by design subdivisions
are optional.
(2) Purpose. To conserve open space
by grouping of lots with reduced individual
lot sizes, provided that overall density
within the subdivision is maintained. The
remaining undeveloped area within the
subdivision provides open space and helps
preserve the scenic and natural qualities of
the land being divided, especially any
applicable environmentally sensitive area.
Grouping of residences will facilitate
common water and sewage disposal systems
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 6 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
and encourage the improved use of the land
respecting the preservation of natural
resources.
(3) Applicability. Any subdivision or
CSM where the total area of the land to be
developed is at least five (5) acres may
follow Conservation subdivision design.
Other land divisions with less than five (5)
acres may be considered for Conservation
subdivision design with special approval of
the Village.
(4) Site Analysis Plan. As a part of the
concept plan phase described under Section
17.04 a study of existing site features shall
be prepared and provided to the Village
prior to the onsite inspection. This site
analysis must include the following:
(a) A topographic map, based on a
U.S.G.S Quadrangle map or aerial
topography at not less than two foot (2’)
contours;
(b) Soil boundaries as shown on the
Brown County Soil Survey maps published
by the Soil Conservation Service;
(c) The location of significant features
such as woodlands, tree-lines, open fields or
meadows, scenic views into or out from the
property, watershed divides and drainage
ways, fences or stone walls, rock outcrops,
and existing structures, easements, roads,
tracks and trails; and
(d) The site analysis plan shall identify
both primary conservation areas (floodways,
wetlands, and steep slopes, as defined in the
process for computing "adjusted tract
acreage") and potential secondary
conservation areas. The site analysis plan
shall form the basis for the conceptual
preliminary plan, which shall show the
tentative location of houses, streets, lot lines,
and greenway lands.
(5) General Requirements. Proposed
conservation subdivisions shall be platted in
accordance with the requirements and
procedures of this chapter and the following
requirements:
(a) Density. The maximum permitted
number of lots in such developments shall
be determined by dividing the total adjusted
tract acreage by the minimum lot size(s)
required in the Suamico Zoning Ordinance.
As an alternate method, the total number of
lots within a conservation subdivision may
be based upon a yield plan showing how
many lots could be attained if the land were
platted using the standard lot size and lot
width. Such yield plan shall be subject to
Village approval and every lot shall be
viable for development to be counted.
Greater density may be permitted based
upon Section 17.03 (5) (b) described below.
(b) Water and Sewer. Water supply and
sewage disposal shall meet the minimum
standards of all state, county, or Village
regulations.
(c) Design. The design standards, as
contained within this chapter, may, at the
discretion of the Board, be relaxed as an
incentive in developing conservation
subdivisions. Standards that can be relaxed
in order to permit more creative land
division design include, but are not limited
to, lot shape and depth, length of cul-de-sac
roads, and road right-of-way width.
However, the lots shall be of sufficient size
to provide buildable room for reasonable
development based on the intended use.
(d) Trail Connections. If pedestrian
trails are included within any conservation
subdivision, such trails may, at the
developer’s discretion, be connected to any
regional pedestrian trails established by the
Village, Brown County, any adjacent
community, or the State of Wisconsin,
subject to approval by the owner of the trail.
(6) Open Space Requirements.
(a) Open space required for
conservation subdivisions shall be based
upon the contour, character, and aesthetics
of the land being developed and may include
both primary and secondary conservation
areas.
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 7 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
(b) Minimum Open Space. In order to
receive relaxation of the design standards, as
described in Subsection 17.03 (4) (c) above,
permanent open space shall be designated on
the plat and shall be at least twenty-five
percent (25%) of the gross site area of the
tract being divided. In addition, as an
incentive for establishing greater open
space, the number of lots within the
subdivision may be increased above the
number prescribed in Subsection 17.03 (4)
(a) as follows:
1. The total amount of open space shall
be at least thirty percent (30%) of the gross
site area.
2. All of the primary conservation areas
shall be included within the permanent open
space to the extent practical.
3. Of the area gained as a result of
reduced right-of-way widths or lots less than
the normal minimum area, at least twothirds
(2/3) shall be included as additional
open space. The remaining one-third (1/3)
may be used for additional platted lots above
the density prescribed in Subsection 17.03
(4) (a) above.
(c) The minimum required open space
may include storm water management
facilities, active recreation facilities, and
manmade ponds. However, not more than
fifty percent (50%) of the required open
space shall consist of active recreation
facilities and permanent ponds.
(d) The required open space may be
used, without restriction, for underground
drainage fields for individual or community
septic systems, subject to the requirements
of the Brown County Private Sewage
System Ordinance.
(e) The required open space shall be
designated as undivided open space and
shall be protected by a permanent
conservation easement, prohibiting further
development and setting other standards
safeguarding the site’s special resources.
Such conservation easement shall be in a
form acceptable to the Village and duly
recorded with the Brown County Register of
Deeds. A narrative describing the
ownership, use, and maintenance
responsibilities of the open space may be
required by the Village.
(f) Open space shall abut the largest
practical number of lots within the
conservation subdivision. The Village may
require safe and convenient pedestrian
access to the open space from all lots not
adjoining the open space.
(g) The design of open space should be
sufficient to allow for the intended use, such
as agriculture, natural resource protection,
recreation, stormwater management, etc.
(7) Evaluation Criteria. The Village
Planning and Zoning Commission and
Board shall evaluate proposed conservation
subdivisions to determine whether the
proposed conceptual preliminary plan
effectively meets the following criteria:
(a) The conservation subdivision design
should identify and, to the extent possible,
preserve all environmentally sensitive areas.
(b) The design should create sufficient
buffer areas to minimize conflicts between
residential and other uses.
(c) The development should be visually
buffered from existing public roads, such as
by placing lots at the far edges of fields or
by a planting screen consisting of a variety
of trees, shrubs, and wildflowers.
(d) The conservation subdivision design
should recognize and preserve where
possible existing hedgerows and tree lines
between fields or meadows, and should
minimize impacts on large woodlands
(greater than five (5) acres), especially those
containing many mature trees or a
significant wildlife habitat. When any
woodland is developed, great care shall be
taken to situate all disturbed areas (for
buildings, roads, yards, septic disposal
fields, etc.) in locations where there are no
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 8 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
large trees or obvious wildlife areas, to the
fullest extent practicable.
(e) The conservation subdivision design
should leave scenic views and vistas
unblocked or uninterrupted, particularly as
seen from public thoroughfares. In wooded
areas where the sense of enclosure is a
feature that should be maintained, a deep
"no-build, no-cut" buffer should be provided
to preserve existing vegetation.
(f) The conservation subdivision design
should respect and preserve sites of historic,
archaeological, or cultural significance, and
their environs, insofar as needed to
safeguard the character of the feature,
including stone walls, barn foundations,
cellar holes, earthworks, and burial grounds.
(g) The conservation subdivision should
protect rural roadside character and promote
public safety and roadway carrying capacity
by avoiding development fronting directly
on or taking access onto collector or arterial
roads.
(h) If the conservation subdivision
design includes a pedestrian circulation
system, it should be designed to assure
pedestrian safety, and consideration should
be given to providing a connection to
adjoining properties or pedestrian trail
systems.
(i) The conservation subdivision design
should provide open space that is in a
reasonably contiguous configuration.
Fragmentation of open space should be
minimized and not divided into numerous
small parcels located in various parts of the
development. To the greatest extent
practical, open space should be designed as
a single block with logical, smooth-flowing
boundaries. Long thin strips of conservation
land shall be avoided, unless the area
needing conservation is linear or unless such
configuration is necessary as a trail
connection or similar corridor.
(j) Wherever possible, the open space
should generally abut or connect with
existing or potential open space land on
adjacent parcels (such as in other
subdivisions, public parks, or properties
owned by or leased to private land
organizations). Such open space may be
designed as part of a larger contiguous and
integrated parkway or system of trails.
(8) Ownership of Open Space.
(a) Ownership Options. Different
ownership and management options may
apply to the permanently protected open
space created by the development. The open
space shall remain titled as undivided
interest in ownership and may be owned and
managed by any of the following options:
1. Private individual or entity such as
the original landowner.
2. Duly established homeowners
association or condominium association for
the development approved by the Village.
3. Recognized land trust or organization
approved and acceptable to the Village.
4. Village, Brown County, or other
public entity or agency, subject to
acceptance by the applicable unit of
government.
(b) Dedications and Easements. If open
space is proposed to be dedicated to the
public it shall first be offered to the Village,
and if the Village does not accept, then to
Brown County. The Village may, but shall
not be required to, accept a dedication of
open space. Such dedication shall take the
form of a fee simple ownership and there
shall be no cost of acquisition other than any
costs incidental to the transfer of ownership
such as title insurance. Land proposed for
dedication shall be accessible to the
residents of the Village.
1. The Village may, but shall not be
required to, accept easements for public use
of any portion or portions of undivided open
space land. The Village may require a
public land dedication, easement, or
combination thereof, through designated
open space to facilitate trail connections.
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 9 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
(c) Transfer of Ownership or Easement
to a Private Organization. An owner may
transfer open space lands or conservation
easements to a private, nonprofit
organization, among whose purposes it is to
conserve open space and/or natural
resources, provided that:
1. The organization is acceptable to the
Village and is a bona fide private
organization with perpetual existence;
2. The conveyance contains appropriate
provisions for proper reverter or retransfer in
the event that the organization becomes
unwilling or unable to continue carrying out
its functions; and
3. The developer and the organization
enter into a maintenance agreement
acceptable to the Village.
(d) Failure to adequately maintain the
undivided open space in reasonable order
and condition constitutes a violation of this
chapter. The Village is hereby authorized to
give notice, by personal service or by United
States mail, to the owner and/or easement
holder, of any violation, directing the owner
to remedy the same within thirty (30) days.
In the event of repeated violations, the
Board may determine it is necessary to take
on maintenance responsibilities for any
common open space established through this
chapter and pursuant to Wisconsin statutes
levy a special assessment on the property for
the costs associated with maintaining the
open space.
17.04 PROCEDURES FOR DIVIDING
LAND.
(1) Preliminary Consultation. Prior to
filing an application for the approval of a
land division, the subdivider shall consult
with representatives of Village Planning
staff, Brown County Planning and public
utilities, including sewer and water, to assist
the subdivider in planning the development.
The consultation shall take place prior to all
land division reviews and approval. A
written confirmation that such consultation
has occurred shall be provided to the Village
at the time the preliminary plat is submitted.
The procedure shall be:
(a) The subdivider shall prepare a
"concept" plan of the proposed land
division. The plan should show the basic
layout of the streets, lots, open space and
any other proposed developments.
(b) The subdivider shall then contact the
Administrator to make an appointment to
review the plan with Village staff and walk
the site. The subdivider should send a copy
of the concept plan to the Administrator as
soon as possible after a meeting date has
been established to give staff time to prepare
for the meeting. Village Planning and
Zoning Commission members will be
invited to walk the site with the developer
and the staff. During the onsite inspection,
the developer will provide a map showing
existing natural features of the site.
(c) Following the preliminary
consultation meeting, the Administrator or
his or her designee will prepare a written
report outlining any comments, concerns
and/or suggestions within ten (10) working
days of the meeting. This report will be sent
to the subdivider and surveyor with copies
to the Planning and Zoning Commission,
Board, and the Brown County Planning
Department and to any city or village with
extraterritorial plat review jurisdiction.
(2) Certified Survey Map Procedures.
A certified survey map (CSM) shall be
submitted to the Village for review and
approval only after the preliminary
consultation has taken place as described
herein. Copies of the proposed CSM shall
be submitted to the Administrator.
(a) Prior to action by the Board, the
CSM shall be referred to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall submit a recommendation
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 10 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
to the Board within forty (40) days of receipt
of the proposed CSM.
(b) Within sixty (60) days of filing the
proposed CSM with the Administrator
(unless such time limit is extended by
mutual consent of the Village and
applicant), the Board shall approve,
conditionally approve, or reject the CSM. If
conditionally approved or rejected, the
applicant shall be notified in writing of the
conditions of approval or reasons for
rejection.
(c) The review of the proposed CSM
shall consider the requirements of this
chapter, the Suamico Zoning Ordinance, the
Suamico Comprehensive Plan, any
comments on the concept plan received from
the County or adjacent incorporated
communities, and the county trunk and state
highway access control regulations.
(3) Recording of Certified Survey
Map. After the Board has approved the
certified survey map, the subdivider shall
record the certified survey map with the
County Register of Deeds in accordance
with Wis. Stats. §236.34(2).
(4) Preliminary Plat Procedures –
State and County Plat. Before submitting
a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall
prepare a preliminary plat in accordance
with Section 17.08 (3) of this chapter. The
subdivider shall file with the Administrator
copies of the transmittal forms proving that
the appropriate number of copies of the
preliminary plat have been submitted to the
appropriate state and local agencies, utilities
and municipalities, along with a letter of
application.
(a) Approving agencies shall be the
Board, Brown County Planning and Zoning
Commission and any adjoining city or
village with extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction.
(b) Objecting shall be the applicable
county and state agencies.
(5) Preliminary Plat Approval – State
and County Plat. The objecting agencies
shall, within twenty (20) days of the date of
receiving their copies of the preliminary
plat, notify the subdivider and all other
approving and objecting agencies of any
objections. If there are no objections, they
shall so certify on the face of a copy of a
plat and shall return that copy to the
Planning and Zoning Commission staff. If
an objecting agency fails to act within
twenty (20) days, it shall be deemed to have
no objections to the plat.
(a) The Planning and Zoning
Commission and Board shall review the plat
for conformance with this chapter and all
other ordinances, rules, regulations and
adopted regional, county and local
comprehensive plans or adopted plan
components which affect the plat.
(b) Prior to action by the Board, the
preliminary plat shall be referred to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for
review and recommendation. The Planning
and Zoning Commission shall submit a
recommendation to the Board within sixty
(60) days of the date of filing of the
preliminary plat with the Administrator.
(c) The Board shall, within ninety (90)
days of the date of filing of the preliminary
plat with the Administrator, approve
conditionally or reject such plat unless the
time is extended by agreement with the
subdivider. One (1) copy of the plat shall
thereupon be returned to the subdivider with
the date and action endorsed thereon and, if
approved conditionally or rejected, a letter
setting forth the conditions of approval or
the reason for the rejection shall accompany
the plat. One (1) copy of the plat and letter
shall be placed in the Planning and Zoning
Commission’s permanent file.
(d) Failure of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Board to act within ninety
(90) days of the filing date shall constitute
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 11 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
an approval as provided in Wis. Stats.
§236.11(1)(a).
(e) Approval or conditional approval of
a preliminary plat shall not constitute
automatic approval of the final plat, unless
the final plat is submitted within six (6)
months of the preliminary plat approval and
conforms substantially to the preliminary
plat layout as indicated in Wis. Stats.
§236.11(1)(b), the final plat shall be entitled
to approval with respect to such layout.
(6) Final Plat Procedures. The
subdivider shall prepare a final plat in
accordance with Section 17.05 (4) of this
chapter and shall file copies of the
transmittal forms indicating that the
appropriate number of copies of the final
plat have been submitted to the appropriate
reviewing agencies as outlined in Section
17.04 (4) of this chapter, whichever is
applicable, and a letter of application with
the Administrator.
(a) Partial Platting–The final plat may,
if permitted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, constitute only that portion of
the approved preliminary plat that the
subdivider proposes to record at that time.
(7) Final Plat Approval. The objecting
agencies shall, within twenty (20) days of
the date of receiving their copy of the final
plat, notify the subdivider and all other
approving and objecting agencies of any
objections. If there are no objections, they
shall so certify on the face of a copy of the
plat or by letter and shall return that copy to
the Planning and Zoning Commission. If an
objecting agency fails to act within the
twenty (20) days, it shall be deemed to have
no objection to the plat. (Under certain
circumstances in accordance with Wis.
Stats. Ch. 236, the Department of
Commerce may have thirty (30) days to
object.)
(a) The Planning and Zoning
Commission and Board shall examine the
final plat as to its conformance with the
approved preliminary plat, any conditions of
approval of the preliminary plat, this chapter
and all ordinances, rules, regulations,
Village and County comprehensive plans or
plan components which may affect the plat.
(b) Prior to action by the Board, the
final plat shall be referred to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall submit a recommendation
to the Board within forty (40) days of the
date of filing of the final plat with the
Administrator.
(c) The Board shall, within sixty (60)
days of the date of filing of the final plat
with the Administrator, approve, approve
conditionally or reject the plat, unless the
time is extended by agreement with the
subdivider. If the plat is rejected, the
reasons shall be stated in the minutes of the
meeting and a written statement of the
reasons forwarded to the subdivider. If the
plat is approved, the Board shall not inscribe
its approval on the face of the original final
plat until the Administrator certifies that
copies were forwarded as required by
Section 17.04 (4) of this chapter, the date
thereof and that no objections have been
filed within twenty (20) days or, if filed,
have been satisfied.
(d) Failure of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Board to act within sixty
(60) days, the time having not been extended
and no unsatisfied objections having been
filed, the plat shall be deemed approved as
provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.11(2).
(8) Recording. After the Board and
any other approving agencies have approved
the final plat, the subdivider shall record the
plat with the County Register of Deeds in
accordance with Wis. Stats. §236.25.
(9) Re-Plat. In accordance with Wis.
Stats. §236.36, a re-plat of all or any part of
a recorded subdivision, which does not alter
areas previously dedicated to the public,
may be made by complying with Sections
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 12 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
17.02 - 17.04 of this chapter. When a
proposed re-plat involves alteration or
vacation of areas previously dedicated to the
public, the subdivider shall vacate or alter
the recorded plat in accordance with Wis.
Stats. §236.40 and §236.44.
(10) Land Divisions within
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. In
accordance with Wis. Stats. Ch. 60, 62, 66,
91, 236 and this subdivision ordinance, any
land division within extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village shall be submitted
to the Administrator or his or her designee,
for review and approval. The review and
approval requirements of such land division
shall comply with all sections of this
subdivision ordinance, with the exception
that the approving agent shall be the
Administrator or his or her designee.
17.05 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
FOR PLATS AND CERTIFIED
SURVEYS.
(1) Certified Survey Map
Requirements. A certified survey map
(CSM) shall be required for all newly
created parcels of land where the act of
division will create up to and including four
(4) new lots, parcels or tracts from the
parent parcel. A CSM shall also be required
for all public dedications. No land included
in any street, highway or railroad right-ofway
shall be included in computing lot area.
(2) Specifications. A CSM shall
comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats.
§236.34 and shall include the following
information:
(a) Every CSM shall show prominently
near the top of the first (1st) page the
quarter-quarter section, government lot or
private claim; section, township and range;
name of Village and county or, if part of a
recorded subdivision or certified survey
map, the name of the recorded subdivision
or CSM volume and number, Village and
County.
(b) If required by the Village in which
the CSM is located, a certificate of approval
by the Village shall appear on the CSM.
(c) A north arrow, scale, legend and
symbols, bearing and distance of each line,
lot numbers and area in square feet and
acres, and existing and proposed easements.
(d) All tax parcel numbers shall be
shown on the CSM in their approximate
relationship.
(e) All existing structures.
(f) The location, right-of-way width and
name of all existing and proposed highways,
streets, alleys of other public ways.
(g) Location of section quarter,
sixteenth, government or private claim lines
that are within fifty feet (50’) of the exterior
boundary of the CSM.
(h) Location and names of any
subdivision, CSM, existing property lines
and owners of record of abutting unplatted
lands contained in or within fifty feet (50’)
of the exterior boundary of the CSM.
(i) Locations of any corporate limit lines
within fifty feet (50’) of the exterior
boundary of the CSM.
(j) All existing driveways and access
points. If the CSM abuts a controlled access
highway and no driveway exists, a statement
to that effect shall appear on the CSM.
(k) When a CSM or plat abuts a
controlled access state highway it shall
conform to the requirements of Wisconsin
DOT Trans. 233.
(l) All streams and other water bodies
located within the CSM boundary shall be
shown. A building setback line and distance
shall also be shown.
(m) All wetland areas within the CSM
shall be shown. All areas that have been
designated floodplain shall also be shown
and labeled. The source of the floodplain
determination shall be stated on the CSM.
(3) Preliminary Plat Requirements.
A preliminary plat shall be required for all
subdivisions and shall be based upon a
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 13 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
survey by a registered land surveyor and the
plat prepared on reproducible material at a
scale of not more than two hundred feet
(200’) to the inch and shall show correctly
on its face the following information:
(a) Title under which the proposed
subdivision is to be recorded.
(b) Legal description and general
location of proposed subdivision and
relative location to a nearby municipality.
(c) Date, scale and north arrow.
(d) Names and addresses of the owners,
subdivider and land surveyor preparing the
plat.
(e) Entire area contiguous to the
proposed plat owned or controlled by the
subdivider shall be included on the
preliminary plat even though only a portion
of the area is proposed for immediate
development. The Planning and Zoning
Commission may waive this requirement
where it is unnecessary to fulfill the
purposes and intent of this chapter and
undue hardship would result from strict
application thereof.
(f) Length and bearing of the exterior
boundaries of the proposed subdivision
referenced to a corner established in the U.S.
Public Land Survey and the total acreage
encompassed thereby.
(g) Contours at vertical intervals of not
more than two feet (2’).
(h) Water elevations of adjoining lakes
and streams at the date of the survey,
approximate high and low water elevation,
and FEMA's one hundred (100) year
floodplain elevation, all referred to the same
datum used for the contours.
(i) Location, right-of-way width and
name of all existing and proposed streets,
alleys or other public ways, easements,
railroad and utility right-of-way and all
section and quarter section lines within the
exterior boundaries of the plat or
immediately adjacent thereto.
(j) Locations and names of any
subdivisions, parks, schools, and cemeteries
and owners of record of abutting unplatted
lands.
(k) Location and invert elevation of any
existing sanitary or storm sewers, culverts
and drain pipes, the location of manholes,
catch basins, hydrants and any existing
water mains within the exterior boundaries
of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto.
(l) If no sewer or water mains are
located on or immediately adjacent to the
tract, the nearest such sewers or water which
might be extended to serve the tract shall be
indicated by their direction and distance
from the tract, size, and invert elevations.
(m) Locations of all existing property
boundary lines, structures, easements,
drives, streams and watercourses, marshes,
rock outcrops, wooded areas, railroad tracks
and other similar significant features within
the tract being subdivided or immediately
adjacent thereto.
(n) Dimensions of all lots, together with
proposed lot and block numbers.
(o) Location and dimensions of any
sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks,
playgrounds, drainage ways, or other public
use.
(p) Radii of all curves.
(q) Existing zoning and proposed use on
and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
(r) Corporate limit lines.
(s) Any proposed lake and stream
access with a small drawing clearly
indicating the location of the proposed
subdivision in relation to the access.
(t) Wetlands.
(u) Sewer service area boundary, when
applicable.
(4) Final Plat. General–A final plat
prepared by a registered land surveyor shall
be required for all subdivisions. It shall
comply with and show correctly on its face,
in addition to the information required by
Wis. Stats. §236.20, the following:
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 14 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) Exact street width along the line of
any obliquely intersecting street.
(b) Setbacks or building lines in
accordance with the Suamico and Brown
County Zoning Ordinances.
(c) All lands reserved for future public
acquisition or reserved for the common use
of property owners within the plat. If
common property is located within the plat,
then provisions for its use and maintenance
must also be provided with the plat.
(d) Special restrictions required by any
approving or objecting agency relating to
access control along public ways or to the
provisions of planting strips.
(e) The following certificates must be
on all final plats:
1. Surveyor's Certificate,
2. Owner's Certificate, including all
persons holding an interest in the fee of
record or by being in possession,
3. The mortgagee of record if land is
mortgaged,
4. Brown County Certificate,
5. Treasurer’s Certificates of the Village
and County
6. Village certificate to include
Administrator and Clerk, and
7. Certificate of any municipality
having extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(5) Deed Restrictions and/or
Restrictive Covenants. Any deed
restrictions and/or restrictive covenants
attached to the subdivision shall be filed
with and/or placed on the final plat. Placing
the Register of Deeds recording information
on the face of the plat is acceptable.
(6) Surveying and Monumenting. All
final plats shall meet all of the surveying and
monumenting requirements of Wis. Stats.
§236.15.
(7) Brown County Coordinate
System. All distances and bearings shall be
referenced to the Brown County Coordinate
System.
17.06 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
(1) General. The Village shall not
commence to install any street or other
improvements required by the Village until
the Board has approved the certified survey
map and plat or until the Board and Brown
County Planning and Zoning Commission
have approved the final plat. Before
recording the final plat with the County
Register of Deeds, the subdivider shall enter
into a contract with the Village agreeing to
pay for the full cost to install all required
improvements and shall file with such
contract an irrevocable letter of credit
meeting the approval of the Board and
reviewed by the Village Attorney as a
guarantee that such improvements will be
paid for by the subdivider within the time
limit established by the Board. Such
improvements shall include all or any of the
following:
(a) Grading and Surfacing. Grading
and surfacing of all streets and trails
proposed to be dedicated in accordance with
the construction standards of the Village.
(b) Stormwater Drainage Facilities:
1. Construction of stormwater drainage
facilities, which may include curb and
gutters, catch basins and inlets, culverts,
storm sewers, road ditches and open
channels as may be required, to provide
adequate surface drainage for the
subdivision.
2. Storm drainage facilities, where
needed, shall be designed to permit the
unimpeded flow of natural watercourses,
ensure the drainage of all points along the
line of streets and provide positive drainage
away from onsite sewage disposal facilities.
In designing storm drainage facilities,
special consideration shall be given to
protection against shoreland erosion and
siltation of surface waters and preventing
excess water runoff in adjacent property.
The Planning and Zoning Commission or
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 15 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
Board may require that easements or
drainage ways of width sufficient to
accommodate anticipated stormwater runoff
be provided. All stormwater facilities shall
be constructed in accordance with plans and
standard specifications as listed in
Chapter 10 of the Village Code. All
drainage ways and associated structures,
other than infiltration basins, shall lie within
maintenance easements or within lots, or
outlots to be dedicated to the Village. Such
easements, lots, or outlots shall be shown on
the final plat or certified survey map.
a. Infiltration basins shall lie within a
separate lot or outlot to be dedicated to the
Village.
b. Access to easements, lots, or outlots
dedicated for drainage ways and associated
structures shall be provided by way of
access easements sufficient to allow for
conveyance of equipment to conduct
maintenance of drainage ways and
associated structures.
(c) Street Signs. Installation of street
signs and traffic control signs meeting the
approval of the Board at all intersections
shall be installed by the Village at the
subdivider’s expense.
(d) Street Lighting. Decorative or nonstandard
street lighting may only be installed
if approved by the Board and the subdivider
enters into an agreement with the Village to
pay the costs of maintenance and power in
perpetuity.
(2) Surface Water Drainage
Restrictions. No drainage way contained
within a drainage easement shall be
disturbed, except as provided in Sub. (c), in
accordance with the following:
(a) No artificial obstruction may be
constructed, planted or maintained within
any manmade or natural drainage way so
that such obstruction impedes the natural
flow of water and/or diminishes the natural
aesthetic quality of the drainage way.
(b) Lot boundaries shall be made to
coincide with new and/or pre-existing
manmade and natural drainage ways to
avoid the creation of lots that can be built
upon by altering such drainage ways.
(c) Surface water shall not be regarded
as unduly retained or diverted if:
1. The retention or diversion results
from a technique, practice or device
deliberately installed as part of an approved
sedimentation or stormwater runoff control
plan.
2. The retention or diversion is not
substantially different in location or degree
than that experienced by the development
site in its pre-development stage, unless
such retention presents a danger to health or
safety.
3. The retention or diversion results
from the actions of natural obstructions,
whereby maintenance shall be performed by
the Village.
4. The retention or diversion has been
allowed or required by the County Planning
Department and noted on the approved
drainage plan.
(3) Stormwater Detention. The intent
of this section is to protect property and
structures from damage caused by increased
surface water runoff due to commercial,
industrial, and residential development.
(a) Standards. Stormwater treatment
facilities shall be designed and constructed
to meet standards listed in Chapter 10.16
and 10.17 of the Village Code.
(b) Plan. A stormwater plan shall be
submitted as a condition of final plat and
CSM approval. The plan shall be designed,
stamped, and signed by a registered
professional engineer. The plan shall
include, but not be limited to, the
requirements as outlined in Chapter 10.19 of
the Village Code.
(4) Public Sanitary Sewerage and
Private Disposal Systems.
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 16 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) In areas that have a sanitary sewer
system on or near the proposed land
division, the subdivider shall make
reasonable efforts to connect the proposed
development with the sanitary sewer system.
(b) In areas where a sanitary sewer
system is not available, onsite sewage
disposal systems utilizing soil absorption
fields will be permitted only when soil tests
conducted in accordance with Chapters
COMM 85 and/or 83, Wis. Adm. Code,
indicate the systems will function
adequately. Such systems must be in
compliance with all Village, county and
state regulations.
(5) Dedication and Reservation of
Parkland.
(a) Whenever a tract of land to be
subdivided embraces all or any part of a
street or other public way which has been
designated in adopted regional, county or
Village comprehensive plans or adopted
plan components, such public way shall be a
part of the plat and either dedicated or
reserved by the subdivider in the locations
and dimensions indicated on such plan as
agreed to by the Village and subdivider at
platting.
(b) Whenever a proposed park,
playground, public access, open space site or
other public land other than streets which
has been designated in adopted regional,
county or Village comprehensive plans or
adopted plan components is embraced, all or
in part, in a tract of land to be subdivided,
such proposed public lands shall be made a
part of the plat and shall either be dedicated
to the public or be reserved for acquisition at
fair market value land costs for a period not
to exceed one (1) year from the date of
recordation, unless extended by mutual
agreement between the subdivider and the
public agency having jurisdiction. If the
reserved land is not acquired by such public
agency within the above time limit, the land
shall be released to the owner.
(c) In order that adequate land be
dedicated, reserved, and preserved for the
development of public parks, recreation, and
open space and to provide for the proper
location such sites as the Village develops,
the following provisions shall be
established:
1. The number, size, and location of all
dedications shall be subject to approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, who
shall ascertain that the proposed sites are
suitable for the proposed uses. Such
Commission shall retain the right to refuse
any dedication of land found to be
unsuitable.
2. Where the dedication is incompatible
or for other reasons is infeasible as
determined by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the subdivider shall, in lieu
thereof, pay to the Village according to the
zoning classification intended for each
dwelling unit in the land division as
specified in the schedule of fees as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board.
3. After the final plat has been recorded,
no lot or parcel shall be further divided by
re-plat, certified survey map or conveyance,
as defined in Wis. Stats. §706.01(3), unless
such further division shall have been
approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and payment of the appropriate
per lot fee shall have been made for each
additional lot or parcel created by such
division.
4. The development of park and
recreation facilities shall be located in the
vicinity of the area from which such funds
originated. Park and recreation facilities,
which are created as a result of this section,
shall be owned, operated, and maintained by
the Village.
17.07 DESIGN STANDARDS.
(1) Street Arrangements. The
subdivider shall dedicate land for and
improve streets as provided herein. Streets
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 17 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
shall conform to any applicable official map
ordinance in effect. In areas for which an
official map has not been completed, the
street layout shall recognize the functional
classification of various street types and
shall be developed and located in proper
relation to existing and proposed streets,
utilities, land uses and public convenience
and safety. The land division shall be
designed so as to provide each lot with
satisfactory access to a public street as
provided herein. The following conditions
shall apply for street arrangement in all
proposed land divisions:
(a) Arterial Street. Arterial streets shall
be arranged so as to provide ready access to
centers of employment, high-density
residential areas, centers of government
activity, community shopping area,
community recreation and points beyond the
boundaries of the community. They shall
also be properly integrated with and related
to the existing and proposed system of major
streets and highways and shall be, insofar as
is practicable, continuous and in alignment
with existing or planned streets with which
they are to connect.
(b) Collector Streets. Collector streets
shall be arranged so as to provide collection
of traffic from residential areas and
conveyance of this traffic to the major street
and highway system and shall be properly
related to special traffic generators, such as
schools, churches and shopping centers and
other concentrations of population and to the
major streets into which they feed.
(c) Minor Streets. Minor streets shall be
arranged to conform to the topography,
discourage use by through traffic, permit the
design of efficient storm and sanitary
sewerage systems and require the minimum
street area necessary to provide safe and
convenient access to abutting property.
(d) Proposed Street. Proposed streets
shall extend to the boundary lines of the
tract being divided, unless prevented by
topography or other physical conditions or
unless, in the opinion of the Board, such
extension is not necessary or desirable for
the coordination of the layout of the land
division or for the advantageous
development of adjacent land tracts. Such
streets shall terminate with a temporary turnaround
of sixty-five feet (65’) right-of-way
radius and a roadway pavement of not less
than forty-five feet (45’) in radius.
(e) Arterial Street and Highway
Protection. Whenever the proposed land
division contains or is adjacent to a major
street or highway, adequate protection of
residential properties, limitation of access
and separation of through and local traffic
shall be provided by reversed frontage, with
screen planting contained in a non-access
reservation along the rear property line or by
the use of frontage streets.
(f) Reserve Strips. Reserve strips
controlling access to streets or alleys shall
be prohibited, except where their control is
under the jurisdiction of Brown County
Highway Department.
(g) Alleys. Alleys may be required in
commercial and industrial districts to
provide for off-street loading and service
access, but shall not be approved in
residential districts unless required by
unusual topography or other exceptional
conditions.
(h) Street Names. Street names shall
not duplicate or be similar to existing street
names; existing street names shall be
projected or continued wherever possible.
Brown County Planning Department shall
determine the acceptability of proposed
street names.
(2) Limited Access Highway and
Railroad Right-of-Way Treatment.
Whenever the proposed land division
contains or is adjacent to a limited access
highway or railroad right-of-way, the design
shall provide the following treatment:
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 18 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) When residential lots within the
proposed land division back upon the rightof-
way of an existing or proposed limited
access highway or railroad, the following
restriction shall be placed on the face of the
plat or certified survey map: "Direct
vehicular access to (name of road) from lots
abutting such road is prohibited".
(b) Commercial and industrial districts
should provide on each side of the limited
access highway or railroad a street
approximately parallel to and at suitable
distance from such highway or railroad for
the appropriate use of the land between such
streets and highway or railroad, but not less
than one hundred fifty feet (150’).
(c) Streets parallel to a limited access
highway or railroad right-of-way, when
intersecting a major street and highway or
collector street which crosses such railroad
or highway, shall be located at a minimum
distance of two hundred fifty feet (250’)
from such highway or railroad right-of-way.
Such distance, where desirable and
practicable, shall be determined with due
consideration of the minimum distance
required for the future separation of grades
by means of appropriate approach gradients.
(3) Street Design Standards.
(a) Minimum Right-of-Way. The
minimum right-of-way of all proposed
streets shall be as specified on any
applicable street plan officially adopted by
the Village or, if no width is specified, the
minimum right-of-way width shall be as
follows:
Type of Street Minimum Right-of-Way
Arterial Streets 100 feet
Collector Streets 80 feet
Minor Streets 70 feet
Frontage Streets 50 feet in addition
to the street it adjoins.
(b) Minimum Roadway and Surface
Widths. Minimum roadway width and
surface width of all new roads shall comply
with the Village road standards contained in
Wis. Stats. §86.26, unless adopted Village
road standards require a greater width.
(c) Cul-de-sacs designed to have one (1)
end permanently closed shall not normally
exceed one thousand feet (1,000’) in length.
Such streets shall terminate in a circular
turn-around having a minimum right-of-way
radius of sixty-five feet (65’) and a
minimum roadway radius of forty-five feet
(45’).
(d) Street Grades:
1. Unless necessitated by exceptional
topography subject to the approval of the
Board, the minimum centerline grade of any
street or public way shall not exceed the
following:
a. Arterial Street–six percent (6%)
b. Collector Street–eight percent (8%)
c. Minor Street and Frontage Street–ten
percent (10%)
d. Pedestrian Ways–two percent (2%),
unless steps of acceptable design are
provided.
e. Maximum Grade–The grade of any
street shall in no case exceed twelve percent
(12%) or be less than five tenths percent
(0.5%).
2. Street grades shall be established,
whenever practicable, so as to avoid
excessive grading, the promiscuous removal
of ground cover and tree growth and general
leveling of the topography.
(e) Radii of Curvature–When a
continuous street centerline deflects at any
one (1) point by more than ten degrees
(10°), a circular curve shall be introduced
having a radius of curvature on such
centerline of not less than the following:
1. Arterial Streets and Highways–three
hundred feet (300’).
2. Frontage and Collector Streets–two
hundred feet (200’).
3. Minor Streets–one hundred feet
(100’).
(f) Tangents. A tangent at least one
hundred feet (100’) in length shall be
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 19 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
provided between reverse curves on arterial
and collector streets.
(g) Half-Streets. Half-streets shall be
prohibited, except where the other half has
already been dedicated or its alignment is
shown on an officially adopted street plan.
(4) Street Intersections. Streets shall
intersect each other as nearly as possible at
right angles and not more than two (2)
streets shall intersect at one (1) point, unless
approved by the Board.
(a) Number of intersections along major
streets and highways shall be held to a
minimum.
(b) Street jogs with centerline offsets of
less than one hundred twenty-five feet
(125’) shall not be approved.
(5) Blocks. The widths, lengths, and
shapes of blocks shall be suited to the
planned use of the land, zoning
requirements, need for convenient access,
control and safety of street traffic and the
limitations and opportunities of topography.
(a) Length. Blocks in residential areas
should not, as a general rule, be less than
seven hundred fifty feet (750’) nor more
than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500’)
in length, unless otherwise dictated.
(b) Pedestrian Ways. Pedestrian ways
of not less than ten feet (10’) in width may
be required near the center and entirely
across any block over nine hundred feet
(900’) in length where deemed essential by
the Board to provide adequate pedestrian
circulation or access to schools, shopping
centers, churches, or transportation facilities.
(c) Width. Blocks shall have sufficient
width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of
appropriate depth, except where otherwise
required to separate residential development
from through traffic or where lots abut a
lake or stream. Width of lots or parcels
reserved or laid out for commercial or
industrial use shall be adequate to provide
for off-street service and parking required by
the use contemplated and the area zoning
provisions for such use.
(d) Utility Easements. All utility lines
for electric power, cable television, and
telephone service shall be placed
underground, except where lots abut a lake
or stream or where such a location is
deemed unfeasible for reasons of
groundwater or soils by the utility
companies involved.
(6) Lots. The size, shape, and
orientation of lots shall be appropriate for
the location of the subdivision and for the
type of development and use contemplated.
The lots should be designed to provide an
architectural setting for the building
contemplated.
(a) Lot Lines. Side lot lines should be at
right angles to straight street lines or radial
to curved street lines on which the lots face.
Lot lines shall follow municipal boundary
lines rather than cross them.
(b) Double and Reversed Frontage Lots.
Double frontage and reversed frontage lots
shall be prohibited, except where necessary
to provide separation of residential
development from through traffic or to
overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation.
(c) Access. Every lot shall front or abut
a public street and have direct vehicular
access to that public street for a distance set
by the minimum requirements of the
Village’s Zoning Code of Ordinances.
Direct access does not include the use of
easements.
(d) Lot Area and Dimensions. Area and
dimensions of lots shall conform to the
Village Zoning Ordinance and in areas not
served by public sewer shall, in addition,
conform to the requirements of the State
Division of Health. Whenever a tract is
divided into parcels with area in excess of
the zoning requirements, such parcels should
be arranged and dimensioned so as to allow
re-dividing of any such parcels into normal
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 20 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
lots in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Lots within the shoreland
jurisdiction shall conform to the area and
dimension requirements of the Village
Zoning, Shoreland and Floodplain Zoning
Ordinances.
(e) Depth. Lots shall be designed with a
suitable proportion between width and
depth. Neither long, narrow nor wide,
shallow lots are normally desirable. The use
of "Flag Lots" shall be prohibited, except to
overcome specific topographic or
environmental restrictions.
(f) Width of Lots. Width of lots shall
conform to the requirements of the Village
Zoning Ordinance.
(g) Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be
designed with extra width to permit
adequate building setback from both streets.
(7) Building Setback Lines. Building
setback lines shall conform to the
requirements established in the Village
Zoning, Shoreland and Floodplain Zoning
Ordinances. Setbacks stated on a recorded
plat take precedence over any Suamico
Zoning Ordinance change put in place after
the recorded date of the plat, except if there
is a change of use in the property.
(8) Easements. Where a land division
is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way
or stream, an adequate drainage way or
easement may be required to handle
stormwater runoff. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall approve the
location, width, alignment and improvement
of the drainage way or easement.
17.08 INSPECTIONS AND PERMITS.
(1) Commencement. No construction
or installation of improvements shall
commence in a proposed land division until
the final plat or certified survey map has
been approved by the Village and Brown
County.
(2) Building Permits. No land use
permit or building permit shall be issued for
erection of a structure on any lot not of
record until all the requirements of this
chapter have been met.
(3) Fees. The subdivider shall pay the
Village all required fees at the specified
time. The schedule of fees shall be as
adopted from time to time by resolution of
the Board and is hereby adopted by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
(4) Inspection. The subdivider, prior to
commencement of any work within the land
division, shall make arrangements with the
Board to provide for adequate inspection.
The Board shall inspect and approve all
completed work prior to release of the
sureties.
17.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY,
AND ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this ordinance,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation. Failure or refusal to
pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
Village of Suamico
17-Subdivision Code Page 21 of 21 Adopted 1-21-08
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
Chapter 18
DATCP Submittal Date: January 22, 2015
18-Zoning Code Page 1 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
ZONING CODE
18.01 Title and Authority .......................................................................................................... 1
18.02 Intent, Purpose, and Severability ................................................................................... 1
18.03 Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 2
18.04 General Provisions ......................................................................................................... 10
18.05 Establishment of Zones ................................................................................................. 17
18.06 AG – Agriculture............................................................................................................ 18
18.07 AG – FP Agricultural – Farmland Preservation ........................................................ 18
18.08 RR – Rural Residential (No Sewer) .............................................................................. 24
18.09 RS – Residential Sewered .............................................................................................. 26
18.10 Public Lands and Institutions ....................................................................................... 27
18.11 B – Business .................................................................................................................... 28
18.12 HB – Highway Business District ................................................................................... 31
18.13 Neighborhood Business District.................................................................................... 34
18.14 I1 – Industrial 1 .............................................................................................................. 36
18.15 I2 – Industrial 2 .............................................................................................................. 37
18.16 Manufactured Housing Parks ....................................................................................... 40
18.17 Sign Regulations ............................................................................................................. 45
18.18 Off-Street Parking Requirements ................................................................................ 52
18.19 Telecommunication Towers .......................................................................................... 55
18.20 Lakes and Ponds ............................................................................................................ 57
18.21 Earth Excavations and Fill ............................................................................................ 59
18.22 PDD – Planned Development District .......................................................................... 62
18.23 TCOD – Town Center Overlay District ....................................................................... 70
18.97 Nonconformity................................................................................................................ 74
18.98 Administration and Enforcement ................................................................................. 75
18.99 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement....................................................................... 79
18.01 TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
(1) Title. This ordinance shall be
known, cited and referred to as the Village
Zoning Ordinance, Brown County,
Wisconsin.
(2) Authority. The Village, pursuant to
Wis. Stats. §60.74 and §60.75 (1953 as
amended), Wis. Stats. §60.61 through
§60.66 (1987-88 as amended) and Section
12 of the Village Zoning Ordinance enacted
June 8, 1953, hereby amends that ordinance
to read as follows.
18.02 INTENT, PURPOSE, AND
SEVERABILITY.
(1) Intent. This ordinance is intended
to promote the orderly development of the
community in accordance with the Official
Village Comprehensive Plan or any of the
component parts thereof.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 2 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(2) Purpose. The Zoning Ordinance of
the Village, Brown County, Wisconsin, is
adopted for the following purposes:
(a) to lessen congestion in the streets;
(b) to secure safety from fire, panic, and
other dangers;
(c) to promote and to protect the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience, and
general welfare;
(d) to provide adequate standards of
light, air, and open space;
(e) to maintain the aesthetic appearances
and scenic values of the Village;
(f) to prevent the overcrowding of land;
(g) to avoid undue concentration of
population;
(h) to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, and other public requirements;
(i) and to foster a more rational pattern
of relationship among agricultural,
residential, business, commercial, and
manufacturing uses for the mutual benefit of
all.
(3) Severability. If any section, clause,
provision, or portion of this ordinance is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this ordinance shall not be
affected thereby.
If any application of this ordinance to a
particular structure, land, or water is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall not be applicable to any
other structure, land, or water not
specifically included in said judgment.
18.03 DEFINITIONS.
(1) General. For the purpose of this
ordinance, words used in the present tense
shall include the future; and words used in
the singular number shall include the plural
number, and the plural the singular.
(a) The word “shall” is mandatory and
not discretionary.
(b) The word “may” is permissive.
(c) The word “lot” shall include the
words, “piece”, “parcel”, and “plats”.
(d) The word “building” includes all
other structures of every kind regardless of
similarity to buildings.
(e) The phrase “used for” shall include
the phrases “arranged for”, “designed for”,
“intended for”, and “occupied for”.
(f) All “measured distances” shall be to
the nearest “integral inch”. If a fraction is
one-half inch (½”) or less, the next “integral
inch” below shall be taken.
(g) Any words not herein defined shall
be construed as defined in other respective
state, county, and Village codes.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Accessory Use of Building. A
building or use which is:
1. Constructed or located on the same
zoning lot as the principal building or use
served, except as may be specifically
provided elsewhere in this ordinance.
2. Clearly incidental to, subordinate in
purpose to, and serves the principal use.
3. Either in the same ownership as the
principal use or is clearly operated and
maintained solely for the comfort,
convenience, necessity, or benefit of the
occupants, employees, customers, or visitors
of or to the principal use.
(b) Agriculture. The use of land for
agricultural purposes, including soil tillage
for the production of crops, dairying,
pasturage, apiculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, animal, fish and
poultry husbandry, and the necessary
accessory uses for packing, treating, or
storing the produce; provided, however, that
the operation of any such accessory uses
shall be secondary to that of the normal
agricultural activities. This shall also
include land in federal land bank and similar
land preservation programs.
(c) Airport. Any area of land or water
which is used or intended for use for the
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 3 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
landing and taking off of aircraft, and any
appurtenant areas which are used or
intended for use for airport buildings or
other airport facilities or right-of-way,
including all necessary taxiways, aircraft
storage and tie-down areas, hangars, and
other necessary buildings and open spaces.
(d) Alley. A public or private right-ofway,
shown on a plot, primarily designed to
serve as secondary access to abutting
properties.
(e) Antenna. A structure whose purpose
is to receive or transmit communications or
other signals to or from land based or
satellites and transfer signal to or from the
interior of a building.
(f) Appurtenances. An appendage or
attachment to a building that constitutes an
outside dimension of said building,
including attached porch, awning, roof
overhang, greenhouse, sunroom, and other
similar appendages.
(g) Basement. That portion of any
structure located all or partly underground.
The portion underground shall have more
than one-half (½) of its height below the
finished lot grade.
(h) Block. A tract of land bound by
streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-ofway,
shorelines of waterways, or municipal
boundary lines, or other physical features.
(i) Boarding, Lodging, & Bed &
Breakfast Houses. A building or premises
other than a motel or hotel where lodging, or
meals and lodging are furnished for
compensation for two (2) or more persons
not members of a family.
(j) Building. Any structure built, used,
designed, or intended for the support,
shelter, protection, or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
When a building is divided into separate
parts by unpierced fire or party walls
extending continuously from the ground
through all stories to and above the roof,
each part shall be deemed a separate
building.
(k) Building Set Back Line. A line
located a stated distance from and parallel
with a lot line or street right-of-way, the
nearest point to which a building may be
erected.
(l) Building Height. The vertical
distance measured from the finished first
(1st) floor grade to the midpoint of the facia
line and top of roof.
(m) Building Permits. Written
permission issued by the proper municipal
authority for the construction, repair,
alteration or addition to a structure.
(n) Campground. A tract or parcel of
land on which space is provided for
camping. Includes day and overnight
camping.
(o) Carport. A permanent structure
open on at least one (1) side used to store
vehicles.
(p) Clinic, Medical, or Dental. An
organization of physicians or dentists, or
both, who have their offices in a common
building. A clinic shall not include inpatient
care.
(q) Club. An association of persons for
some common purpose but not including
groups organized primarily to render a
service which is customarily carried on as a
business.
(r) Commercial Feedlots. An
agricultural enterprise where livestock are
raised to a designated weight or age and then
sold.
(s) Commercial Vehicle. A motorized
licensed vehicle used in the operation or in
conjunction with any business or industry.
(t) Condominium, Co-op. Individual
ownership of a unit in a multiunit structure
(as an apartment building) or on land owned
in common (as a town house complex) also,
a unit so owned; a building containing
condominiums.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 4 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(u) Corner Side Yard. An area
extending along a side lot line from front
yard to rear yard when said lot line is
coterminous with a street right-of-way.
(v) Cul-de-Sac. A local street open at
one (1) end only having a special turning
area at the closed end.
(w) Day Care & Day Care Home. A
licensed facility where a person, other than
relative or guardian, provides care and
supervision for four (4) or more children
under seven (7) years of age, for less than
twenty-four (24) hours a day and for
compensation.
(x) Drive-Thru Restaurant. An
establishment which may provide permanent
interior seating, but allows window service
and carry-out counter service for food
products to automobile customers.
(y) Dwelling. A building, or portion
thereof designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single
family dwellings, two (2) family dwellings
and multiple family dwellings, but not
including hotels and motels.
(z) Dwelling, Multiple Family. A
building used or designed as a residence for
three (3) or more families including
tenement houses, row houses, town houses,
apartment houses, and apartment hotels.
(a1) Dwelling, Single Family. A
building designed for and occupied
exclusively by one (1) family and meeting
the building requirements as set forth in
Section 18.04 (4).
(b1) Dwelling, Two Family (Duplex). A
building designed for and occupied
exclusively by two (2) families and meeting
the building requirements as set forth in
Section 18.04 (4).
(c1) Dwelling Unit. Consists of one (1)
or more rooms which are arranged,
designed, or used as living quarters for one
(1) family only. Individual bathrooms and
complete kitchen facilities, permanently
installed, shall always be included for each
“dwelling unit”.
(d1) Employee or Staff Member. Full
Time. A person who works full time at the
building or use regulated. For computation
of the sum of employees at a use scheduling
more than one (1) shift, the sum shall be
based on the maximum number of
employees at any one (1) shift working at
least thirty (30) hours per week.
(e1) FAA. The Federal Aviation
Administration.
(f1) FCC. The Federal
Communications Commission.
(g1) Family. Any number of
individuals related by blood, adoption,
marriage, or not to exceed two (2) persons
not so related, living together on the
premises as a single housekeeping unit,
including any domestic servant.
(h1) Farm. A tract of agricultural land,
together with the fields, buildings, animals,
and personnel there assembled for the
purpose of producing a crop or crops, or the
raising, breeding, or production of animals
or plant life. See 18.07(1) (f) for “Farms”
located within AG-FP zoning district.
(i1) Farm Building. Any building used
for the continuance of farming operations,
excluding a dwelling and its accessory
buildings.
(j1) Floor Area. (For determining offstreet
parking and loading requirements)
Shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors of the building or
portion thereof, devoted to such use,
including accessory storage areas, located
within selling or working space, such as
counters, racks or closets, and any basement
floor area devoted to retailing activities, to
the production or processing of goods, or to
business or professional offices. However,
“floor area” for the purpose of measurement
for off-street parking spaces shall not
include: floor area devoted primarily to
storage purposes (except as otherwise noted
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 5 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
herein); floor area devoted to off-street
parking or leading facilities, including
aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space; or
basement floor area other than area devoted
to retailing activities, to the production or
processing of goods, or to business or
professional offices.
(k1) Frontage, Lot. The length of all
the property of such lot fronting on a street,
measured along the front lot line between
two (2) exterior side lot lines and being
parallel to the road/street.
(l1) Fur Farm. Agricultural operation
where the major income is derived from the
selling or sale of fur bearing animals and/or
pelts.
(m1) Garage, Private. An accessory to
the main building which provides for storage
of motor vehicles and in which no
occupation, business, or service for a profit
is carried on.
(n1) Garage, Public and Storage. Any
building or premises other than a private
garage, where motor driven vehicles are
equipped, repaired, serviced, hired, or
stored.
(o1) Gazebo. An accessory building
consisting of a detached, covered,
freestanding, open-air structure which may
be enclosed with screening or glass intended
to be used for outdoor living activities.
(p1) Grade. The average level of the
finished surface of the ground adjacent to
the exterior walls of the building.
(q1) Groundwater. Groundwater is
water beneath the surface of the ground in a
saturated zone.
(r1) Group Home. A facility or
dwelling unit housing persons unrelated by
blood or marriage and operating as a group
family household as described in Wis. Stats.
§60.63. A group care facility may include
halfway houses; recovery homes; and homes
for orphans, foster children, the elderly,
battered children, and women. It also could
include a specialized treatment facility
providing less than primary health care.
(s1) Hard Surfaced. A driveway or
parking lot surfaced with concrete or
bituminous paving.
(t1) Home Occupation. A gainful
occupation conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by the inhabitant(s)
thereof, which:
1. Is not visible from the exterior of the
dwelling and does not alter the residential
character of the dwelling.
2. Does not require a state or federal
license, which includes structural
considerations as part of or associated with
the license to conduct the business, except as
exempted by state or federal statute from
local zoning control (i.e. community living
arrangements).
3. Does not employ any other person(s)
that are not residents of the dwelling.
4. Does not require special structural
considerations, alterations, or conformance
to any building codes other than those
required for residential dwelling units.
5. Does not occupy more than twentyfive
percent (25%) of the floor area of the
residence.
6. Does not include the sale, display, or
advertisement of goods or commodities on
the site, either within or outside the
residence.
(u1) Hotel. A building in which
lodging, with or without meals, is offered to
transient guests for compensation and which
there are more than five (5) sleeping rooms
with or without cooking facilities in any
individual room or apartment.
(v1) Industrial Park. A special or
exclusive type of planned area designed and
equipped to accommodate a community of
industries.
(w1) Junk (Salvage) Yard. An area,
inside a building or outside a building where
waste or scrap materials are brought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 6 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
disassembled, or handled, including, but not
limited to: scrap iron and other metals,
paper, rakes, rubber tires, glass, plastic, and
automobiles. This definition shall include
motor vehicle grave yards.
(x1) Kennel. Any lot or premises
wherein or whereon more than three (3)
dogs, at least five (5) months of age or older
are kept, either permanently or temporarily,
for board, propagation, training, sales, or
other uses excluding pets.
(y1) Lake. An inland body of water,
either natural or artificially created, of five
(5) acres or more.
(z1) Artificial Lakes or Ponds. An
artificial lake or pond is any body of water,
conforming to the definition of a lake or
pond; that is made, fabricated, or
constructed, with human skill or skill and
labor, by the dredging, excavation, or
mining of land. Maintenance or expansion
of a natural body of water by dredging or
otherwise shall not be considered creation of
an artificial lake or pond under this
definition. However, the creation of an open
body of water by dredging or excavation of
a wetland or any other area shall be subject
to the rules and regulations pertaining to
artificial lakes and ponds.
(a2) Lot. A parcel of land, having a
width and depth sufficient to provide the
space necessary for one (1) or more
permitted or conditional uses, abutting on a
public street.
(b2) Lot, Corner. A lot located at the
intersection of two (2) streets, the interior
angle of such intersection not exceeding one
hundred thirty-five degrees (135°). See
Appendix A, Exhibit 2.
(c2) Lot, Depth of. The mean horizontal
distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot
boundaries. See Appendix A, Exhibit 3.
(d2) Lot, Interior. A lot other than a
corner lot. See Appendix A, Exhibit 2.
(e2) Lot Lines and Area. The peripheral
boundaries of a parcel of land including the
street right-of-way lines and the total area
lying within such boundaries.
(f2) Lot Line, Front. Same as front
right-of-way line.
(g2) Lot, Through. Interior lot having
frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets.
The front yard determined after construction
of primary structure and the rear yard having
a special setback equal to the front yard
setback for the zoning district in which it
lies. See Appendix A, Exhibit 2.
(h2) Lot, Width. The horizontal
distance between the side lot lines of a lot,
measured at the widest width within the first
forty feet (40’) of a lot depth immediately in
back of the front right-of-way line. It must
be parallel to street. Such minimum lot
width may be measured at the building
setback line only if said lot is located on the
outer radius of a curved street such as a culde-
sac. However, in no case shall the lot
frontage measured at the right-of-way line
be less than sixty feet (60’) wide. When
measuring at the building setback, on a
curved street, the width shall be at right
angles to a radial line. (See Exhibit A,
Diagrams 5-8).
(i2) Lot Area, Gross. The area of a
horizontal plane bounded by the front, side,
and rear lot lines, but not including any area
occupied by the waters of a duly recorded
lake or river and/or public right-of-way.
(j2) Lot of Record. A lot which is part
of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the office of the Register of
Deeds of Brown County; or a parcel of land,
the deed to which was recorded in the office
of said Register of Deeds prior to the
adoption of this code.
(k2) Marina. An area for the launching,
docking, storage, sales or rental of boats for
compensation, including activities directly
related to boating needs such as fuel sales,
waste pumping, or boat repair.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 7 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(l2) Manufactured Home–Class I. A
structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with
or without permanent foundation, when
connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, and air
conditioning systems contained in it, and is
certified and labeled as a manufactured
home under 42 U.S.C. Sections 5401 to
5426. For purposes of this ordinance, a
manufactured home Class I shall be
considered a single family or two (2) family
home when meeting the requirements of
Section 18.04 (4), therefore, may be located
in any district permitting such use.
(m2) Manufactured Home–Class II. A
structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with
or without permanent foundation, when
connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems
contained in it, and built prior to the
enactment of the Federal Manufactured
Construction and safety Standards Act of
1974, which became effective July 15, 1996.
(n2) Manufactured Home Park. Any
park, court, camp, site, lot, parcel or tract of
land designed, maintained, intended or used
for the purpose of supplying a location or
accommodations for two (2) or more
manufactured homes, and shall include all
facilities used or intended for use as part of
the equipment thereof. Manufactured home
park shall not include automobile or
manufactured home sales lots on which
unoccupied manufactured homes are parked
for purposes of inspection and sale.
(o2) Motel. Establishment consisting of
a group of attached or detached living or
sleeping accommodations with bathroom
and closet space, located on a single zoning
lot and designed for use by transient guests;
and where there is no permanent occupancy
of any unit except by the owner, his/her
agent or his/her employees.
(p2) Motor Vehicle Sales and Service,
New and Used. A building or premises used
primarily for one (1) or more of the
following:
1. Sales of new or used motor vehicles
by properly licensed dealers.
2. Service or repair of motor vehicles
when incidental to Sub 1. above or
otherwise.
(q2) Motor Vehicles. Any vehicle used
or intended to be used for transportation of
freight or passengers propelled or drawn by
mechanical or electrical power, except a
device used exclusively on stationary rail or
tracks or in the water.
(r2) Non-Conforming Use. Any use of
land, buildings, or structures, lawful at the
time of the enactment of this code, which
does not comply with all of the regulations
of this code or of any amendment here to
governing use for the zoning district of
which such use is located.
(s2) Non-Conforming Structure. A
structure or building, the size dimensions, or
location of which was lawfully existed at the
time of adoption, revision, or amendment of
the zoning ordinance which no longer
conforms to the zoning standards because of
said revision or amendment.
(t2) Occupancy Permit. A required
permit allowing occupancy of a building or
structure after it has been determined that
the building meets all the requirements of
applicable ordinances.
(u2) Outdoor Solid Fuel Furnace. Any
detached energy system, such as wood or
other solid fuel burners, boilers or furnaces,
associated with the production of useable
heat or energy, which is not located within
another structure.
(v2) Parking Space. A graded and
surfaced area of not less than two hundred
(200) square feet in area either enclosed or
open for the parking of a motor vehicle,
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 8 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
having adequate ingress and egress to a
public street or alley.
(w2) Planned Commercial
Development. An area of land, controlled
by a single owner, corporation, or any legal
entity, to be developed as a single owner,
corporation, or any legal entity, to be
developed as a single entity for commercial
uses, the plan for which is unique in the
establishment of combinations of
developments and uses, and open spaces or
common facilities.
(x2) Planned Development District. An
area of land, controlled by a single owner,
corporation, or other legal entity, which is to
be developed as a single unit, and is referred
to as PDD.
(y2) Planning & Zoning Commission.
Referred to in this ordinance shall be
construed to mean the body authorized to
consider planning matters and make
recommendations to the Board, and
administer the said Zoning Ordinance.
(z2) Pond. An inland body of water,
either natural or artificially created, of less
than five (5) acres.
(a3) Primary Detached Garage. An
accessory building located in reasonable
proximity to a home without an attached
garage with direct access for vehicular
storage and finished with materials similar
to the home.
(b3) Professional Office. The office of
a doctor, practitioner, dentist, minister,
architect, landscape architect, professional
engineer, lawyer, author, musician, or other
recognized profession.
(c3) Restaurant. An establishment with
interior/exterior seating which provides food
service to customers.
(d3) Retail. Sale of commodities and
services directly to customers when such
commodities and services are used or
consumed by the customer and not
purchased primarily for purpose of resale.
(e3) Roadside Stand. A structure of not
more than three hundred (300) square feet in
floor area, not more than ten feet (10’) in
height, not permanently fixed to the ground
and is readily removable in its entirety,
covered or uncovered and not wholly
enclosed used for the seasonal sale of fruits,
vegetables, agricultural products or
commodities associated with national
holidays (i.e. fireworks or Christmas trees).
A stand for the seasonal sale of fireworks or
other holiday commodities shall be
considered to be a roadside stand for the
purposes of this code whether or not located
within a permanent structure.
(f3) Sanitary Landfill. Disposal of
refuse on land without creating a nuisance or
hazard to public health or safety by utilizing
the principles of engineering to confine the
refuse to the smallest practical volume, and
to cover it with a layer of earth at the
conclusion of each day’s operation or at
more frequent intervals.
(g3) Satellite Dish. An antenna whose
purpose is to receive communications or
other signals from orbiting satellites and
other extraterrestrial sources and magnify
and transfer signals to the interior of a
building.
(h3) Service Station and Garage,
Automotive. A building or premises used
primarily for one (1) or more of the
following:
1. Gasoline and fuel sales for motor
vehicles.
2. Service or repair of motor vehicles
and sale of accessories when incidental to
Sub 1. above.
(i3) Setback. Minimum horizontal
distance between a building including
appurtenances or structures and the lot line.
(j3) Sign. A name, identification,
description, display, or illustration which is
affixed to, or represented directly or
indirectly upon, a building, structure, or
piece of land, and which directs attention to
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 9 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
an object, product, place, activity, person,
institution, organization, or business.
However, a “sign” shall not include any
display of official court or public office
notices, nor shall it include the flag emblem,
or insignia of a nation, political unit, school,
or religious group. A “sign” shall not
include a sign located completely within an
enclosed building unless the content shall so
indicate.
(k3) Sign, Advertising. A sign which
directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, or entertainment not exclusively
related to the premises where such sign is
located or to which it is affixed.
(l3) Slaughterhouse. A building or
portion thereof used in the conducting of a
business enterprise where animals are
butchered or where animals or parts thereof
are processed, cut, or altered.
(m3) Stockfarm. An agricultural
operation, usually non-dairying in nature,
where livestock are raised to the required
age or weight for slaughterhouse purposes or
for sale to commercial feedlots.
(n3) Story. That part of a building
between any floor and the floor next above,
and if there is no floor above, then the
ceiling above. A basement is a story if its
ceiling is five feet (5’) or more above the
level from which the height of the building
is measured, or it is used for business
purposes, or if it contains any dwelling units
other than one (1) dwelling unit for the
caretaker of the premises.
(o3) Street/Road. A public right-of-way
which affords a primary means of vehicular
access to abutting property, whether
throughway, or however otherwise
designated, but does not include driveways
to buildings.
(p3) Structure. Anything constructed or
erected, the use of which requires a location
on the ground or attached to something
having a location on the ground.
(q3) Structural Alteration. Any change,
other than incidental repairs, in the
supporting members of a structure, such as
the addition, removal, or alteration of
bearing walls, columns, beams, girders,
roofs or foundations, excepting alterations
which may be required for the safety of the
structure.
(r3) Swimming Pool. A pool
constructed for swimming or wading, either
above or below ground.
(s3) Telecommunication Tower. Any
structure that is designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one
(1) or more telecommunication antennas,
including self-supporting lattice towers, guy
towers, or monopole towers. The term shall
include radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common-carrier
towers, cellular telephone towers, PCS
towers and the like.
(t3) Temporary Use. Short-term use of
vehicle, mobile home, or movable structure
(non-permanent) as determined by review of
the Suamico Planning & Zoning
Commission. Each situation shall constitute
a separate review and a separate decision by
the Suamico Planning & Zoning
Commission. This temporary use shall not
exceed ninety (90) days without
reapplication in any one (1) year period.
(u3) Transitional Facility. A premises,
other than a community living arrangement
or community based facility, for the
temporary placement of persons on parole,
extended supervision or probation in a
controlled environment including
supervision or monitoring.
(v3) Use, Principal. The main use of
land or building as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use. A “principal
use” may be “permitted” or “conditional”.
(w3) Use, Permitted. A use which may
be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 10 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
with all requirements, regulations, and
standards of such district.
(x3) Use, Conditional. A use, either
public or private, which, because of its
unique characteristics, cannot be properly
classified as a permitted use in a particular
district or districts. Conditions may be
attached as part of the approval.
(y3) Variance. A variance is permission
granted by the Board of Appeals to build or
develop in a way which is inconsistent with
the dimensional standard contained in the
code.
(z3) Water Table. The water table is the
level below the ground at which the soil or
rock is saturated with water, sometimes
referred to as the upper surface of the
saturated zone.
(a4) Well. A well is a vertical
excavation that taps an underground liquidbearing
rock formation. The primary use of
this definition in this ordinance refers to
wells drilled to obtain water, to monitor the
quality of water or to determine the depth of
the water table. For the purpose of this
ordinance a high-capacity well is a well that
delivers or is capable of delivering a water
flow of more than seventy (70) gallons per
minute.
(b4) Yard. Open space on the same lot
with a building or structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward,
except for vegetation. A “yard” extends
along a lot line, and to a depth or width
specified in the yard requirements for the
zone the lot is located in.
(c4) Yard, Front. A yard extending
along the full length of the front lot line
between the side lot lines. See Appendix A,
Exhibit 1.
(d4) Yard, Side. A yard extending along
a side lot line from the front yard to the rear
yard. See Appendix A, Exhibit 1.
(e4) Yard, Rear. A yard extending
along the full length of the rear lot line
between the side lot lines. See Appendix A,
Exhibit 1.
(f4) Zero Lot Line Lot. A lot upon
which a dwelling unit may be placed so that
one (1) of its walls is placed upon a side lot
line. In case of a two (2) family dwelling,
this side wall is to be a common wall.
(g4) Zoning District. Divisions of the
Village, each area being accurately defined
to boundaries and locations on the official
zoning map and in the zoning ordinance, for
which the regulations and requirements
governing use, lot, and bulk of buildings and
premises are uniform.
18.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of
this code shall include all lands, persons,
and waters within the Village.
(2) Existing Ordinance. Restrictions
or requirements with respect to buildings,
land, water, persons, or animals, which
appear in other code of the Village or are
established by federal, state, and county
laws, and which are greater than those set
forth herein shall take precedence over those
herein. Otherwise, the provisions of this
code shall apply.
(3) Building and Uses.
(a) The use of buildings hereafter
erected, enlarged converted, structurally
altered, rebuilt or moved, and existing land,
shall be used only for purposes as specified
in this code. Furthermore, land and building
uses shall be in compliance with the
regulations as established herein for each
district.
(b) All dwellings shall be located on a
lot; and only one (1) dwelling shall be
located, erected or moved onto a lot, except
for lots specifically approved and excepted
by the Board as duplex or multi-family, and
all lots shall have the required frontage on
an approved Village road.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 11 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(c) Permitted and permitted accessory
uses are limited to the uses indicated for the
respective zone districts.
(d) Conditional uses may be allowed,
limited to the uses indicated for the
respective zone districts, upon written
recommendation by the Planning & Zoning
Commission and approval of the Board.
(e) Accessory buildings which are not a
part of the main building shall not occupy
more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of
the required rear or side yard. All other
accessory building requirements are set forth
by zoning districts.
(f) No lot area shall be reduced by the
owner so that the yards and open spaces
shall be smaller than is required by this
code.
(g) If the lot area is less than the
minimum number of square feet per family
dwelling required for the district in which it
is located and was of record as such at the
time of the passage of this code, such lot
may be occupied by a single family dwelling
if it meets the requirements of the Brown
County Code of Ordinances.
(h) Where a building permit for a
building or structure has been issued in
accordance with regulations set forth in this
code, and provided that construction is
begun within six (6) months from date of
issuance and completed within two (2) years
the said building or structure shall be
completed in accordance with the approved
plans on the basis of which the building
permit has been issued, and further, shall
upon completion be occupied under a
certificate of occupancy by the use for
which originally designed and subject
thereafter to the provisions of Section 18.99.
(i) Other structures or buildings allowed
as permitted or conditional uses within Ag-
Agriculture District shall meet the
requirements of the district and the Village
Zoning Ordinance.
(4) Transitional Facility.
(a) Transitional facilities are allowed as
conditional use in the following zoning
districts:
1. Highway Business (HB)
2. Industrial District-Limited (I1)
3. Industrial District (I2)
(b) Transitional facilities are prohibited
in the following zoning districts:
1. Residential Sewered (RS)
2. Rural Residential (RR)
3. Agriculture (AG)
4. Agricultural – Farmland Preservation
(AG – FP)
5. Public Lands and Institutions
6. Business District (B)
7. All planned developments
(5) Residential Dwelling Standards.
All single family and two (2) family
residential dwellings shall meet the
following requirements as set forth in this
section. Any home not meeting the
requirements of this section shall be treated
as a Manufactured Home Class II and may
only be placed in a manufactured home park
pursuant to Section 18.16 as set forth in this
code.
(a) Minimum Floor Area. Minimum
size of a residential dwelling shall be one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet
above grade, with at least eight hundred
(800) square feet on the main floor.
(b) Roof Pitch and Overhang. All main
buildings shall have a minimum pitch of
four inches (4”) per twelve inches (12”) of
run, with a minimum of twelve inch (12”)
roof overhang on each of the dwelling’s
perimeter walls, such that the overhang is
structurally integrated into the design of the
dwelling. Exception: Homes with
significant architectural design that would
otherwise be excluded by these requirements
may be permitted after review and approval
by the Zoning Administrator.
(c) Roofing Materials. All accessory
structures on a lot shall be of like materials
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 12 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
to the primary structure, unless approved by
the Zoning Administrator. Corrugated
sheets of metal, fiberglass, plastic, or its
equivalent may be allowed provided the
following is met:
1. Only allowed on a lot of three (3)
acres or more.
2. Minimum of a twelve inch (12”)
overhang.
3. Minimum of a four inch (4”) fascia.
4. Minimum setback from any existing
off-premise residential structure shall be one
hundred feet (100’).
(d) Siding Materials. All main
buildings and all detached garages located
on a lot shall have exterior siding material
consisting of weatherproof material such as
wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite,
vinyl, aluminum, or metal lap. The exterior
siding material shall extend to ground level
except that, when a solid concrete or
masonry perimeter foundation is used, the
siding material need not extend below the
top of the foundation.
(e) Foundation. All dwellings shall
have a properly engineered, permanently
attached means of support meeting the
applicable installation requirements and all
applicable building codes. In the event that
a manufactured home does not utilize a
perimeter load bearing foundation, any
space between ground level and siding shall
be enclosed with permanent, non-load
bearing concrete or masonry having a
foundation-like appearance.
(f) Minimum Width. The minimum
width of the main structure of a dwelling
shall be twenty feet (20’).
(g) Wheels and Axles. All tow bars,
wheels, and axles shall be removed when the
dwelling is installed on a residential lot.
(6) Moving of Buildings. A permit
shall be obtained from the Building
Inspector prior to the moving of any
building or structure. The applicant shall be
a qualified building mover. Application for
this permit shall include photographs of the
building, site plan showing lot and house
dimensions, and required bond.
(a) Compliance. Building or structures
moved shall conform with the provisions of
this chapter for new buildings and structures
where deemed practical by the Building
Inspector. No building or structure shall be
moved in whole or in part to any other
location on the same lot or any other lot in
the zone district unless every portion of such
building or structure which is moved shall
conform to the zone district requirements.
(b) Conformance with Existing
Buildings. The building or structures to be
moved shall conform with the existing
buildings in the area in which it is to be
moved as determined by the Planning &
Zoning Commission.
(c) Unsafe or Unfit Buildings. No
building or structure shall be moved if
deemed structurally unsafe by the Building
Inspector.
(d) Bond Required. Before a permit to
move any building or structure is issued by
the Building Inspector, the party applying
shall give a bond in the sum of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000), and liability insurance
with good and sufficient sureties to be
approved by the Building Inspector and
Board conditioned, among other things, that
such party will save and indemnify
judgments, costs, and expenses which may
in any way accrue against the Village and
keep the Village harmless against all
liabilities, judgments, costs, and expenses in
consequence of granting such permit.
(e) Conditions of Approval. Every
permit to move a building or structure shall
state all conditions to be complied with,
designate the route to be taken and limit of
time for removal.
(f) Regulations for Building in Transit.
The removal of a building shall be
continuous during all hours of the day and at
night if the Building Inspector so orders
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 13 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
until completed with the least possible
obstruction to thoroughfares. Warning
lights shall be kept in conspicuous places at
each end of the building during the night.
The route and time of moving shall be
approved in writing by the Administrator.
(g) Damage to Streets and Highways.
Every person receiving a permit to move a
building or structure shall, within one (1)
day after reaching its destination, report the
fact to the Building Inspector who shall
report the same to the Administrator who
shall inspect the streets and highways over
which the building was moved or cause the
same to be done and ascertain their
condition. If the removal of the building or
structure has caused any damage to the
streets or highways over which moved, the
building mover shall immediately place
them in as good repair as they were before
the permit was granted. Upon failure of the
building mover to do so within ten (10) days
to the satisfaction of the Administrator, the
Administrator shall order the repair of the
damage done to such streets or highways
and hold sureties of the bond given by the
building mover responsible for the payment
of same.
(h) All conditions as set forth in Section
16.08 shall be met.
(7) Home Occupations. As defined in
this ordinance, home occupations shall be
permitted in any residence of any zoning
district provided:
(a) No home occupation shall be
permitted in an accessory building on any
lot except in AG-FP zoning per 18.07(4) (d)
or by conditional use approval.
(b) No signage shall be permitted to
identify or advertise the home occupation.
(c) A professional person may use their
residence for infrequent consultation,
emergency treatment, or performance of
religious rites, but they must maintain a
separate professional office for the general
practice of their profession.
(8) Kennels. The following provisions
shall apply to all kennels located in the
Village as either a permitted or conditional
use:
(a) All kennels shall provide adequate
indoor housing for one hundred percent
(100%) capacity of animals kept on the
premises of sufficient construction as to
eliminate any noise or odor from leaving the
property.
(b) Such housing shall be adequately
ventilated, cooled, and heated to provide a
year-round quality living environment for
the animals kept on the property. The
adequacy of the ventilation, cooling, and
heating required shall be dependent on the
breed of animal that is kept on the premises.
In the case of multiple breeds the facility
may require sectioning to provide differing
provisions of ventilation, cooling, and
heating.
(c) No animals shall be kept in any
outdoor facility between the hours of 10
p.m. to 7 a.m.
(d) All outdoor facilities shall be
maintained to provide a clean environment
for the animals being kept and to eliminate
odor from leaving the property and as much
as possible onsite.
(e) All kennels shall operate within full
compliance of Wis. Stats. Ch. 174 “DOGS”.
(9) Flea Markets and Farmer
Markets. The following provisions shall
apply to all outdoor flea markets and
farmers markets for the sale of products by
multiple venders on properties located
within the Village:
(a) All flea markets and farmers
markets require a permit from the Village.
(b) Prohibited on residentially zoned
properties.
(c) Agriculturally zoned properties are
limited to agriculture related products.
(d) Permits must be applied for a
minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the first
(1st) day of the event.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 14 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(e) Any single parcel may be permitted
for a maximum of sixty (60) individual days
in any one (1) calendar year. Events on
multiple parcels will count against each
parcel’s allowable days. Extensions must be
reviewed and approved by the Health &
Safety Committee and the Board.
(f) Signage shall conform to the
temporary signage for roadside stands
Section 18.17 (3) (b) 3 except that each
vender shall be allowed the on-premise
signage.
(g) A site plan must be submitted which
details all of the following:
1. Maximum number of venders on any
given day.
2. Size of each individual vender area.
3. Provisions to ensure safety and
security for multiple day events.
4. Location and number of sanitary
facilities.
5. Visitor and vendor parking areas,
including capacity.
(h) A list of all venders must be
submitted to the Village five (5) business
days prior to the participation in the event.
(i) Temporary vender structures shall be
limited to three hundred (300) square feet in
area and limited to ten feet (10’) maximum
side wall height.
(j) All venders with consumable
products must contact the Brown County
Department of Health and be properly
permitted (per DHFS 196 & Wis. Stats.
Ch. 254).
(k) All vender areas shall observe and
conform to a ten foot (10’) setback
requirement from any side or rear yard.
(l) All right-of-way areas with less than
twenty-five feet (25’) of setback must
restrict access to the right-of-way with
fencing or other approved devices.
(m) Sale of sexually-orientated products
prohibited.
(n) Sale of alcohol, tobacco, explosives,
hazardous materials, firearms, or fireworks
is prohibited.
(o) Event times are limited to the hours
of 6 a.m. to 8 p.m.
(p) The Village reserves the right to
suspend and/or revoke any permit for
violations of any condition of approval or
any local, county, state, or federal
ordinance/code having jurisdiction. The
Village reserves the right to exclude any
vender and/or event applicant for good
cause.
(q) Fees will be as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board.
(10) Roadside Stands. The following
provisions shall apply to all roadside stands
and stands for the sale of products
associated with a national holiday, except
fireworks stands, located within the Village:
(a) There shall be not more than one (1)
roadside stand on any one (1) premises.
(b) No such roadside stand shall be
more than three hundred (300) square feet in
floor area and limited to ten feet (10’)
maximum height.
(c) All roadside stands shall observe and
conform to a ten foot (10’) setback
requirement from any street right-of-way,
front yard, corner side yard, or double
frontage.
(d) Roadside stands for the purpose of
the seasonal sale of fruits, vegetables, and
agricultural products shall provide area for a
minimum of three (3) off-street parking
spaces behind the setback of the zoning
district and in conformance to the
requirements of Section 18.04 (16).
(e) Roadside stands for the purpose of
the sale of products associated with national
holidays, except fireworks stands, shall
provide a minimum of six (6) off-street
parking spaces behind the setback of the
zoning district and in conformance to the
requirements of Section 18.04 (16).
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 15 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(f) The owner/operator of a roadside
stand shall obtain a roadside stand permit
from the Building Inspector prior to the
establishment and/or operation of any
roadside or fireworks stand. The
owner/operator shall submit a site plan,
drawn to a scale of not less than one inch
(1”) = one hundred feet (100’), which
addresses the above requirements.
(g) The Building Inspector shall issue a
roadside stand permit for any roadside stand
that meets the above requirements for a
roadside stand upon receipt of the required
site plan and one-time fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25). Permits are renewable on a
yearly basis provided no changes have been
made to the operation of the stand. In the
event the roadside stand operation is
changed or altered a new permit, site plan,
and fee shall be required. The Building
Inspector shall make the necessary onsite
inspections to determine conformance of all
roadside stands with these regulations.
(11) Fireworks Stands. The following
requirements shall apply to roadside stands
for the sale of fireworks located within the
Village:
(a) Roadside stands for the purpose of
the sale of fireworks products shall provide
a minimum of six (6) off-street parking
spaces behind the setback required for
roadside stands and in conformance to the
requirements of Section 18.04 (16).
(b) In addition to Section 18.04 (11) (a),
fireworks stands shall conform to the
requirements of Section 18.04 (10) (a), (b),
and (c).
(c) Roadside stands for the purpose of
the sale of fireworks shall be permitted only
by conditional use approval in accordance to
the requirements of this ordinance. The
application for conditional use approval
shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to
a scale of not less than one inch (1”) = one
hundred feet (100’) which addresses the
above requirements for a fireworks or
national holiday stand.
(d) The owner/operator of a fireworks
stand shall obtain a roadside stand permit
from the Building Inspector prior to the
establishment or yearly continued operation
of a fireworks stand. The Building Inspector
shall issue a roadside stand permit for any
fireworks stand that has received conditional
use approval, meets the above requirements
and upon receipt of a twenty-five dollar
($25) permit fee and provision, by the
owner, of proof of insurance on the
operation. The Building Inspector and the
Suamico Fire Department shall make the
necessary onsite inspections to determine
conformance of all fireworks stands with
these regulations prior to any sales being
conducted.
(12) Area Regulations.
(a) Lot size shall comply with the
required regulations of the established
district.
(13) Height Regulations.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this
ordinance, the height of any structures
hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, or
structurally altered shall be in compliance
with the regulations established herein for
the district in which such structure is
located.
(b) Churches, schools, hospitals,
sanitariums, and other public and quasipublic
buildings may be erected to a height
not exceeding sixty feet (60’), provided the
front, side, and rear yards required in the
district in which such building is to be
located are each increased at least one foot
(1’) for each foot of additional building
height above the height limit otherwise
established for the district in which such
building is to be located.
(14) Front, Side, and Rear Yard
Regulations.
(a) No front yard shall be used for the
storage of boats, vehicles, or any other
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 16 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
equipment except under the following
conditions:
1. Licensed vehicular parking on
driveways.
2. Seasonal recreational equipment (on
trailers) on driveways during the normal
season for such equipment. Said equipment
must be owned by the resident of the
property.
(b) No accessory building or structure
shall be allowed within the front yard unless
all of the following apply:
1. Actual front yard setback of primary
structure is six (6) times greater than zoning
requirements.
2. Accessory building or structure must
maintain a setback of four-fifths (4/5) of the
actual setback of primary structure.
(c) Allow an accessory building or
structure within a corner side yard. The
setback from the right-of-way shall be the
same as the front yard setback of the zoning
district for the accessory building.
(d) No part of a yard or other open
space provided around any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of
this ordinance shall be included as part of a
yard or other open space required for
another building.
(e) Buildings on through lots and
extending from street to street may waive
the requirements for a rear yard by
furnishing an equivalent open space on the
same lot in lieu of the required rear yard
provided that the setback requirements on
both streets are complied with; and further
provided that no accessory building shall
extend within the setback line on either
street.
(f) Detached accessory buildings may be
located in the rear yard, or the side yard of a
main building provided such accessory
building will meet district requirements.
(g) Walks and drives extending not
more than six inches (6”) above the average
ground level at their margin, may be located
in any yard.
(15) Fences, Walls, and Hedges.
(a) A fence or wall may be erected,
placed, or maintained along a lot line on
residentially zoned property or adjacent
hereto to a height not exceeding eight feet
(8’) above the ground level. No fence or
wall which is located in a required front or
corner side yard shall exceed a height of
three feet (3’).
(b) No fence or wall shall be erected,
placed, or maintained along a lot line on any
non-residential zoned property, adjacent to
residentially zoned property to a height
exceeding eight feet (8’).
(c) In any district, no fence, wall, hedge,
or shrubbery shall be erected, constructed,
maintained, or grown to a height exceeding
three feet (3’) above the street grade nearest
thereto, within twenty-five feet (25’) of the
intersection of any right-of-way lines or of
right-of-way lines projected.
(d) The most attractive side of a fence
shall face adjoining property.
(16) Parking Standards. For all
applicable regulations refer to Section 18.18,
Off-Street Parking Requirements.
(17) Outdoor Solid Fuel Furnaces.
Outdoor solid fuel furnaces installed after
April 18, 2005 shall require a building
permit and meet the following requirements:
(a) Outdoor solid fuel furnaces shall be
prohibited in all zoning districts except for
the following by conditional use permit
only:
1. Rural Residential
2. Agriculture
3. Agricultural – Farmland Preservation
4. Public Lands & Institutions
5. Industrial 1 & 2
(b) Conditional use regulations.
1. No outdoor solid fuel furnace shall be
located in a front or corner yard.
2. Minimum setback to rear or side
yards shall be two hundred feet (200’).
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 17 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
3. Minimum chimney stack shall be
twenty feet (20’) above grade.
4. No outdoor solid fuel furnace shall
create an undesirable impact upon adjacent
property or otherwise create a public
nuisance. All outdoor solid fuel furnaces are
required to meet emission standards
currently required by the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Underwriters
Laboratories listing.
(c) An outdoor solid fuel furnace shall
be considered exempt from the total number
of accessory structures allowed on a lot.
18.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES.
(1) Zone Districts. For the purpose of
this code, the Village, Brown County,
Wisconsin is hereby divided into the
following zoning districts:
(a) Ag-Agriculture
(b) B-Business
(c) AG – FP – Agricultural – Farmland
Preservation
(d) HB-Highway Business
(e) RR-Rural Residential
(f) I1-Industrial 1
(g) RS-Residential Sewered
(h) I2-Industrial 2
(i) PDD-Planned Development District
(j) NB-Neighborhood Business
(k) PL&I-Public Lands & Institutions
(l) TCOD-Town Center Overlay District
(2) Zoning Map. The location and
boundaries of the districts established by the
code are set forth on the zoning map entitled
“Zoning District Map for the Village, Brown
County, Wisconsin, dated June 25, 1970”,
and as amended which are incorporated
herein and hereby made a part of this code.
The said maps, together with everything
shown thereon and all amendments thereto
shall be as much a part of this code as
though fully set forth and described herein.
(3) Zone Boundaries. The following
rules shall apply with respect to the
boundaries of the various districts as shown
on the zoning district map.
(a) District boundary lines are the center
lines of highways, streets, alleys, and
pavement; or right-of-way lines of railroads,
and expressways; or section, division of
section, tract and lot lines; or such lines
extended, unless otherwise indicated.
(b) In areas not subdivided into lots and
blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a
strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or
highway, the depth of such strips shall be in
accordance with dimensions shown on the
maps measured at right angles from the
center line of the street or highway, and the
length of frontage shall be in accordance
with dimensions shown on the map from
section, quarter section, or division lines, or
center lines of streets and highways, or
railroad rights-of-way, unless otherwise
indicated.
(c) Where a district boundary line
divides a lot in single ownership on the
effective date of this code, the Board of
Appeals, after due hearing, may extend the
regulation for either portion of such lot.
(4) Exempted Uses. The following
uses are exempted by this code and
permitted in any zone district:
public highway rights-of-way and
improvement projects, poles, towers, wires,
cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes,
mains, valves, or any other similar
distributing equipment for telephone or
other communications; and electric power,
gas, water and sewer lines, water towers and
municipal wells provided that the
installation shall conform to the Federal
Communications Commission and Federal
Aviation Agency rules and regulations, and
other authorities having jurisdiction.
However, all telecommunication towers and
antennas are subject to the requirements
prescribed in Section 18.19.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 18 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
18.06 AG – AGRICULTURE. The
following regulations shall apply in the Ag-
Agriculture District:
(1) Permitted Uses.
(a) Apiculture, dairying, floriculture,
forestry, general farming, grazing, noncommercial
greenhouses, hatcheries, fish
farms, horticulture, livestock raising, noncommercial
nurseries, non-commercial
orchards, pasturage, poultry raising, wildlife
sanctuaries, kennels, game preserves, and
fur farms.
(b) Single family dwellings.
(c) Transmission lines, substations,
telephone and telegraph lines, and public
utility installations.
(2) Permitted Accessory Uses.
(a) Private garage or carport.
(b) Roadside stands.
(c) Additional structures necessary for
the continuance of the farming operation.
(d) Private swimming pools.
(3) Conditional Uses. The following
uses may be considered for conditional use
(see Section 18.04 (3) (d)):
(a) Two (2) family dwellings (duplexes)
(b) Dairy product stores
(c) Earth excavations
(d) Veterinary clinics and hospitals
(e) Riding academies and stables
(f) Artificial lakes and ponds two
thousand (2,000) square feet or larger in size
(see Section 18.20)
(f) Telecommunication towers
(g) Outdoor solid fuel combustion
appliances
(4) Lot Requirements.
Area: five (5) acres minimum
Width: two hundred fifty feet (250’)
minimum
(5) Height Regulations.
Farm structures: sixty feet (60’)
maximum
Residential dwellings: thirty-five feet
(35’) maximum
Accessory buildings: twenty-five feet
(25’) maximum
(6) Building Setbacks. Building
setbacks shall be those listed on a certified
survey map and/or plat duly approved by the
Board for the Village on or after
September 16, 2002, or the setbacks listed
below:
Yard Resid. Dwell. Farm Struct.
Front 45 ft. min.
from hwy.
ROW
50 ft. min.
from hwy.
ROW
Side 20 ft. min. 75 ft. min.
Rear 25 ft. min. 75 ft. min.
Corner Side 45 ft. min.
from hwy.
ROW
50 ft. min.
from hwy.
ROW
ROW=right-of-way
(7) Building Size. Minimum size of
residential dwelling shall be one thousand
two hundred (1,200) square feet above grade
with at least eight hundred (800) square feet
on the main floor.
(8) Parking. Parking shall conform to
the requirements as set forth in Section
18.18.
(9) Signs. Signs shall be regulated as
set forth in Section 18.17.
18.07 AG-FP – AGRICULTURAL –
FARMLAND PRESERVATION. The
following regulations shall apply in the AGFP-
Agricultural - Farmland Preservation
District:
(1) Definitions. In this farmland
preservation ordinance:
(a) Accessory Use means any of the
following land uses on a farm:
1. A building, structure, or improvement
that is an integral part of, or is incidental to,
an agricultural use.
2. An activity or business operation that
is an integral part of, or incidental to, an
agricultural use.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 19 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
3. A farm residence, including normal
residential appurtenances.
4. A business, activity, or enterprise,
whether or not associated with an
agricultural use, which meets all of the
following requirements:
a. It is conducted on a farm by an owner
or operator of that farm.
b. It requires no buildings, structures, or
improvements other than those described in
par. 1. or 3.
c. No non-farm resident employees
except by conditional use approval. Cannot
employ more than four (4) full-time
employees annually.
d. It does not impair or limit the current
or future agricultural use of the farm or other
protected farmland.
(b) Agricultural use means any of the
following activities conducted for the
purpose of producing an income or
livelihood:
1. Crop or forage production.
2. Keeping livestock.
3. Beekeeping.
4. Nursery, sod, or Christmas tree
production.
5. Floriculture.
6. Aquaculture.
7. Fur farming.
8. Forest management.
9. Enrolling land in a federal
agricultural commodity payment program or
a federal or state agricultural land
conservation payment program.
(c) Agriculture-related use means a
facility, whether or not located on a farm,
that has at least one of the following as a
primary and not merely incidental purpose:
1. Providing agricultural supplies,
agricultural equipment, agricultural inputs or
agricultural services directly to farms,
including farms in the farmland preservation
zoning district.
2. Storing, processing or handling raw
agricultural commodities obtained directly
from farms, including farms in the farmland
preservation zoning district.
3. Slaughtering livestock, including
livestock from farms in the farmland
preservation zoning district.
4. Marketing livestock to or from farms,
including farms in the farmland preservation
zoning district.
5. Processing agricultural by-products
or wastes received directly from farms,
including farms in the farmland preservation
zoning district.
(d) Common ownership for purposes of
the farmland preservation ordinance means
ownership by the same person or persons.
Common ownership includes land owned by
the same individual, married couple, joint
tenants, tenants in common, corporation,
LLC, partnership, estate or trust. Solely for
purposes of this definition, a parcel owned
by one member of a married couple is
deemed to be owned by the married couple.
(e) Contiguous means adjacent to or
sharing a common boundary. Contiguous
land includes land that is separated only by a
river, stream, section line, public road,
private road, railroad, pipeline, transmission
line, or transportation or transmission rightof-
way. Parcels are not contiguous if they
meet only at a single point.
(f) Farm means all land under common
ownership that is primarily devoted to
agricultural use. For purposes of this
definition, land is deemed to be primarily
devoted to agricultural use if any of the
following apply:
1. The land produces at least $6,000 in
annual gross farm revenues to its owner or
renter, regardless of whether a majority of
the land area is in agricultural use.
2. A majority of the land area is in
agricultural use.
(g) Farm residence means a singlefamily
or duplex (by conditional use
approval) residence that is the only
residential structure on the farm.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 20 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(h) Gross farm revenue means gross
receipts from agricultural uses, less the cost
or other basis of livestock or other
agricultural items purchased for resale
which are sold or otherwise disposed of
during the taxable year. Gross farm revenue
includes receipts accruing to a renter, but
does not include rent paid to the land owner.
(i) Livestock means bovine animals,
equine animals, goats, poultry, sheep, swine,
farm-raised deer, farm-raised game birds,
camelids, ratites and farm-raised fish.
(j) Open space parcel means a parcel on
which no buildings, other than hunting
blinds or small sheds, have been constructed
or approved for construction.
(k) Person means an individual,
corporation, partnership, limited liability
company (LLC), trust, estate or other legal
entity.
(l) Prime farmland means all of the
following:
1. An area with a class I or class II land
capability classification as identified by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service of
the United States Department of Agriculture.
2. Land, other than land described in
par. 1., which is identified as prime farmland
in the county’s certified farmland
preservation plan.
(m) Prior nonconforming use means a
land use that does not comply with this
farmland preservation zoning ordinance, but
which lawfully existed prior to the
application of this ordinance.
(n) Protected farmland means land that
is any of the following:
1. Located in a farmland preservation
zoning district certified under ch. 91, Wis.
Stats.
2. Covered by a farmland preservation
agreement under ch. 91, Wis. Stats.
3. Covered by an agricultural
conservation easement under s. 93.73, Wis.
Stats.
4. Otherwise legally protected from
nonagricultural development.
(2) Land Use in Farmland
Preservation Zoning District, General.
Only the following land uses are allowed in
a farmland preservation zoning district:
(a) Uses allowed under Section (3) and
(4) without a conditional use permit.
(b) Uses allowed under Section (5) with
a conditional use permit.
(c) Prior nonconforming uses, subject to
Wis. Stats. §62.23(7)(h).
(3) Permitted Uses. The following
land uses are allowed without a conditional
use permit in a farmland preservation zoning
district:
(a) The following Agricultural uses on
farms:
1. Crop or forage production.
2. Keeping of livestock.
3. Beekeeping.
4. Nursery, sod, or Christmas tree
production.
5. Floriculture.
6. Aquaculture.
7. Fur farming.
8. Forest management.
9. Enrolling land in a federal
agricultural commodity payment program or
a federal or state agricultural land
conservation payment program.
(b) Undeveloped natural resource and
open space areas.
(c) Transportation, utility,
communication, or other uses that are
required under state or federal law to be
located in a specific place, or that are
authorized to be located in a specific place
under a state or federal law that preempts the
requirement of a conditional use permit for
that use.
(4) Accessory Uses. The following
accessory uses are permitted in a farmland
preservation zoning district:
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 21 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) A building, structure, or
improvement that is an integral part of, or is
incidental to, an agricultural use, including:
1. A facility to store or process raw
agricultural commodities, all of which are
produced on the farm.
2. A facility used to keep livestock on
the farm.
3. A facility used to store or process
inputs primarily for agricultural uses on the
farm.
4. A facility used to keep or service
vehicles or equipment primarily employed
in agricultural uses on the farm.
5. A wind turbine or solar energy
facility that collects wind or solar energy on
the farm, and uses or transforms it to
provide energy primarily for use on the
farm.
6. A manure digester, bio-fuel facility,
or other facility that produces energy
primarily from materials grown or produced
on the farm primarily for use on the farm.
7. A waste storage or processing facility
used to store or process animal waste
produced solely from livestock kept on the
farm.
(b) An activity or business operation
that is an integral part of or incidental to, an
agricultural use.
(c) A single family farm residence,
including normal residential appurtenances
such as a pool, deck, or patio.
(d) A business, activity, or enterprise,
whether or not associated with an
agricultural use, which meets all of the
following requirements:
1. It is conducted on a farm by an owner
or operator of that farm.
2. It requires no buildings, structures, or
improvements other than those described in
18.07(4) (a) & (c).
3. No non-farm resident employees
except by conditional use approval. Cannot
employ more than four (4) full-time
employees annually.
4. It does not impair or limit the current
or future agricultural use of the farm or other
protected farmland.
(5) Conditional Uses.
(a) General.
1. The Village may issue a conditional
use permit for a proposed land use identified
in this section if the proposed land use meets
applicable conditions under this section.
The Village shall follow the procedures
described in 18.98 (7).
2. Before issuing a conditional use
permit under par. 1., the Village shall
determine in writing that the proposed use
meets applicable conditions under this
section. The Village may issue the permit
subject to any additional conditions which
the Village deems necessary to carry out the
purposes of this ordinance.
(b) Accessory Uses on Farms.
1. The Village may issue a conditional
use permit for any of the following
accessory uses:
a. Duplex, provided it is the only
residential structure on the farm & the
occupants are the farm operator & those
related to the farm operator.
b. A home business, activity, or
enterprise with 2 or less non-resident
employees.
c. Riding stables and/or boarding
facilities.
(c) Certain Agriculture-Related
Conditional Uses.
1. The Village may issue a conditional
use permit for the certain agricultural and
agriculture-related uses under par. (5) (c) 2.
if all of the following apply:
a. The use supports agricultural uses in
the farmland preservation zoning district in
direct and significant ways, and is more
suited to a farmland preservation zoning
district than to an industrial or commercial
zoning district.
b. The use and its location in the
farmland preservation zoning district are
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 22 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
consistent with the purposes of the farmland
preservation zoning district.
c. The use and its location in the
farmland preservation zoning district are
reasonable and appropriate, considering
alternative locations, or are specifically
approved under state or federal law.
d. The use is reasonably designed to
minimize conversion of land, at and around
the use site, from agricultural use or open
space use.
e. The use does not substantially impair
or limit the current or future agricultural use
of other protected farmland.
f. Construction damage to land
remaining in agricultural use is minimized
and repaired to the extent feasible.
2. Certain Agriculture-Related
Conditional Uses Include:
a. Farmstead food processing facilities.
b. Farmstead retail outlets.
c. On-farm fuel or agrichemical storage
facilities.
d. A grain warehouse, potato
warehouse, or other warehouse that stores
raw agricultural commodities received from
farms.
e. A dairy plant that processes or
handles milk from farms.
f. A meat slaughter establishment.
g. A food processing plant that
processes raw agricultural commodities
received from farms.
h. A feed mill or rendering plant that
processes raw agricultural commodities or
agricultural by-products received directly
from farms, or supplies animal feed directly
to farms.
i. An ethanol plant, bio-diesel plant,
communal manure digester, pelletizing plant
or other facility that processes raw
agricultural commodities, agricultural byproducts
or agricultural wastes (received
directly from farms) to produce bulk fuel or
other bulk products.
j. A sawmill or other facility that
processes wood or other forest products
received directly from farms.
k. A facility that provides farm inputs
such as fertilizer, pesticides, seed or feed
directly to farms.
l. A facility that is primarily engaged in
sale and servicing of farm vehicles or other
farm equipment.
m. A facility that is primarily engaged
in providing agronomic or veterinary
services to farms.
(d) Compatible Infrastructure.
1. The Village may issue a conditional
use permit for a proposed use under par. (2)
if all of the following apply:
a. The use and its location in the
farmland preservation zoning district are
consistent with the purposes of the farmland
preservation zoning district.
b. The use and its location in the
farmland preservation zoning district are
reasonable and appropriate, considering
alternative locations, or are specifically
approved under state or federal law.
c. The use is reasonably designed to
minimize conversion of land, at and around
the site of the use, from agricultural use or
open space use.
d. The use does not substantially impair
or limit the current or future agricultural use
of other protected farmland.
e. Construction damage to land
remaining in agricultural use is minimized
and repaired to the extent feasible.
2. The Village may issue a conditional
use permit for any of the following
compatible infrastructure uses if that use
meets applicable conditions under par. 1.:
a. Transportation uses, including rail
facilities, and agricultural aeronautic
facilities.
b. Communication uses, including cell
towers, antennae and broadcast towers.
(e) Government and Nonprofit
Community Uses.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 23 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
1. The Village may issue a conditional
use permit for a government use, or for an
institutional, religious or community use, if
the Village determines that all of the
following apply:
a. The use and its location in the
farmland preservation zoning district are
consistent with the purposes of the farmland
preservation zoning district.
b. The use and its location in the
farmland preservation zoning district are
reasonable and appropriate, considering
alternative locations, or are specifically
approved under state or federal law.
c. The use is reasonably designed to
minimize the conversion of land, at and
around the site of the use, from agricultural
use or open space use.
d. The use does not substantially impair
or limit the current or future agricultural use
of other protected farmland.
e. Construction damage to land
remaining in agricultural use is minimized
and repaired, to the extent feasible.
2. Government and Nonprofit
Community Conditional Uses Include:
a. Fire stations, police stations, post
offices, and other government
administration buildings.
b. Schools, colleges, and universities.
c. Religious institutions, including
cemeteries and mausoleums.
d. Public parks and recreation areas
(f) Nonmetallic mineral extraction. The
Village may issue a conditional use permit
for nonmetallic mineral extraction if it
determines that all of the following apply:
1. The operation complies with all of
the following:
a. Subch. I of ch. 295 and rules
promulgated under that subchapter
b. Applicable provisions of ch. 14 of the
Brown County Code of Ordinances & 18.21
of the Suamico Municipal Code.
c. Any applicable requirements of the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation
concerning the restoration of nonmetallic
mineral extraction sites.
2. The operation and its location in the
farmland preservation zoning district are
consistent with the purpose of the farmland
preservation zoning district.
3. The operation and its location in the
farmland preservation zoning district are
reasonable and appropriate, considering
alternative locations outside the farmland
preservation zoning district, or are
specifically approved under state of federal
law.
4. The operation reasonably designed to
minimize the conversion of land around the
extraction site from agricultural use or open
space use.
5. The operation does not substantially
impair or limit the current or future
agricultural use of other protected farmland.
6. The conditional use permit requires
the landowner to restore the affected land
after the nonmetallic mineral extraction
operation is completed. The permit shall
require the landowner to restore the land to a
condition suitable for agricultural use,
according to a written restoration plan
included with the permit.
(6) Rezoning Land Out of a Farmland
Preservation Zoning District.
(a) Except as provided in sub. (2), the
Village may not rezone land out of a
farmland preservation zoning district unless
the Village finds all of the following in
writing, after public hearing, as part of the
official record of the rezoning, before
granting the rezone:
1. The rezoned land is better suited for a
use not allowed in the farmland preservation
zoning district.
2. The rezoning is consistent with any
comprehensive plan, adopted by the Village,
which is in effect at the time of the rezoning.
3. The rezoning is substantially
consistent with the Brown County Farmland
Preservation Plan, certified under ch. 91,
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 24 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
Wis. Stats., which is in effect at the time of
the rezoning.
4. The rezoning will not substantially
impair or limit current or future agricultural
use of other protected farmland. NOTE: By
March 1 of each year, the zoning authority
must report to DATCP & Brown County the
total acres rezoned, along with a map that
clearly shows the location of these areas,
during the preceding year.
(b) Subsection (a) does not apply to any
of the following:
1. A rezoning that is affirmatively
certified by the Wisconsin Department of
Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
under ch. 91, Wis. Stats.
2. A rezoning that makes the farmland
preservation zoning ordinance map more
consistent with the Brown County Farmland
Preservation Plan Map, certified under ch.
91, Wis. Stats., which is in effect at the time
of the rezoning.
(7) Dimensional Requirements.
(a) Lot Requirements.
Area. All land whether one parcel or 2 or
more contiguous parcels that is under
common ownership, 25 acres min, except
that non-contiguous parcels owned and
operated by a qualifying farm at the time of
adoption of this ordinance that are less than
the 25 acres may remain AG-FP as long as
no further land division occurs.
Width. Two hundred fifty (250) ft min.
(b) Height Regulations.
Farm Structures, except silos sixty (60) ft
max.
Residential Dwellings thirty-five (35) ft
max.
Accessory Buildings twenty-five (25) ft
max.
(c) Building Setbacks. Building
setbacks shall be those listed on a Certified
Survey Map and/or Plat duly approved by
the Board for the Village on or after
September 16, 2002, or the setbacks listed
below:
Yard Resid. Struc. Farm Struc.
Front 45 ft. min.
from hwy.
ROW
50 ft. min.
from hwy.
ROW
Side 20 ft. min. 75 ft. min.
Rear 25 ft. min. 75 ft. min.
Corner Side 45 ft. min.
from hwy.
ROW
50 ft. min.
from hwy.
ROW
ROW=right-of-way
(d) Building Size. Minimum size of a
residential dwelling shall be one thousand
twelve hundred (1,200) square feet above
grade with at least eight hundred (800)
square feet on the main floor.
(e) Parking. Parking shall conform to
the requirements as set forth in section
18.18.
(f) Signs. Signs shall be regulated as set
forth in section 18.17.
18.08 RR – RURAL RESIDENTIAL (NO
SEWER). The following regulations shall
apply in the RR-Rural Residential District:
(1) Permitted Uses.
(a) Single family dwellings.
(b) The production of crops (and soil
tillage for the purpose of producing the
crops) on unplatted lands. The application
of raw or liquid manure would require a
conditional use permit.
(2) Permitted Accessory Uses.
(a) No more than two (2) per
Section 18.04 (3) (e) detached garage or
accessory buildings. Gazebos less than two
hundred (200) square feet are exempt from
this requirement.
(b) Private swimming pools and decks.
(c) Home occupation without nonresident
employees. No retail sales,
assembling or manufacturing allowed onpremise.
(d) The keeping of chickens per 11.19.5
of the Suamico Municipal Code.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 25 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(3) Conditional Uses. The following
uses may be considered for conditional use
(see Section 18.04 (3) (d)):
(a) Home occupation with two (2) or
less employees. No retail sales, assembling,
or manufacturing allowed on-premise.
(b) Duplexes.
(c) Signs.
(d) Kennels.
(e) One (1) horse per every two (2)
acres.
(f) Artificial lakes and ponds two
thousand (2,000) square feet or larger in
size.
(g) Permitted Ag uses.
(h) Outdoor solid fuel combustion
appliances.
(4) Lot Requirements.
(a) Areas identified as “Future Rural
Residential” in the most recently
adopted/amended Village Comprehensive
Plan zoned Rural Residential (RR) shall
have the following minimum lot sizes:
Area: eighty-seven thousand one
hundred twenty (87,120) square feet (two
(2) acre) minimum
Width: one hundred fifty feet (150’)
minimum
1. Exception: Those existing lots of
record legally zoned Rural Residential (RR)
prior to the April 18, 2005 revision of this
district having less than eighty-seven
thousand one hundred twenty (87,120)
square feet (two (2) acres) shall be
considered conforming lots for the purposes
of this district. However in no instance shall
those lot sizes be further reduced while
zoned Rural Residential (RR).
(b) Areas identified as “Future 14,000;
20,000; and/or 25,000; Square Foot
Residential” in the most recently
adopted/amended Village Comprehensive
Plan zoned or requesting to be rezoned to
Rural Residential (RR) shall have the
following minimum lot sizes:
Area: fifty thousand (50,000) square
feet minimum
Width: one hundred fifty feet (150’)
minimum
(5) Height Regulations.
Residential dwellings: thirty-five feet
(35’) maximum
Accessory buildings: twenty-five feet
(25’) maximum
(6) Buildable Area. All lots (including
planned developments and conservation by
design subdivision) created after April 18,
2005 shall have a minimum buildable area
of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(7) Building Setbacks. All building
setbacks shall be measured from the
foundation wall, except that any overhang
greater than two feet (2’) shall require
additional setback equal to the amount
greater than two feet (2’). Building setbacks
shall be those listed on a certified survey
map and/or plat duly approved by the Board
for the Village on or after September 16,
2002, or the setbacks listed below:
Yard Princ. Struc. Acces. Struc.
Front 45 foot
min. from
street ROW
50 foot
min. from
street ROW
Side 20 foot
min.
20 foot
min.
Rear 25 foot
min.
20 foot
min.
Corner Side 45 foot
min.
50 foot
min.
ROW=right-of-way
(8) Building Size. Minimum size of a
residential dwelling shall be one thousand
two hundred (1,200) square feet above grade
with at least eight hundred (800) square feet
on the main floor.
(9) Parking. Parking shall conform to
the requirements as set forth in Section
18.18.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 26 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(10) Signs. Signs shall be regulated as
set forth in Section 18.17.
(11) Special Exceptions. The
following uses may be considered for
special exception (see Section 18.98 (8))
(a) Honey Bees.
18.09 RS – RESIDENTIAL SEWERED.
The following regulations shall apply in the
RS-Residential Sewered District:
(1) Permitted Uses.
(a) Single family dwellings.
(b) Duplex/two (2) family dwellings
when approved by the Planning & Zoning
Commission and Board during the platting
process.
(c) The production of crops (and soil
tillage for the purpose of producing the
crops) on unplatted lands. The application
of raw or liquid manure would not be
permitted.
(2) Permitted Accessory Uses.
(a) No more than one (1) per Section
18.04 (3) (e) detached garage or accessory
building (maximum size seven hundred
twenty (720) square feet) except duplex lots
shall be limited to three hundred sixty (360)
square feet per side. An additional
accessory building or additional seven
hundred twenty (720) square feet is
permitted if lot size meets or exceeds forty
thousand (40,000) square feet. The
following shall be exempt from these
requirements:
1. Primary detached garage one
thousand twenty (1,020) square feet or less.
2. Gazebos less than two hundred (200)
square feet.
(b) Private swimming pools and decks.
(c) Home occupation without nonresident
employees. No retail sales,
assembling, or manufacturing allowed onpremise.
(d) The keeping of chickens per 11.19.5
of the Suamico Municipal Code.
(3) Conditional Uses. The following
uses may be considered for conditional use
(see Section 18.04 (3) (d)):
(a) Duplex/two (2) family dwellings.
(b) Multi-family dwellings and condos.
(c) Home occupation with two (2) or
less employees. No retail sales, assembling,
or manufacturing allowed on-premise.
(d) Signs.
(e) Artificial lakes and ponds two
thousand (2,000) square feet or larger in
size.
(4) Lot Requirements.
Single Family Dwelling Lot
Area: per the most current Village
Comprehensive Plan
Width: one hundred feet (100’)
minimum
Duplex Lot
Area: fourteen thousand (14,000) square
feet minimum, but must comply with the
most current Village Comprehensive Plan
Width: one hundred feet (100’)
minimum
(5) Height Regulations.
Residential dwellings: thirty-five feet
(35’) maximum
Accessory structure: twenty-five feet
(25’) maximum
(6) Buildable Area. All lots (including
planned developments and conservation by
design subdivision) created after April 18,
2005 shall have a minimum buildable area
of three thousand (3,000) square feet.
(7) Building Setbacks. All building
setbacks shall be measured from the
foundation wall, except that any overhang
greater than two feet (2’) shall require
additional setback equal to the amount
greater than two feet (2’). Building setbacks
shall be those listed on a certified survey
map and/or plat duly approved by the Board
for the Village on or after September 16,
2002, or the setbacks listed below:
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 27 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
Yard Princ. Struc. Acces. Struc.
Front 35 foot
min. from
street ROW
40 foot
min. from
street ROW
Side 10 foot
min.
10 foot
min.
Rear 25 foot
min.
15 foot
min.
Corner Side 35 foot
min.
40 foot
min.
ROW=right-of-way
(8) Building Size.
(a) Single Family. Minimum size of a
residential dwelling shall be one thousand
two hundred (1,200) square feet above grade
with at least eight hundred (800) square feet
on the main floor.
(b) Two (2) Family. Minimum size of a
residential dwelling shall be seven hundred
(700) square feet on the main floor area per
family unit.
(9) Parking. Parking shall conform to
the requirements as set forth in Section
18.18.
(10) Signs. Signs shall be regulated as
set forth in Section 18.17.
(11) Other Requirements.
(a) Apartment units constructed within
the RS District shall meet the height
regulations, setbacks, and lot area.
(b) There shall be a minimum spacing
of five hundred feet (500’) between duplex
lots when not separated by a public road.
(c) There shall be no more than one (1)
duplex lot per ten (10) lots within any
individual subdivision plat.
(d) There shall be no more than two (2)
duplex lots on an intersection containing
four (4) corner lots.
(e) There shall be no more than one (1)
duplex lot located on an intersection
containing two (2) corner lots. This will
ensure a low density of duplexes in a
predominantly single family development
area.
(f) All corner lot duplexes shall access
one (1) unit to each street unless otherwise
specified.
(g) All duplex lots must be identified on
the plat on the specific lot and in the
restrictive covenants prior to final plat or
certified survey map approval.
(12) Zero Lot Line Duplexes, Four (4)
Plexes, and Condominiums.
(a) Lots shall have not less than fifty
feet (50’) of frontage measured along the
right-of-way line for each dwelling unit. If
such lot is located on the outer radius of a
curved street or cul-de-sac, the frontage may
be measured at the building front setback
line provided the right-of-way frontage is at
least forty feet (40’).
(b) Lots shall have not less than seven
thousand (7,000) square feet in area for each
dwelling unit.
(c) When attached dwelling units are
created, matters of mutual concern to the
adjacent property owners, due to
construction, catastrophe, and maintenance,
shall be guarded against by private
covenants and deed restrictions and the
approving authorities shall not be held
responsible for same.
(d) Easements shall be provided across
zero lot lines where necessary for water,
sewer, and utility services.
(e) When attached dwelling units are
created, the plans, specifications and
construction of such buildings shall require
the installation and construction of separate
sewer and other metered utility services to
each dwelling unit.
18.10 PUBLIC LANDS AND
INSTITUTIONS.
(1) Purpose. To provide for, properly
control, and protect public, quasi-public, and
semi-public lands and buildings intended
and used for the general public welfare,
including land reserves designated for future
public or institutional use.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 28 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(2) Permitted Uses. No land in the
Public Lands and Institutions District shall
be used or altered and no building or
structure in the Public Lands and Institutions
District shall be used, erected, altered, or
enlarged except for the uses specified in this
chapter.
(a) Public gardens and forests.
(b) Public sports fields and other
recreational facilities including golf courses.
(c) Open space for recreational use
whether wild or developed.
(d) Religious institutions.
(e) Cemeteries-to provide, properly
control, and protect land used for interment
of human remains and for related uses.
1. Crematoria, monuments, chapels,
administration and maintenance buildings,
and other buildings, structures, and facilities
appurtenant to the operation and care of
cemeteries.
(f) Public administration buildings,
garages and warehouses, and police and fire
stations.
(g) School-park sites.
(h) Public, private, and parochial
elementary and secondary schools.
(i) Public, private, and parochial
colleges.
(j) Libraries.
(k) Zoos, arboretums, and museums.
(l) Similar uses determined appropriate
by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
The location and architectural design of such
buildings and structures, whether publicly or
privately owned, shall first be submitted to
the Planning & Zoning Commission for its
consideration and report before final action
is taken thereon by the Board.
(3) Conditional Uses. The following
uses may be considered for conditional use
(see Section 18.04 (3) (d)):
(a) Telecommunication Towers.
(4) Lot Area, Frontage, and Yard
Regulations. All yard requirements shall be
reviewed by the Planning & Zoning
Commission, before final action is taken
thereon by the Board, after investigation of
the effect of the proposed use upon the
surrounding area and adjoining premises,
but in no case shall the minimum yard
distance be less than as follows:
(a) When abutting a residentially zoned
property, setbacks shall be no less than that
of the abutting residential classification.
(b) Zero-lot line may be permitted in
situations where combining of properties is
not practical.
(c) Or the setbacks listed below:
Front 25 foot min. from
street ROW
Side 10 foot min.
Rear 10 foot min.
Corner Side 25 foot min.
ROW=right-of-way
18.11 B – BUSINESS. The Business
District is designed to accommodate those
uses where moderate-intensity retail, office
and service uses are planned. Businesses
that typically involve outdoor display,
storage and/or sales, motor vehicle repair
and other intensive or outdoor uses are
discouraged.
(1) General Requirements. The
following general requirements shall apply
in the Business District:
(a) Uses. With the exception of
approved accessory buildings and uses, only
principal retail or office uses are allowed.
(b) Business. All business shall be
conducted directly with consumers.
(c) Goods. All goods produced on a
premises shall be sold at retail on the
premises where produced.
(d) Enclosed Buildings. Except for
permitted accessory uses, outside sale and
display (Section 18.11 (5)), and except as
specifically allowed as a conditional use in
accordance with Section 18.99 (7), all
business, servicing, processing, sales, and
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 29 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
storage shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings.
(e) All building, lighting, site, signage,
and landscaping shall require Design
Review Committee review for conformance
to the provisions of this ordinance in relation
to the standards adopted in Section 16.28 of
the Village Municipal Code.
(f) Developments located in special
development areas (e.g. Town Center) shall
conform to the recommendations of those
districts.
(g) Stormwater plans shall be approved
by the Engineer.
(2) Permitted Uses.
(a) Antique/Second hand/consignment
shops.
(b) Appliance dealers/repairs
(household).
(c) Art shops, galleries, and supply
stores.
(d) Bakery goods stores.
(e) Banks and financial institutions.
(f) Barber/Beauty/Tanning Shops.
(g) Bicycle sales, rental, and repair
stores.
(h) Boat and marina supply dealers.
(i) Book stores (including magazine and
newspaper sales).
(j) Business machine sales and service
centers.
(k) Catering establishments.
(l) Clubs and lodges.
(m) Computer and data processing
services and dealers.
(n) Copy and duplicating services.
(o) Day care centers (group).
(p) Electrical showrooms and shops.
(q) Florist shops.
(r) Fruit and produce stands.
(s) Funeral homes.
(t) Grocery and food stores.
(u) Laboratories (medical, dental,
research, and testing).
(v) Laundries (full-service, employing
not more than four (4) persons).
(w) Laundries (self service).
(x) Lawn and garden supply, seed, and
plant stores.
(y) Lawn equipment sales and service
centers.
(z) Libraries.
(a1) Locksmith shops.
(b1) Meeting halls.
(c1) Millinery shops.
(d1) Motor vehicle parts, supplies and
accessory stores, not to include used auto
salvage yards.
(e1) Nursing homes and personal care
facilities.
(f1) Office machine sales and service
shops.
(g1) Offices (business, professional, and
governmental).
(h1) Orthopedic and medical appliance
stores.
(i1) Paint stores.
(j1) Pet shops.
(k1) Pharmacies.
(l1) Photography studios.
(m1) Picture framing shops.
(n1) Plumbing showrooms and shops.
(o1) Post offices.
(p1) Radio and television stations.
(q1) Recording studios.
(r1) Rental service stores.
(s1) Restaurants (including drive-in
restaurants).
(t1) Retail sales, except sales requiring
special permits and/or licenses are by
conditional use only. (Adult entertainment
establishments are prohibited).
1. Alcohol.
2. Explosives.
3. Firearms.
4. Fireworks.
5. Hazardous materials.
(u1) Schools (dance, music, and
business).
(v1) Tailor shops.
(w1) Taxidermists.
(x1) Theaters (indoor).
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 30 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(y1) Ticket agencies (amusement).
(z1) Tobacco shops.
(a2) Transportation ticket offices.
(b2) Travel agencies.
(c2) Any use deemed similar by the
Zoning Administrator to the above listed
uses.
(3) Permitted Accessory Uses.
(a) General Requirements. Accessory
uses and structures shall comply with the
following standards and all other applicable
regulations of this code.
1. No accessory use or structure shall be
constructed or established on any lot prior to
the time of construction of the principal use
to which it is accessory.
2. The accessory use or structure shall
be incidental to and customarily associated
with the principal use or structure served.
3. The accessory use or structure shall
be subordinate in area, extent, and purpose
to the principal use or structure served.
4. The accessory use or structure shall
contribute to the comfort, convenience, or
necessity of the occupants of the principal
use or structure.
5. The accessory use or structure shall
be located on the same parcel as the
principal use or structure.
(4) Conditional Uses. The following
may be considered as a conditional use (see
Section 18.04 (3) (d)).
(a) Amusement establishments (archery
ranges, bowling alleys, driving ranges,
shooting galleries, game rooms, swimming
pools, skating rinks, and similar facilities).
(b) Auction rooms.
(c) Boat and recreational watercraft
rental businesses.
(d) Car washes.
(e) Dry cleaners.
(f) Dwelling units and lodging rooms
located above the first (1st) floor.
(g) Gasoline and motor vehicle fuel
sales businesses.
(h) Hotels.
(i) Kennels.
(j) Laundries (full-service, employing
more than four (4) persons).
(k) Lumber yards and building material
sales centers.
(l) Mail order houses.
(m) Motels.
(n) Outside business, servicing,
processing, sales or storage (any use or
activity, other than off-street parking and
loading, not conducted within completely
enclosed buildings).
(o) Parking lots, garages, and structures
(non-accessory).
(p) Planned developments.
(q) Public utility, governmental and
service uses (except as specifically
exempted in Section 18.05 (4) of this
ordinance).
(r) Retail sales requiring special permits
and/or licenses.
1. Alcohol.
2. Explosives.
3. Firearms.
4. Fireworks.
5. Hazardous materials.
(s) Recreational buildings.
(t) Restaurants primarily engaged in
drive-in, drive-through, or carry out
services.
(u) Taverns, cocktail lounges, and
drinking establishments.
(v) Veterinary clinics and hospitals.
(5) Outdoor Sales & Displays.
Outdoor sales or display are permitted only
when accessory to the permitted or
conditional use. All outdoor sales or
displays are required to meet the following:
(a) Maximum size of area without
conditional use approval is one hundred
(100) square feet.
(b) All sales and display areas shall be
removed at the end of every business day.
(c) Display areas must be located as to
not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 31 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
traffic, required parking areas or encroach
upon landscaped areas.
Temporary displays larger than one
hundred (100) square feet will require a
special permit from the Zoning
Administrator. Special permits if granted
shall be for a maximum of thirty (30) days
and no more than two (2) permits shall be
issued per calendar year. Fees for temporary
permits will be as approved from time to
time by resolution by the Board.
(6) Lot Requirements.
With public sewer
Area: fourteen thousand (14,000) square
feet minimum
Width: one hundred feet (100’)
minimum
Without Public Sewer
Area: forty thousand (40,000) square
feet minimum
Width: one hundred feet (100’)
minimum
(7) Height Regulations.
All structures, thirty-five feet (35’)
maximum
(8) Building Setbacks. Building
setbacks shall be those listed on a certified
survey map and/or plat duly approved by the
Board for the Village on or after
September 16, 2002, or the setbacks listed
below:
Yard Princ. Struc. Acces. Build.
Front 45 foot
min. from
street ROW
45 foot
min. from
street ROW
Side 10 foot
min.
10 foot
min.
Rear 10 foot
min.
10 foot
min.
Corner Side 45 foot
min. from
street ROW
45 foot
min. from
street ROW
ROW=right-of-way
(9) Building Size.
All principal buildings, minimum seven
hundred (700) square feet
(10) Building Materials. One hundred
percent (100%) of a building elevation (nonwindow
areas) that fronts on a right-of-way
or proposed right-of-way shall be
constructed with wood (manmade materials
that give the appearance of wood are
acceptable), brick, stucco, stone, or
decorative face concrete block.
Consideration will be given for metal lap
siding, glass curtain walls and other
manmade materials if fifty percent (50%) of
face is approved masonry materials.
(11) Parking. Parking shall conform to
the requirements as set forth in Section
18.18.
(12) Signs. Signs shall be regulated as
set forth in Section 18.17.
18.12 HB – HIGHWAY BUSINESS. The
Highway Business District is designed to
accommodate those business and retail uses
which provide merchandise and services
desired by motorists, directly from or for
motor vehicles.
(1) General Requirements. The
following general requirements shall apply
in the Highway Business District:
(a) Uses. With the exception of
approved accessory buildings and uses, only
principal retail, office, and institutional uses
are allowed.
(b) Business. All business shall be
conducted directly with consumers.
(c) Goods. All goods produced on a
premises shall be sold at retail on the
premises where produced.
(d) Enclosed Buildings. Except for
permitted accessory uses, outside sale and
display (Section 18.12 (5)) and except for
services provided to and for motor vehicles,
and except as specifically allowed as a
conditional use in accordance with
Section 18.99 (7), all business, servicing,
processing, sales, and storage shall be
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 32 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
conducted within completely enclosed
buildings.
(e) All building, lighting, site, signage,
and landscaping shall require Design
Review Committee review for conformance
to the provisions of this ordinance in relation
to the standards adopted in Section 16.28 of
the Village Municipal Code.
(f) Developments located in special
development areas (e.g. Town Center) shall
conform to the recommendations of those
districts.
(g) Stormwater plans shall be approved
by the Engineer.
(2) Permitted Uses.
(a) All permitted uses allowed in the
Business District as specified in
Section 18.11 (2).
(b) Amusement establishment (archery
ranges, bowling alleys, shooting galleries,
game rooms, swimming pools, skating rinks,
and similar facilities).
(c) Auction rooms.
(d) Boats and recreational watercraft
business.
(e) Car washes.
(f) Commercial publishing and printing
establishments.
(g) Dry cleaners.
(h) Hospitals.
(i) Hotels.
(j) Laundries (full-service, employing
more than four (4) persons).
(k) Lumber yards and building material
sales centers.
(l) Mail order houses.
(m) Motels.
(n) Motorcycle dealers.
(o) Motor vehicle dealers.
(p) Motor vehicle rental and leasing
businesses.
(q) Parking lots, garages, and structures
(non-accessory).
(r) Passenger transportation services.
(s) Public utility, governmental, and
service uses (except as specifically
exempted in Section 18.05 (4).
(t) Recreational buildings.
(u) Recreational vehicle dealers.
(v) Restaurants primarily engaged in
drive-in, drive-through, or carry out
services.
(w) Rooming and boarding houses.
(x) Trailer dealers (utility).
(y) Veterinary clinics and hospitals.
(3) Permitted Accessory Uses.
(a) General Requirements. Accessory
uses and structures shall comply with the
following standards and all other applicable
regulations of this code.
1. No accessory use or structure shall be
constructed or established on any lot prior to
the time of construction of the principal use
to which it is accessory.
2. The accessory use or structure shall
be incidental to and customarily associated
with the principal use or structure served.
3. The accessory use or structure shall
be subordinate in area, extent, and purpose
to the principal use or structure served.
4. The accessory use or structure shall
contribute to the comfort, convenience, or
necessity of the occupants of the principal
use or structure.
5. The accessory use or structure shall
be located on the same parcel as the
principal use or structure.
(4) Conditional Uses. The following
may be considered as a conditional use (see
Section 18.04 (3) (d)).
(a) Automotive/motor vehicle repair
shops, garage, and service centers.
(b) Farm machinery and equipment
dealers.
(c) Gasoline and motor vehicle fuel
sales business.
(d) Kennels.
(e) Liquor stores.
(f) Manufactured home dealers.
(g) Mini-warehouse.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 33 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(h) Outside business, servicing,
processing, sales or storage (any use or
activity, other than off-street parking and
loading, not conducted within completely
enclosed buildings).
(i) Planned developments.
(j) Tavern, cocktail lounges, and
drinking establishments.
(k) Trade schools.
(l) Transitional facility.
(5) Outdoor Sales & Displays.
Outdoor sales or display are permitted only
when accessory to the permitted or
conditional use. All outdoor sales or
displays are required to meet the following:
(a) Temporary outdoor sales or
displays:
1. Maximum size of area is one hundred
(100) square feet.
2. All sales and display areas shall be
removed at the end of every business day.
3. Display areas must be located as to
not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, required parking areas, or encroach
upon landscaped areas.
4. Temporary displays larger than one
hundred (100) square feet will require a
special permit from the Zoning
Administrator. Special permits if granted
shall be for a maximum of thirty (30) days
and no more than two (2) permits shall be
issued per calendar year.
5. Fees for temporary permits will be as
approved from time to time by resolution by
the Board.
(b) Permanent outdoor sales or displays:
1. Site plan approval by the Planning &
Zoning Commission is required for the
following uses. All other uses require
conditional use approval:
a. Boats and recreational watercraft
business.
b. Motorcycle dealers.
c. Motor vehicle.
d. Motor vehicle rental and leasing
businesses.
e. Parking lots, garages, and structures
(non-accessory).
f. Recreational vehicle dealers.
g. Trailer dealers (utility).
(6) Lot Requirements.
With public sewer
Area: fourteen thousand (14,000) square
feet minimum
Width: one hundred feet (100’)
minimum
Without public sewer
Area: forty thousand (40,000) square
feet minimum
Width: one hundred feet (100’)
minimum
(7) Height Regulations.
All structures: thirty-five feet (35’)
maximum
(8) Building Setbacks. Building
setbacks shall be those listed on a certified
survey map and/or plat duly approved by the
Board for the Village on or after
September 16, 2002, or the setbacks listed
below:
Yard Princ. Struc. Acces. Build.
Front 45 foot
min. from
street ROW
45 foot
min. from
street ROW
Side 10 foot
min.
10 foot
min.
Rear 10 foot
min.
10 foot
min.
Corner Side 45 foot
min.
45 foot
min.
ROW=right-of-way
(9) Building Size.
All principal buildings, minimum seven
hundred (700) square feet
(10) Building Materials. One hundred
percent (100%) of a building elevation (nonwindow
areas) that fronts on a right-of-way
or proposed right-of-way shall be
constructed with wood (manmade materials
that give the appearance of wood are
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 34 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
acceptable), brick, stucco, stone, or
decorative face concrete block.
Consideration will be given for metal lap
siding, glass curtain walls, and other
manmade materials if fifty percent (50%) of
face is approved masonry materials.
(11) Parking. Parking shall conform to
the requirements as set forth in Section
18.18.
(12) Signs. Signs shall be regulated as
set forth in Section 18.17.
18.13 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS.
The Neighborhood Business District is
intended to serve the retail and service needs
of community with controlled impact to the
surrounding residential neighborhoods.
(1) General Requirements. The
following general requirements shall apply
in the Neighborhood Business District:
(a) Uses. With the exception of
approved accessory buildings and uses, only
principal retail or office uses are allowed.
(b) Business. All business shall be
conducted directly with consumers.
(c) Goods. All goods produced on a
premises shall be sold at retail on the
premises where produced.
(d) Enclosed Buildings. Except for
permitted accessory uses, outside sale and
display (Section 18.13 (5) below), and
except as specifically allowed as a
conditional use in accordance with Section
18.99 (7), all business, servicing, processing,
sales, and storage shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings.
(e) All building, lighting, site, signage,
and landscaping shall require Design
Review Committee review for conformance
to the provisions of this ordinance in relation
to the standards adopted in Section 16.28 of
the Village Municipal Code.
(f) Developments located in special
development areas (e.g. Town Center) shall
conform to the recommendations of those
districts.
(g) Stormwater plans shall be approved
by the Engineer.
(2) Permitted Uses.
(a) Art supplies, shops, and galleries.
(b) Bakeries, retail.
(c) Banks, credit unions, financial
institutions.
(d) Barber and beauty shops, spas.
(e) Book stores (including magazine and
newspaper sales).
(f) Boutiques, specialty clothing.
(g) Community center, neighborhood
center.
(h) Dairy product retail stores.
(i) Day care centers.
(j) Delicatessens, cafes.
(k) Drug stores.
(l) Dry cleaning drop-off site.
(m) Floral shops.
(n) Gift shops.
(o) General merchandise.
(p) Hardware store.
(q) Health club, fitness center, indoor
recreation.
(r) Insurance agents.
(s) Jewelry stores.
(t) Libraries.
(u) Liquor/wine store.
(v) Pet shops.
(w) Photography studios.
(x) Picture framing shops.
(y) Professional offices.
(z) Restaurants.
(a1) Specialty foods.
(b1) Small appliance sales and service
(indoor appliance only).
(c1) Video, DVD stores.
(3) Permitted Accessory Uses.
(a) General Requirements. Accessory
uses and structures shall comply with the
following standards and all other applicable
regulations of this code.
1. No accessory use or structure shall be
constructed or established on any lot prior to
the time of construction of the principal use
to which it is accessory.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 35 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
2. The accessory use or structure shall
be incidental to and customarily associated
with the principal use or structure served.
3. The accessory use or structure shall
be subordinate in area, extent, and purpose
to the principal use or structure served.
4. The accessory use or structure shall
contribute to the comfort, convenience, or
necessity of the occupants of the principal
use or structure.
5. The accessory use or structure shall
be located on the same parcel as the
principal use or structure.
(4) Conditional Uses. The following
uses may be considered for conditional use.
(see Section 18.04 (3) (d)):
(a) Mixed Business/Residential use.
(b) Any allowable use in Business.
(5) Outdoor Sales & Display. Outdoor
sales or display are permitted only when
accessory to the permitted or conditional
use. All outdoor sales or displays are
required to meet the following:
(a) Maximum size of area without
conditional use approval is one hundred
(100) square feet.
(b) All sales and display areas shall be
removed at the end of every business day.
(c) Display areas must be located as to
not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, required parking areas, or encroach
upon landscaped areas.
(d) Temporary displays larger than one
hundred (100) square feet will require a
special permit from the Zoning
Administrator. Special permits shall be for a
maximum of thirty (30) days and no more
than two (2) permits shall be issued per
calendar year.
(e) Fees for temporary permits will be
as approved from time to time by resolution
by the Board.
(6) Hours of Operation. All business
shall be conducted between the hours of
7 a.m. and 9 p.m. unless approved by the
Board.
(7) Lot Requirements.
With public sewer
Area: fourteen thousand (14,000) square
feet minimum
Width: one hundred feet (100’)
minimum
Without public sewer
Area: forty thousand (40,000) square
feet minimum
Width: one hundred feet (100’)
minimum
(8) Height Regulations.
Primary structures: thirty-five feet (35’)
maximum
Accessory structures shall not exceed the
height of the principal structure.
(9) Building Setbacks. All building
setbacks shall be measured from the
foundation wall, except that any overhang
greater than two feet (2’) shall require
additional setback equal to the amount
greater than two feet (2’).
Yard Princ. Struc. Acces. Build.
Front 25 foot
min. from
street ROW
35 foot
min. from
street ROW
Side 10 foot
min.
10 foot
min.
Rear 10 foot
min.
10 foot
min.
Corner Side 25 foot
min. from
street ROW
35 foot
min. from
street ROW
ROW=right-of-way
(10) Building Size.
(a) Principal structure: minimum seven
hundred (700) square feet
(b) Accessory building: maximum
seven hundred (700) square feet in size
(11) Number of Structures.
(a) Maximum of three (3) principal use
structures shall be located on a lot.
(b) Only one (1) accessory structure
shall be located on a lot.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 36 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(12) Building Materials.
(a) One hundred percent (100%) of all
building elevations (non-window areas)
shall be constructed with wood (manmade
materials that give the appearance of wood
are acceptable), brick, stucco, stone, or
decorative face concrete block.
Consideration will be given for metal lap
siding, glass curtain walls, and other
manmade materials if fifty percent (50%) of
face is approved masonry materials.
(b) All structures shall be of like
materials.
(c) All outside trash shall be kept in
enclosed areas of like materials of the main
structure.
(13) Parking. Parking shall conform to
the requirements as set forth in Section
18.18, except that no parking area shall be in
a front yard. All parking areas are required
to be paved and properly marked.
(14) Signs. Signs shall be regulated as
set forth in Section 18.17, except that the
following restrictions apply:
(a) All exterior signs shall be ground
style with a maximum size of thirty-two (32)
square feet per side (no building wall
signage).
(b) All sign lighting shall be turned off
at the end of business each day.
18.14 I1 – INDUSTRIAL 1. The I1
Industrial District is designed primarily to
accommodate those business and
commercial activities which may be
incompatible with the predominantly retail
uses permitted in the Highway Business or
Business Districts; and whose service area is
not confined to any one (1) neighborhood or
community.
(1) General Requirements. The
following general requirements shall apply
in the I1 Industrial Zoning District:
(a) Except for permitted off-street
parking and loading, and except as
specifically allowed as a conditional use in
accordance with Section 18.99 (7) of this
code, all business, servicing, processing,
manufacturing operations, and storage shall
be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings.
(b) All development shall comply with
the requirements set forth in the Village
Industrial Park Land Use Controls.
(c) No building or any improvement
shall be erected, placed, or altered on any
building site until the plans for such building
or improvement, including site plan,
landscape plan, building plan and
specifications, have been submitted for
approval to the Board or its designated agent
or representative. The Board or its
designated agent or representative shall
approve or disapprove such plans with
respect to conformity with the Village
Industrial Park Land Use Controls and other
applicable codes and ordinances of the
Village, and with respect to harmony of
external design and land use as it affects
property within and adjacent to the industrial
park.
(d) Stormwater plans shall be approved
by the Engineer.
(2) Permitted Uses. The following
uses are allowed in the I1 Industrial Zoning
District. All other uses not specifically
listed are prohibited.
(a) Automotive repair garages.
(b) Bakeries (wholesale).
(c) Bedding manufacturing.
(d) Building materials sales and storage.
(e) Carpet and flooring manufacturing.
(f) Cloth products manufacturing.
(g) Contractor’s offices, shops, and
yards.
(h) Cosmetic production.
(i) Dairy products manufacturing,
processing, and packaging.
(j) Electronic and scientific precision
equipment manufacturing.
(k) Farm machinery and equipment
dealers.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 37 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(l) Feed and seed sales.
(m) Glass products manufacturing.
(n) Lithographing.
(o) Lodges and offices of labor
organizations.
(p) Machinery and appliance
manufacturing (light).
(q) Manufacturing and bottling of nonalcoholic
beverages.
(r) Manufactured home dealers.
(s) Municipal facilities.
(t) Musical instrument manufacturing.
(u) Orthopedic and medical appliance
manufacturing.
(v) Printing and publishing
establishments.
(w) Radio and television towers.
(x) Sign manufacturing.
(y) Sporting goods manufacturing.
(z) Trade schools.
(a1) Warehousing, storage, and
distribution facilities.
(b1) Parking lots.
(3) Conditional Uses. The Planning &
Zoning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the Board concerning
the proposal. The conditional uses may be
allowed when determined not to be
obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive.
(4) Lot Requirements.
With public sewer
Area: one (1) acre minimum
Width: one hundred feet (100’)
minimum
Without public sewer
Area: two (2) acre minimum
Width: two hundred feet (200’)
minimum
(5) Height Regulations.
Residential dwelling: thirty-five feet
(35’) maximum
All other structures: sixty feet (60’)
maximum
(6) Building Setbacks. Building
setbacks shall be those listed on a certified
survey map and/or plat duly approved by the
Board for the Village on or after
September 16, 2002, or the setbacks listed
below:
Yard Princ. Struc. Acces. Build.
Front 45 foot
min. from
street ROW
45 foot
min. from
street ROW
Side 20 foot
min.
20 foot
min.
Rear 20 foot
min.
20 foot
min.
Corner Side 45 foot
min. from
street ROW
45 foot
min. from
street ROW
ROW=right-of-way
When adjacent to a residential zone,
side, and rear yard setbacks shall be
increased to a fifty feet (50’) minimum.
(7) Parking. Parking shall conform to
the requirements as set forth in Section
18.18.
(8) Signs. Signs shall be regulated as
set forth in Section 18.17.
18.15 I2 – INDUSTRIAL 2. The I2
Industrial District is a special or exclusive
type of planned industrial area designed and
equipped to accommodate a community of
both light and heavy industrial activities
which require large parcels of property,
which are compatible with the use and
occupancy of adjoining properties and
which, by their character should be remote
from residential and business development,
and which are found not to be obnoxious,
unhealthful, or offensive by reason of
potential emission or transmission of noise,
vibrations, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or toxic
or noxious matter.
(1) General Requirements.
(a) All business, servicing, processing,
manufacturing operations within three
hundred feet (300’) of a residential,
business, or commercial zoning district shall
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 38 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings. Except for permitted off-street
parking and loading, all storage within three
hundred feet (300’) of a residential,
business, or commercial zoning district shall
be within completely enclosed buildings or
effectively screened by a solid wall or fence
(including solid entrance and exit gates) not
less than six feet (6’) nor more than eight
feet (8’) in height.
(b) No building shall be erected or
structurally altered within the district to
exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five feet
(35’) in height, excepting that architectural
features and chimneys may extend above
such height; and further excepting that
buildings may exceed such height if an
additional one foot (1’) of front yard and
side yard is provided for each foot
exceeding such height of thirty-five feet
(35’). No building shall exceed seventy-five
feet (75’) in height.
(c) No building or any improvement
shall be erected, placed, or altered on any
building site until the plans for such building
or improvement, including site plan,
landscape plan, building plan and
specifications, have been submitted for
approval to the Board or its designated agent
or representative. The Board or its
designated agent or representative shall
approve or disapprove such plans with
respect to conformity with the Village
Industrial Land Use Controls and other
applicable codes and ordinances of the
Village, and with respect to harmony of
external design and land use as it affects
property within and adjacent to the I2
Industrial District.
(d) Stormwater plans shall be approved
by the Engineer.
(2) Permitted Uses. The following
general uses are permitted in the I2
Industrial District:
(a) Abrasive manufacturing.
(b) Adult entertainment establishments.
(c) Asphalt products manufacturing.
(d) Assembly plants.
(e) Bakeries (excluding retail outlets).
(f) Bedding manufacturing.
(g) Boot and shoe manufacturing.
(h) Bottling companies.
(i) Brick and masonry products
manufacturing.
(j) Carpet and flooring manufacturing
cartage facilities.
(k) Cartage facilities.
(l) Chemical manufacturing and
processing.
(m) Cloth products manufacturing.
(n) Concrete mixing plants.
(o) Contractor’s offices, shops, and
yards.
(p) Cosmetic production.
(q) Dairy products manufacturing,
processing, and packaging.
(r) Electronic and scientific instrument
manufacturing.
(s) Electroplating facilities.
(t) Feed mills (including feed and seed
sales outlets).
(u) Food manufacturing, processing,
and packaging (excluding meat packing).
(v) Foundries and forge plants.
(w) Freight terminals.
(x) Furniture manufacturing and
upholstery.
(y) Fur processing plants.
(z) Glass products manufacturing.
(a1) Grain storage and processing.
(b1) Graphite products manufacturing.
(c1) Kennels.
(d1) Laboratories (research and testing).
(e1) Laundries (non-retail).
(f1) Leather tanning and processing.
(g1) Lithographing facilities.
(h1) Machinery and appliance
manufacturing.
(i1) Machine shop.
(j1) Manufacturing plants.
(k1) Mail order houses.
(l1) Metal stamping.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 39 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(m1) Motor vehicle repair shops and
service centers.
(n1) Musical instrument manufacturing.
(o1) Orthopedic and medical appliance
manufacturing.
(p1) Paint products manufacturing.
(q1) Paper products manufacturing.
(r1) Parking lots, garages, and structures
(non-accessory).
(s1) Petroleum products manufacturing,
processing, and storage.
(t1) Plastic and plastic products
manufacturing.
(u1) Printing and publishing
establishments (non-retail).
(v1) Public utility, governmental, and
service uses.
(w1) Radio and television stations and
towers.
(x1) Railroad facilities.
(y1) Rope, cord, and twine
manufacturing.
(z1) Rubber manufacturing and
processing.
(a2) Sign manufacturing.
(b2) Sporting goods manufacturing.
(c2) Steel manufacturing.
(d2) Stone products manufacturing.
(e2) Trade schools.
(f2) Transportation equipment
manufacturing.
(g2) Trucking facilities.
(h2) Utilities.
(i2) Warehousing, storage, and
distribution facilities.
(j2) Woodworking and wood products
manufacturing.
(k2) Wearing apparel manufacturing.
(l2) Other establishments that can be
operated without creating objectionable
noise, odor, dust, gas, fumes, or vapor, and
that is not an offensive, dangerous, or
unwholesome use, and that is a use
compatible with the use and occupancy of
the adjoining properties.
(m2) Accessory offices and
administrative uses, such as office buildings
and cafeterias are permitted.
(n2) Watchman’s quarters may be
permitted for temporary, short-term use in
conjunction with the above permitted uses.
(3) Conditional Uses. The Planning &
Zoning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the Board concerning
the proposal. The conditional uses may be
allowed when determined not to be
obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive.
(4) Prohibited Uses. The prohibited
uses in the I2 Industrial District shall not be
limited to those uses listed. Any other use
found and determined to be obnoxious,
unhealthful, or offensive, may be prohibited
by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
(a) Automobile or machinery wrecking
or salvaging.
(b) Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of
paris manufacture.
(c) Distillation of bones.
(d) Explosive manufacture, processing,
or storage.
(e) Junk yards.
(f) Manufacture, storage, or processing
of fuel products consisting of petroleum or
coal.
(g) Smelting.
(h) Manufacture, processing, storage, or
distribution of animals or animal byproducts;
rendering plants, slaughter houses,
meat packing, gelatin, glue, soap, or
fertilizer plants.
(i) All permitted or conditional uses in
all residential or business districts.
(j) Dwelling units and lodging rooms.
(5) Lot Requirements.
With public sewer
Area: one (1) acre minimum
Width: one hundred feet (100’)
minimum
Without public sewer
Area: two (2) acre minimum
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 40 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
Width: two hundred feet (200’)
minimum
(6) Setbacks.
(a) Front Yard.
1. All properties fronting on a county
highway shall have a front yard setback of
not less than forty-five feet (45’).
2. All properties fronting on a municipal
street shall have a front yard setback of not
less than twenty-five feet (25’).
(b) Side Yard. There shall be a
minimum side yard of not less than twenty
feet (20’) on each side of the building or
buildings.
(c) Rear Yard. There shall be a
minimum rear yard of not less than twenty
feet (20’); except when adjoining a
residential zone, in which case a minimum
of fifty feet (50’) is required.
(d) Corner Side Yard. All corner lots
shall have two (2) front yards.
1. All corner side yards fronting on a
county highway shall have a corner side
yard setback of not less than forty-five feet
(45’).
2. All corner side yards fronting on a
municipal street shall have a corner side
yard setback of not less than twenty-five feet
(25’).
(e) Yards, Unoccupied. All front and
exterior side yard setback areas shall be
open and unoccupied by structures of any
kind for open storage of materials, except
for landscaping and landscaping structures,
including walls and identity signs when
incorporated as a landscape feature, entrance
ways, and flagpoles.
(7) Signs. Signs shall be regulated by
the provisions of Section 18.17.
(8) Parking Regulations.
(a) Parking shall conform to the
requirements as set forth in Section 18.18.
(b) Any applications for a building
permit, or for an occupancy certificate
where no building permit is required, shall
include therewith a plot plan drawn to scale
and fully dimensioned showing any offstreet
parking, loading facilities, and any
ingress and egress areas.
(9) Off-Street Loading Requirements.
Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
by the individual business.
(a) Minimum Facilities. All
warehouses, supply houses, manufacturing
plants, or any other building where large
amounts of goods are received or shipped,
shall provide adequate loading or unloading
berth or berths as determined by the
Planning & Zoning Commission.
(b) Size. A required off-street berth
shall be at least fifty-five feet (55’) in
length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering
space, and shall have a vertical clearance of
at least fifteen feet (15’).
(c) Utilization. Space allocated to any
off-street loading shall not, while so
allocated, be used to satisfy the space
requirements for any off-street parking
facilities of portions thereof.
18.16 MANUFACTURED HOUSING
PARKS. This section shall regulate the
parking, location, and maintaining of all
manufactured homes and manufactured
home parks. Manufactured home parks may
be allowed as a Planned Development
District (PDD) in the RR-Rural Residential
and RS-Residential Sewer zones.
Manufactured homes shall be prohibited in
all zoning districts except within a
manufactured home park within the Village
or as set forth in Section 18.16 (2) & (3).
No manufactured home park space shall be
rented or leased for a period of less than
thirty (30) days.
(1) Definitions. The following
definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this code.
(a) Manufactured Home-Class I. A
structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 41 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
or without permanent foundation, when
connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, airconditioning,
and electrical systems
contained in it, and is certified and labeled
as a manufactured home under 42 U.S.C.
Sections 5401 to 5426. For purposes of this
ordinance, a manufactured home Class I
shall be considered a single family or two
(2) family home when meeting the
requirements of Section 18.04 (5) and
therefore, may locate in any district
permitting such use.
(b) Manufactured Home-Class II. A
structure transportable in one (1) or more
sections built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with
or without permanent foundation, when
connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems
contained in it, and built prior to the
enactment of the Federal Manufactured
Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, which became effective July 15, 1976.
(c) Manufactured Home Park. Any
park, court, campsite, lot, parcel, or tract of
land designed, maintained, intended or used
for the purpose of supplying a location or
accommodations for two (2) or more
manufactured homes and shall include all
facilities used or intended for use as part of
the equipment thereof. Manufactured home
park shall not include automobile or
manufactured home sales lots on which
unoccupied manufactured homes are parked
for purposes of inspection and sale.
(d) Unit. One (1) manufactured home.
(e) Non-Dependent Unit. A
manufactured home that has a bath or
shower and toilet facilities.
(f) Dependent Unit. A manufactured
home which does not have a bath or shower
and toilet facilities.
(g) Space. A plat of ground in a
manufactured home park designed for the
location of only one (1) manufactured home.
(h) Person. Shall be construed to
include an individual, partnership, firm,
company, corporation, whether tenant,
owner, lessee, or other agent, heir, or
assignee.
(i) Pad. A concrete slab or its
equivalent, as determined by the Building
Inspector, constructed on the manufactured
home space for the purpose of
accommodating water and sanitary
connections for a manufactured home.
(j) Occupied Area. That portion of an
individual manufactured home space which
is covered by a manufactured home and its
accessory structures.
(k) Park Management. The person who
owns or has charge, care, or control of the
manufactured home park.
(2) License for Manufactured Home
Park: Application and Issuance.
(a) No person shall establish, operate,
maintain, or permit to be established,
operated, or maintained upon any property
owned, leased, or controlled by him, a
manufactured home park within the limits of
the Village without first securing a license
for each park from the Board, pursuant to
this chapter. Such license shall expire at the
close of the calendar year issued, but may be
renewed under the provisions of this chapter
for additional periods of one (1) year.
(b) The application of such license or
renewal thereof shall be approved by the
Board. Before a license is issued, an
applicant shall pay an annual fee as adopted
from time to time by resolution of the Board
and, in addition thereto, each applicant for
an original or renewal license shall file with
the Clerk a bond in the sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000) for each fifty (50)
manufactured home spaces or fraction
thereof, guaranteeing the collection by the
licensee of the monthly parking permit fees
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 42 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
as provided in this code and the compliance
of the licensee and the park management
with the provisions of this code. Such bond
shall also be for the use and benefit and may
be prosecuted and recovery had thereon by
any person who may be injured or damaged
by reason of the licensee violating any
provision of this code. The annual license
shall be subject to renewal by the Board,
provided that said licensee has abided by the
requirements of this ordinance or the laws or
regulations of the State of Wisconsin
relating to manufactured home parks and
their operation, and particularly with
reference to laws or ordinances relating to
health, sanitation, refuse disposal, fire
hazard, morals, or nuisances.
(c) The application for a license or a
renewal thereof shall be made on forms
furnished by the Clerk and shall include the
name and address of the owner in fee of the
tract (if the fee is vested in some person
other than the applicant, a duly verified
statement by that person that the applicant is
authorized by him to construct or maintain
the manufactured home park and make the
application) and such legal description of the
premises upon which the manufactured
home park is or will be located as will
readily identify and definitely locate the
premises. The initial application for any
existing, new, or revised manufactured
home park shall be accompanied by five (5)
copies of the park plan showing the
following, either existing or as proposed:
1. The extent and area for park
purposes.
2. Roadway and driveways.
3. Location and designation of
dependent and independent manufactured
home spaces.
4. Location of service building
indicating the number of sanitary
conveniences, including toilets, washrooms,
laundries, and utility rooms to be used by
occupants of the manufactured home park.
5. Complete layout of storm, sanitary,
and water systems for service building and
spaces.
6. Method and plan of garbage removal.
7. Plan for electrical or gas lighting of
spaces.
8. Interest in applicant in proposed
manufactured home park or extension
thereof. If owner of tract is a person other
than applicant, a duly verified statement by
the owner that applicant is authorized by
him or her to construct and maintain the
proposed park, addition, modification, or
extension, and make the application.
(3) Revocation and Suspension. The
Board may suspend or revoke a license after
a hearing held pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§66.058(2)(d).
(4) Location of Manufactured Home
Parks. An application for the construction
of a manufactured home park shall be
considered only when its proposed location
is within a district zoned to permit this type
of use.
(5) Manufactured Home Park Plan.
(a) Manufactured home spaces shall be
clearly defined and shall consist of a
minimum of eleven thousand two hundred
fifty (11,250) square feet and a width of not
less than forty feet (40’) measured at right
angles from the side lot line of each space
when served by public sanitary sewer, and a
minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square
feet and a width of not less than one hundred
feet (100’) when not served by public
sanitary sewer. The park shall be arranged
so that all spaces shall face or abut on a
roadway of not less than thirty feet (30’) in
width, giving easy access from all spaces to
a public street. Such roadways shall be
paved with asphalt or concrete and
maintained in good condition, provided for
adequate storm water drainage, said
drainage to be determined by the Public
Works Director. The roadways shall be well
lit and shall not be obstructed.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 43 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(b) The park shall be so laid out that no
dependent unit shall be further than two
hundred feet (200’) from the toilets and
service building, provided for herein, and
walkways to such buildings shall be paved
and well lit.
(c) Electrical service to manufactured
home spaces shall conform to the
regulations set forth in the Wisconsin State
Electrical Code, incorporated herein by
reference as though fully set forth.
(d) All manufactured homes within a
manufactured park shall be parked within
the designated spaces.
(e) For the protection of abutting
property owners, as well as manufactured
homeowners, a twenty-five foot (25’) buffer
strip shall be provided within all property
lines of the site. Said buffer strip to be used
for the planting of shrubbery and trees and
shall be exclusive of the manufactured home
spaces. A decorative fence, in accordance
with the off-street parking ordinance may, if
so desired, be substituted for the rear and
interior twenty-five foot (25’) buffer strip.
(f) Each manufactured home space shall
provide a front and rear yard setback of ten
feet (10’) and a side yard setback of ten feet
(10’). The above setbacks shall be seeded
and landscaped and in no case shall they be
used for off-street parking or be occupied by
a manufactured home and/or its necessary
buildings, except for the following:
1. Structures for utility outlets and
garages serving more than one (1) space
may be located within the side or rear
setback of the common lot line.
2. The hitch used for pulling the
manufactured home may protrude into the
front yard setback.
(g) One (1) off-street parking stall shall
be provided within each manufactured home
space, said stall to be in accordance with
Section 18.16 (5) (f).
(h) There shall be constructed on each
manufactured home space a concrete pad, or
its equivalent, as determined by the Building
Inspector to be used for the accommodation
of necessary water and sanitary connections.
(i) A minimum of two hundred (200)
square feet per manufactured home space,
exclusive of the minimum herein provided
for individual manufactured home spaces
and buffer strip, as indicated in Section
18.16 (5) (e) & (f) above, shall be required
for the express purpose of providing open
space and recreational area for the residents
of the manufactured home space.
(j) In no case shall a manufactured
home and its accessory buildings occupy
more than thirty-six percent (36%) of a
space.
(k) All manufactured homes in
manufactured home parks shall be skirted,
unless the unit is placed within one foot (1’)
vertically of the stand with soil and other
material completely closing such space from
view and entry by rodents and vermin.
Areas enclosed by such skirting shall be
maintained free of rodents and fire hazards.
(l) No person shall construct, add to, or
alter any structure attachment or building in
a manufactured home park or in a
manufactured home space without a permit
from the Building Inspector. Construction
on or addition or alteration to the exterior of
a manufactured home shall be of the same
type of construction and materials as the
manufactures home affected. This section
shall not apply to addition of awnings,
antennae, or skirting to manufactured
homes. Accessory structures on
manufactured home spaces shall comply
with all setback side yard and rear yard
requirements for manufactured home units.
(6) Sanitarian Regulations. All
manufactured home parks shall conform to
the sanitarian and health regulations as set
forth by the State of Wisconsin and Brown
County.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 44 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(7) Operation of Manufactured Home
Parks: Responsibility of Park
Management.
(a) In every manufactured home park
there shall be located an office of the
attendant or person in charge of said park.
A copy of the park license and of this code
shall be posted therein and the park register
shall at all times be kept in said office.
(b) The attendant or person in charge
and the park licensee shall operate the park
in compliance with this code and regulations
and codes of the Village and state and their
agents or officers and shall have the
following duties:
1. Maintain a register of all park
occupants, to be open at all times to
inspection by state, federal, and municipal
officers, which shall show:
a. Names and addresses of all owners
and occupants of each manufactured home.
b. Number of children of school age.
c. State of legal residence.
d. Dates of entrance and departure of
each manufactured home.
e. Make, model, year, and serial number
or license number of each manufactured
home and towing or other motor vehicles
and state, territory, or county issuing such
licenses.
f. Place of employment of each
occupant, if any.
2. Notify park occupants of the
provisions of this code and inform them of
their duties and responsibilities and report
promptly to the proper authorities any
violations of this code or any other
violations of law which may come to their
attention.
3. Notify the health officer immediately
of any suspected communicable or
contagious disease within the park.
4. Supervise the placement of each
manufactured home on its stand which
includes securing its stability and installing
all utility connections and tiedowns.
5. Maintain park grounds, buildings,
and structures free of insect and rodent
harborage and infestation and accumulations
of debris which may provide rodent
harborage or breeding places for flies,
mosquitoes, and other pests.
6. Maintain the park free from growth
of noxious weeds.
(8) Permit for Location Outside of
Manufactured Housing Park.
(a) Upon a showing of a hardship and/or
immediate necessity for use, the Planning &
Zoning Commission may issue special
written permits allowing the location of a
Manufactured Home Class II outside of a
manufactured housing park for a period not
to exceed ninety (90) days for any one (1)
premises in any twelve (12) month period.
This permit shall be granted only upon the
written consent of the owner, legal agent of
the owner, or the lessee of the location for
which the permit is issued. Not more than
one (1) Manufactured Home Class II shall
be granted a permit to locate on any one (1)
premises outside a manufactured housing
park. Any violation of this clause shall
comply with the penalty as set forth in
Section 18.99 of this code.
(b) Application for the
hardship/necessity permit shall be made to
the Clerk and shall be accompanied by an
inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25)
and shall state the name and permanent
addresses of the occupants of the
Manufactured Home Class II, the license
number of the Manufactured Home Class II
and towing vehicle, place of last stay,
intended purpose of stay at requested
location, whether any occupant is employed
in state; the exact location of premises, and
the owner’s and/or occupant’s sanitary
facilities, and the permission of the occupant
of the dwelling house for their use and
statement that all wastes from Manufactured
Home Class II occupancy will be disposed
of in a sanitary manner. Application for
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 45 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
location on a vacant lot or parcel of land
shall be accompanied by a statement of the
nature and location of sanitary facilities,
which must include a safe water supply and
toilet within two hundred feet (200’) of the
proposed location of the Manufactured
Home Class II, and a statement of
permission from the owner for their use.
(c) All occupied Manufactured Homes
Class II not located in a manufacturer
housing park shall be subject to the
remaining regulation of this code.
(9) Variances. The requirements of
Section 18.16 (5) (a), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i),
and (j) shall not apply to manufactured
home parks existing prior to the adoption of
this ordinance. All provisions of this
ordinance, however, shall apply to additions
of new manufactured home parks.
18.17 SIGN REGULATIONS. The
following regulations shall apply to all signs
hereinafter erected or established within the
Village:
(1) General. This section shall apply to
all billboards, fences, or display structures of
any kind for advertisement purposes, upon
which any advertisement is shown, painted
or displayed, etc.
(a) No sign shall hereafter be erected,
located, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, converted, or structurally altered
without a permit from the Building Inspector
except signs in Section 18.17 (3)(a) &
(4)(a), which are exempt from the
provisions of the code.
(b) All signs shall be erected and
maintained so as to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds
per square foot (with a factor of safety of
four (4) times the specified minimum).
When a sign is erected or maintained on any
wall of a building, it shall be fastened or
anchored to such wall or building and all
fasteners or anchors used shall be of metal
and be maintained free from rust or defects
of any kind.
(c) In all zones any off-premise outdoor
advertising sign greater than one hundred
(100) square feet per side shall require a
variance.
(d) All signs requiring a permit, except
for those covered by Section 18.17 (3), shall
be approved by the Design Review
Committee.
(e) Roof signs shall not be allowed in
any zoning district in the Village.
(2) Maintenance, Removal, and
Disposition of Signs.
(a) Every sign shall be maintained in a
safe, presentable, and good structural
material condition at all times, including the
replacement of defective parts, painting
(except when a weathered or natural surface
is intended as approved by the Design
Review Committee), repainting, cleaning,
and other acts required for the maintenance
of said sign.
(b) All signs or sign messages shall be
removed by the owner or lessee of the
premises upon which the sign is located
when the sign no longer correctly directs
any person or advertises a bonafide
business, lessor, owner, product, activity,
conductor, or product available on the
premises where the sign is displayed; or
when a business which it advertises is no
longer conducted; or when rental or
compensation is no longer provided. If the
property owner or lessee fails to remove it,
the Zoning Administrator shall give the sign
owner thirty (30) days written notice to
remove it. Upon failure to comply with the
notice, the Village or its duly authorized
representative shall remove the sign at the
expense of the sign owner. Such charge
shall be placed on the tax roll pursuant to
Wis. Stats. §66.0627.
(c) The Village or its duly authorized
agent shall cause to be removed any sign
that is illegally placed or endangers the
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 46 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
public safety, such as dangerous materially,
electrically, or structurally defective signs.
The Village or its duly authorized agent
shall give the land owner a written notice to
repair or remove the illegally placed,
dangerous, or defective sign within thirty
(30) days. If the sign creates an immediate
hazard, it will be the property owner’s
obligation to remove the sign immediately.
If the hazardous sign is not removed by the
property owner, the Village reserves the
right to remove the sign at the expense of
the property owner. Such charge shall be
placed on the tax roll pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§66.0627.
(3) Temporary Signs. The regulations
for temporary signs apply to all zoning
districts unless otherwise stated in the
provisions below.
(a) Temporary Signs that Do Not
Require a Permit or Fee.
1. Political Campaign Signs. Political
campaign signs on behalf of candidates for
public office or issues on election ballots are
subject to the following requirements:
a. Each sign shall not exceed sixteen
(16) square feet in area in non-residential
zoning, except in the Highway 41 corridor.
b. Each sign shall not exceed twelve
(12) square feet in area in residential zoning,
except in the Highway 41 corridor.
c. No sign shall be located within fifteen
feet (15’) of the public right-of-way at a
street intersection, nor over the right-of-way
in any instance.
d. Each sign shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in the Highway 41 corridor.
2. Yard Sale Signs. Yard sale signs
located on premises may be placed one (1)
day prior to the event and shall be removed
the day following the event.
(b) Temporary Signs that Require a
Permit and/or Fee.
1. Temporary Signs for Non-
Commercial Promotional Events.
a. No temporary sign shall exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
b. Temporary signs may be issued for a
maximum of two (2) weeks. One (1)
extension may be granted upon the applicant
showing the continued necessity and
compliance. A property owner is limited to
four (4) promotional events per year.
2. Temporary Signs for the Sale or
Leasing of Real Estate including Residential
Developments and Subdivisions, Not
Including Individual Home Sales. The
Zoning Administrator may issue a special
permit for two (2) temporary signs in any
zoning district in connection with the
marketing of lots or structures in a
subdivision subject to the following
conditions:
a. Such permits may be issued for up to
two (2) years and may be renewed for a time
period not to exceed six (6) months, until
fifty percent (50%) of the lots have been
sold, after which said signs shall be
removed.
b. Signs advertising the sale of new
subdivision lots shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet each in area. Not
more than one (1) sign shall be located on
the owner’s property at each major approach
to the subdivision. Any subdivision
development sign shall comply with all
applicable setback requirements for the
zoning district in which the property is
located.
c. Signs advertising the rental of new
apartment units shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet each in area. Not
more than two (2) signs shall be located at
each major approach to the apartment
complex.
3. Temporary Signs for Roadside
Stands. The following provisions shall
apply to all roadside stands and stands for
the sale of products associated with a
national holiday, except fireworks, located
within the Village:
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 47 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
a. Off-Premises Signs. All roadside
stands shall be permitted four (4) temporary
off-premises signs per the following:
1. Two (2) of the permitted off-premises
signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square
feet in size, two (2) of the off-premises signs
shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet
in size, and all of the off-premise signs shall
be restricted to the message board on one (1)
side only.
2. The signs shall:
i. be located no closer than three
hundred feet (300’) to the roadside stand;
ii. be located not farther than two
thousand five hundred feet (2,500’) from the
roadside stand;
iii. not exceed eight feet (8’) in height;
iv. not be located within the public
right-of-way;
v. not be illuminated or flashing.
b. On-Premise Signs. All roadside
stands shall be permitted only two (2)
temporary on-premise signs per the
following:
1. The signs shall not:
i. exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
size each and shall be restricted to the
message board on one (1) side only;
ii. exceed eight feet (8’) in height;
iii. be located in a public right-of-way;
iv. be illuminated or flashing;
v. be combined to create one (1) sign of
sixty-four (64) square feet but may be back
to back for a total of sixty-four (64) square
feet.
2. Wall mounted signs or signs painted
on the side of the roadside stand shall be
considered as on-premises signs addressed
in this section.
c. No other signage shall be permitted
for roadside stands in the Village.
d. All signage for roadside stands for
the purpose of the sale of products
associated with national holidays, except
fireworks stands, shall not be erected,
displayed, or used more than forty-five (45)
days prior to the national holiday and shall
be removed within ten (10) days after the
holiday.
e. All signage for fireworks stands shall
be part of the conditional use permit for such
stands.
4. Temporary Signs for Business and
Industrial Developments.
a. Permits for temporary signs shall be
issued for a fifteen (15) day period. A
maximum of eight (8)-fifteen (15) day
periods in any one (1) calendar year will be
issued to any one (1) lot. The fifteen (15)
day periods may be combined to allow for
longer displays but shall not be permitted for
more than the allowed one hundred twenty
(120) days in any one (1) calendar year.
b. Temporary signs shall be limited to
one (1) per lot, except corner lots may be
granted a second (2nd) identical sign which
may be displayed during the same fifteen
(15) day period.
c. Signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet and may be two (2) sided.
d. Multiple businesses on one (1) lot
will require the approval in writing of all
businesses on that lot prior to issuance of the
permit for the temporary sign.
e. Businesses that have buildings and/or
parking/display areas that overlap parcel
lines will be considered a single lot for
temporary signs.
f. Temporary signage shall not be
allowed for any business that has any type of
electronic message display.
g. Must be in conjunction with a special
event.
5. Fees Required for Permits. The
schedule of fees shall be as adopted from
time to time by resolution of the Board and
is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set
forth herein.
(c) Temporary Signs Prohibited.
1. Inflatable Signs. Inflatable signs are
prohibited except for:
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 48 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
a. Novelty balloons which do not
advertise and are tethered or moored, not to
exceed fifty feet (50’) above grade.
b. Hot air balloons in use and/or moored
but not being used as a sign.
2. Promotional Flags, Pennants,
Streamers, and Banners in the Village Rightof-
Way. No owner or occupant of any
property shall install or display any
promotional flag, pennant, streamer, or
banner in the Village right-of-way except for
the Village.
3. Mobile Signs. No sign mounted on
wheels, trailers, or any other non-permanent
structure shall be parked within sight of a
street for the purpose of advertising except
for signs approved as part of a special event
or by the Board.
(4) Residential & Agricultural
Districts. In residential and agricultural
districts, all sign types, except signs for
charitable or religious institutions, shall be
of a non-flashing and non-illuminated type.
1. No sign shall project higher than one
(1) story or eight feet (8’) above the finished
ground level, whichever is lower.
2. No sign shall project beyond the
property line.
3. Signs shall be set back ten feet (10’)
from any side or rear lot line.
(a) Signs that Do Not Require a Permit
or Fee.
1. Property Identification. A sign not in
excess of two (2) square feet identifying the
property or nature of the owner or occupant.
2. Warning Signs. Warning signs such
as “No Hunting”, “No Trespassing”, “No
Parking”, or “No Loitering” not to exceed
four (4) square feet are permitted.
3. Real Estate and Lease Signs. Real
estate signs which advertise the sale, rental,
or lease of the premises upon which said
signs are temporarily located. In the
residential zones, no sign shall exceed eight
(8) square feet in area. In the agricultural
zone such signs shall not exceed twelve (12)
square feet. Corner lots in residential zones
shall be permitted two (2) signs. All signs
shall be confined to the immediate property
being solely advertised or displayed.
4. Signs for Historic or Commemorative
Places and Events. Signs not in excess of
two (2) square feet which commemorate or
identify a historic building, place, event,
landscape, geologic or archaeological
feature. A larger sign may be allowed after
review by the Planning & Zoning
Commission and Board approval.
5. Agricultural Signs. Agricultural
signs pertaining to the products of the
agricultural premises shall not exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet in area per sign for any
one (1) farm. Height of this respective sign
shall not exceed eight feet (8’). Two (2)
such signs shall be permitted per farm. The
sign shall be limited to the name of the
premises, the producer, and product being
sold or produced.
6. Official Signs. Official signs as
determined by the Village such as traffic
control, parking restrictions, information,
and notices.
(b) Signs that Require a Permit and
Fee.
1. Signs for Charitable or Religious
Institutions. Signs for charitable or religious
institutions applicable to Wis. Stats. Ch. 70,
located on premises, shall not exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet in area (one (1) per
street face) located on the premises. The
height of the sign shall not exceed eight feet
(8’). May be illuminated if approved by the
Design Review Committee.
2. Non-Residential. Permitted nonresidential
building use in a residential
district shall have no sign larger than twelve
(12) square feet in area and displaying only
the name and address of the building.
3. Development Name Signs.
Subdivision, condominium, and apartment
complex sign, masonry wall, landscaping,
and other similar materials or features may
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 49 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
be combined to form a display for
neighborhood or tract identification,
provided that the legend of such sign or
display shall consist only of the
neighborhood or tract name and shall not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
(5) Business/Industrial Districts. All
signs hereafter established within the
business zone district shall conform to the
following regulations set forth. Any
reference to business shall include industrial
also:
(a) All signs advertising or displaying
business places shall be erected on the
business premises only. Business signs
constructed off the premises shall be
permitted only upon conditional approval by
the Village.
(b) Illuminated signs shall be permitted
in the business districts, subject to the
following:
1. Signs shall be illuminated so light is
diffused or indirect and shall be arranged so
as not to reflect direct rays of light into
adjacent residential.
2. No sign shall be brighter than
necessary for clear and adequate visibility.
3. No sign may be of such intensity or
brilliance as to impair the vision of a motor
vehicle driver with average eyesight or to
otherwise interfere with the driver’s
operation of a motor vehicle.
4. No sign may be of such intensity or
brilliance that it interferes with the
effectiveness of an official traffic sign,
device, or signal.
5. Must be equipped with a means to
immediately turn off the sign if it
malfunctions and the sign owner or operator
must immediately turn off the sign when
notified by the Village that it is not
complying with the standards of Section
18.17.
6. The person owning or controlling the
sign must adjust the sign to meet the
brightness standards in accordance with the
Village’s instructions. The adjustment must
be made immediately upon notice of noncompliance
from the Village. The person
owning or controlling the sign may appeal
the Village’s determination through the
following appeal procedure:
a. After making the adjustment required
by the Village, the person owning or
controlling the sign may appeal the Village’s
determination by delivering a written appeal
to the Clerk within ten (10) days after the
Village’s non-compliance notice.
b. The appeal will be referred to the
Health and Safety Committee for their
review and determination at the next
available meeting.
(c) Electronic message displays shall
conform to Section 18.17 (7).
(d) All types of flashing signs shall be
prohibited.
(e) Window signs shall be placed only
on the inside of business buildings and shall
not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the
glass area of the pane upon which the sign is
displayed.
(f) Wall signs placed against the exterior
of a building shall not extend more than
eight inches (8”) outside of a building wall
surface, shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in area for any one (1) business,
and shall not exceed twenty feet (20’) in
height above the average ground level.
Larger signs will require approval from the
Planning & Zoning Commission but, shall
never exceed ten percent (10%) of the wall
surface of the front of the building or five
hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less.
In the case of a lot fronting on two (2) public
streets, additional wall signage equal to the
above restrictions shall be allowed. Signs
may be allowed on any wall surface but,
aggregate signage on any one (1) wall of the
building may not exceed above
requirements.
(g) Ground signs shall not exceed ten
feet (10’) in height above the average
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 50 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
ground level; shall not be located closer than
fifteen feet (15’) from any lot line; and shall
not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
area per side for all signs combined on any
one (1) parcel.
(h) Property signs fastened to,
suspended from or supported by structures
on a premises developed for business shall
not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
area for all signs combined on any one (1)
premises; shall not extend more than ten feet
(10’) out from the structure, shall not exceed
a height of twenty feet (20’) above the
average ground level; and shall not be less
than ten feet (10’) above any pedestrian
way, and not less than fifteen feet (15’)
above a driveway.
(i) One (1) pedestal type sign, a ground
sign generally supported by one (1) full base
matching building materials and not
exceeding a height of twenty-five feet (25’),
shall be permitted per each business
establishment. Such sign shall not exceed a
total area of one hundred (100) square feet
total per side.
(j) One (1) pylon type sign, a special
type of ground sign supported by tall mastlike
members or pyramidical tower supports
and not exceeding a height of twenty-five
feet (25’), shall be permitted per each
business establishment. Such sign shall not
exceed a total area of one hundred (100)
square feet total per side unless approved by
the Planning & Zoning Commission. All
poles or supports shall be covered in a
material to match the building.
(k) On any one (1) lot, there shall be
allowed either a ground sign, pedestal sign,
or pylon sign. Multiple types of signs on a
single lot shall require Planning & Zoning
Commission approval.
(l) No sign shall be permitted within
fifty feet (50’) of any residence.
(m) No sign shall be within the vision
triangle of intersecting roads.
(n) All off-premises signs shall be
separated by no less than one thousand
(1,000) lineal feet measured on single sign
of road grade at the right-of-way line and at
no point shall any three (3) signs be closer
than three thousand (3,000) lineal feet.
(o) Directional and drive-thru signs
shall be exempt from total sign square
footage but shall not exceed three (3) square
feet in area per sign and a maximum of three
feet (3’) above grade. The construction and
appearance of the sign shall not constitute a
safety hazard where erected.
(6) Planned Development Districts.
Specific sign regulations shall be contained
in the conditions in each approval by the
Board authorizing the establishment of a
Planned District.
(7) Electronic Message Displays. The
following requirements shall apply to
electronic message displays:
(a) All electronic message displays
shall:
1. Advertise on-premise only, except for
non-profit community events & off-premise
signage with-in the Highway 41/141
corridor provided;
a. The proper conditional use permits
&/or variances have been obtained,
b. The sign meets the current separation
requirements of 18.17(5)(n) above,
c. The existing structure is sufficient to
support any additional loads,
d. Permits are submitted & approved
e. Public service messaging/municipal
information messaging of a minimum of 5%
per month is required,
f. Limited to level 1 or 2 only,
g. Such signs shall not be located within
one hundred (100) feet of residential district
boundaries, school property, or public parks
and parkways (including those so designated
on the Official Map) if said signs are
perpendicular to or facing away from such
uses. This distance increases to four
hundred (400) feet if signs are facing
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 51 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(oriented with message side parallel) said
use.
2. Use automatic day/night dimming in
software and conform to Section 18.17 (5)
(b) above.
3. Require Design Review Committee
approval.
4. Not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
total sign area except for allowable offpremise
signs which can be at 100%.
5. Conform to all other requirements of
federal, state, and/or local jurisdictions
including but limited to Trans. 201 and Wis.
Stats. §84.30.
(b) Public service messaging and their
intervals should be part of the approval
process.
(c) Electronic message displays are
defined in four (4) basic levels of
operational modes for message transitions.
1. Level 1. Static display only
(messages change with no transition).
a. Permitted in all business, commercial,
and public land zones.
b. Permitted for charitable or religious
institutions with Design Review Committee
approval.
c. Minimum display time of:
1. Twenty (20) seconds for locations
within five hundred feet (500’) of a
roundabout or major intersection or a
restricted business corridor, as
recommended by the Health and Safety
Committee.
2. Six (6) seconds for all other locations.
2. Level 2. Static display with “fade” or
“dissolve” transitions, or similar transitions
and frame effects that do not have the
appearance of moving text or images.
a. Permitted in all business, commercial,
and public land zones.
b. Minimum display time of:
1. Twenty (20) seconds for location
within five hundred feet (500’) of a
roundabout or major intersection or a
restricted business corridor, as
recommended by the Health and Safety
Committee.
2. Six (6) seconds for all other locations.
3. Level 3. Static display with “travel”
or “scrolling” transitions, or similar
transitions and frame effects that have text
or animated images that appear to move or
change size, or be revealed sequentially
rather than all at once.
a. Permitted by conditional use permit
or as part of a planned development only.
b. Minimum display time of:
1. Twenty (20) seconds for locations
within five hundred feet (500’) of a
roundabout or major intersection or a
restricted business corridor, as
recommended by the Health and Safety
Committee.
2. Six (6) seconds for all other locations.
c. Not permitted adjacent to the
Highway 41/141 corridor.
4. Level 4. Full animation, no flashing
or video shall be allowed as part of any
display.
a. Permitted as part of a planned
development only.
b. Not permitted within five hundred
feet (500’) of a roundabout or major
intersection or in a restricted business
corridor, as recommended by the Health and
Safety Committee.
c. Not permitted adjacent to the
Highway 41/141 corridor.
(8) Definitions. In this section, the
terms have the following meaning:
(a) Electronic Message Display. A sign
capable of displaying words, symbols,
figures, or images that can be electronically
or mechanically changed by remote or
automatic means.
(b) Dissolve. A mode of message
transition on an electronic message display
accomplished by varying the light intensity
or pattern, where the first (1st) message
gradually appears to dissipate and lose
legibility simultaneously with the gradual
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 52 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
appearance and legibility of the second (2nd)
message.
(c) Fade. A mode of message transition
on an electronic message display
accomplished by varying the light intensity,
where the first (1st) message gradually
reduces intensity to the point of not being
legible and the subsequent message
gradually increases intensity to the point of
legibility.
(d) Frame. A complete, static display
screen on an electronic message display.
(e) Frame Effect. A visual effect on an
electronic message display applied to a
single frame to attract the attention of
viewers.
(f) Scroll. A mode of message
transition on an electronic message display
where the message appears to move
vertically across the display surface.
(g) Temporary Sign. Any advertisement
or promotional device not permanently
attached to the ground or permanent
structure to include, but not limited to, signs,
banners, promotional flags, balloons, sign
trailers, streamers, and pennants.
(h) Transition. A visual effect used on
an electronic message display to change
from one (1) message to another.
(i) Travel. A mode of message
transition on an electronic message display
where the message appears to move
horizontally across the display surface.
18.18 OFF-STREET PARKING
REQUIREMENTS. The following
regulations shall apply to all zone districts
within the Village.
(1) General.
(a) All parking spaces required to serve
buildings or uses erected or established after
the effective date of this code shall conform
to the requirements herein.
(b) Buildings or uses existing on the
effective date of this code which are
subsequently altered or enlarged so as to
require the provisions of the parking spaces
under this code shall conform to the
requirements as set forth herein.
(c) One (1) commercial vehicle licensed
at twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or less
may be parked at any lot in a residential
zone provided the owner or driver of the
vehicle resides at that lot. Commercial
vehicles licensed over twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds must obtain a permit from
the Board. Permits shall be issued and/or
rescinded at the discretion of the Board.
(d) All off-street parking areas for
customer and/or employee parking shall be
paved and shall have the aisles and spaces
clearly marked. Parking areas for vehicle
storage shall be graded and surfaced so as to
be dust free and properly drained.
(e) All parking areas and appurtenant
passageways and driveways serving
commercial uses shall be illuminated
adequately during the hours of sunset and
sunrise when the use is in operation.
Adequate shielding shall be provided by
commercial uses to protect adjacent
residential zones from the glare of such
illumination and from that of automobile
headlights.
(2) Size.
(a) Each required off-street parking
space shall be at least nine feet (9’) in width
and at least eighteen feet (18’) in length,
exclusive of access drives or aisles.
(b) All angle parking shall conform to
the requirements as set forth.
Width of
Angle Stall Depth Aisle
30° 17 feet 12 feet
45° 19 feet 15 feet
60° 20 feet 18 feet
90° 18 feet 28 feet
(c) All off-street parking facilities shall
be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in a
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 53 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
manner which will least interfere with traffic
movement.
(3) Setbacks. All parking spaces shall
meet the following setbacks:
(a) Ten feet (10’) from any county
highway or Village street, except that any
parking lot which is fully curbed may be
reduced to five feet (5’) provided it does not
impact any existing ditch and/or flow line.
(b) Five feet (5’) from any side or rear
property line.
(4) Plans. Except for residential uses,
the design of parking lots or areas shall be
subject to the approval of the Village in
accordance with the standards herein
required.
(5) Parking Standards.
(a) Single Family Dwellings. Two (2)
spaces for each dwelling unit.
(b) Two (2) Family Dwellings. Two (2)
spaces for each dwelling unit.
(c) Multiple-Family Dwelling. Two (2)
spaces for each dwelling unit.
(d) Motels. One (1) space for each
guest room plus one (1) space for each three
(3) employees.
(e) Hotels. One (1) space for each two
(2) guest rooms plus such additional spaces
as required for supplemental uses, such as
bars, ballrooms, or nightclub facilities in the
hotel.
(f) Lodging, Rooming, and Boarding
Houses. One (1) space for each two (2) beds
plus one (1) space for each three (3)
employees.
(g) Churches and Places of Worship.
One (1) space for every five (5) seats.
(h) Hospitals. One (1) space for each
two (2) hospital beds, plus one (1) space for
each two (2) employees (other than staff
doctors), plus one (1) space for each doctor
assigned to the staff.
(i) Medical and Dental Clinics. Five (5)
spaces shall be provided for each doctor.
(j) Sanitariums, Rest Homes,
Convalescent Homes, and Nursing Homes.
One (1) space for each four (4) beds, plus
one (1) space for each two (2) employees
(other than staff doctors), plus one (1) space
for each doctor assigned to the staff.
(k) Elementary Schools. One (1) space
for each employee.
(l) Junior High Schools. One (1) space
for each employee.
(m) Senior High Schools. One (1) space
for each employee, plus one (1) space for
each ten (10) students in the school.
(n) Colleges and Universities. One (1)
space for each employee, plus one (1) space
for each six (6) students.
(o) Public Libraries, Art Galleries, and
Museums. One (1) space for each five
hundred (500) square feet of gross floor
area.
(p) Fraternities, Sororities, and
Dormitories. One (1) space for each three
(3) residents, plus one (1) space for the
manager.
(q) Restaurants. Spaces equal to fifty
percent (50%) capacity in persons, plus one
(1) space for each three (3) employees.
(r) Taverns. Spaces equal in number to
sixty percent (60%) of the capacity in
persons.
(s) Theaters-Indoor. One (1) space for
each four (4) seats.
(t) Theaters-Drive-In. Extra reservoir
spaces equal in number to ten percent (10%)
of the vehicle capacity of such theaters.
(u) Bowling Alleys. Six (6) spaces shall
be provided for each alley, plus additional
spaces as required by this ordinance for any
associated use (bars, restaurants, etc.).
(v) Swimming Pools and Skating Rinks.
Spaces equal in number to thirty percent
(30%) of the design capacity.
(w) Amusement Establishments Not
Listed and Amusement Parks. Spaces shall
be provided in adequate number as
determined by the Planning & Zoning
Commission to serve persons employed, as
well as the visiting public.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 54 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(x) Stadiums, Ball Parks, and Outdoor
Arenas. Spaces shall be provided at the rate
of thirty percent (30%) of the maximum
capacity of persons using and/or observing
activities at these facilities during a twentyfour
(24) hour period.
(y) Golf Courses. One (1) space shall
be provided for each four (4) persons using
the course at maximum capacity. Bars,
restaurants, and related uses shall require
additional spaces.
(z) Driving Ranges. Two (2) spaces
shall be provided for each tee.
(a1) Private Clubs. One (1) space shall
be provided for each lodging room, plus
parking spaces equal in number to thirty
percent (30%) of the maximum capacity in
persons of such clubs.
(b1) Recreational Buildings and
Community Centers, Non-Commercial.
Spaces equal in number to thirty percent
(30%) of the capacity in persons.
(c1) Convents, Seminaries, Monasteries,
Nunneries, Rectories, Parsonages, Parish
Houses, and Religious Retreats. One (1)
space shall be provided for each two (2)
employees, plus additional spaces equal in
number to five percent (5%) of the
maximum capacity of professional persons
residing on the premises at any one (1) time.
(d1) Riding Academies and Commercial
Stables. One (1) space shall be provided for
each employee, plus spaces adequate in
number as determined by the Planning &
Zoning Commission to serve the visiting
public.
(e1) Shopping Centers. Eight (8) spaces
for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross floor area in the center.
(f1) Warehousing and Wholesaling
Establishments. One (1) space for each two
(2) employees.
(g1) Junk Yards, Salvage Yards, and
Auto Grave Yards. One (1) space shall be
provided for each two (2) employees, plus
one (1) space for each five thousand (5,000)
square feet of lot area.
(h1) Animal Hospitals and Kennels.
Three (3) spaces shall be provided for each
employee.
(i1) Airport and Commercial Heliports.
One (1) space for each one hundred fifty
(150) square feet, plus additional employee
spaces in the ratio of one (1) space for each
two (2) employees working the same shift,
based on the maximum number of
employees working the same shift.
(j1) Automobile and Truck Service
Stations. One (1) space for each employee,
based on the maximum number of
employees working the same shift, as well
as one (1) additional space for each inside
service bay.
(k1) Automobile Laundries. One (1)
space for each two (2) employees, plus one
(1) space for manager, and in addition,
reservoir spaces equal to five (5) times the
capacity of the automobile laundry for those
automobiles awaiting entrance to the
facility. Maximum capacity in this instance
shall mean the greatest number possible of
automobiles undergoing some phase of
laundering and drying at the same time.
(l1) Building Material Sales. One (1)
space shall be provided for each two (2)
employees, plus additional space equal to
one (1) space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of gross floor area in excess of
two thousand (2,000) square feet.
(m1) Cartage and Express Facilities.
One (1) space shall be provided for each
vehicle maintained on the premises, plus one
(1) space for each two (2) employees.
(n1) Contractor or Construction
Offices, Shops, and Yards. One (1) space
shall be provided for each employee plus
additional customer space at the rate of one
(1) additional space for each five (5)
employees.
(o1) Food Stores, Grocery Stores, Meat
Markets, Bakeries, Delicatessens,
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 55 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
Supermarkets, and Department Stores. One
(1) space shall be provided for each one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor
area for the first six thousand (6,000) square
feet, and one (1) additional space for each
two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor
area in excess of six thousand (6,000) square
feet.
(p1) Motor Vehicle Sales. Three (3)
spaces shall be provided for each employee,
plus additional spaces as deemed necessary
by the Planning & Zoning Commission to
store those cars waiting to be serviced.
(q1) Offices, Business, and
Professionals. One (1) space shall be
provided for each three hundred (300)
square feet of gross floor area.
(r1) Public Utility and Service Uses.
One (1) space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of gross floor area in excess of
four thousand (4,000) square feet or one (1)
space for each two (2) employees,
whichever provides the greater amount.
(s1) Radio and Television Stations and
Studios. One (1) space shall be provided for
each two (2) employees, plus one (1) space
for each three hundred (300) square feet of
gross floor area in excess of six thousand
(6,000) square feet.
(t1) Post Offices. One (1) space shall be
provided for each two (2) employees, plus
one (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of gross floor area in excess of
three thousand (3,000) square feet.
(u1) Undertaking Establishments. One
(1) space shall be provided for each four (4)
seats provided in each chapel or parlor.
(v1) General-General Retail Sales,
Including Department Stores Not Located in
a Shopping Center. One (1) parking space
per two hundred (200) square feet of gross
floor area, plus one (1) per employee on the
maximum shift.
(w1) General-Industries (not listed
above). One (1) space for every one
thousand (1,000) square feet of building area
or for every two (2) employees, whichever
constitutes the greater number of stalls.
Industries operating more than one (1) shift
must have additional spaces to provide for
change of personnel at shift change time.
18.19 TELECOMMUNICATION
TOWERS.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this
section is as follows:
(a) To allow necessary radio, television,
cellular, and other wireless communication
facilities.
(b) To encourage joint use of new and
existing structures.
(c) To minimize visual impact on
surrounding properties, particularly
residential.
(d) To encourage the location of towers
in nonresidential areas and minimize the
total number of towers within the Village.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of
this section shall apply to all
telecommunication towers and antennas,
except that towers and antennas that are
under seventy feet (70’) in height and are
owned and operated by federally-licensed
amateur radio station operators or are
receive-only antennas shall be exempt from
this section.
(3) Antennas.
(a) Permitted Use. Installing an antenna
on an existing structure (including a tower)
shall be a permitted use in all zoning
districts provided the antenna adds no more
than twenty feet (20’) to the height of the
existing structure.
(b) Design. If an antenna is installed on
a structure other than a tower, the antenna
and supporting equipment must be of a
neutral color that is identical, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure in order to limit visual impact.
(4) Telecommunication Towers.
(a) Permitted Uses.
Telecommunication towers which do not
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 56 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
exceed the maximum building height
requirement for the district in which they are
located shall be allowed as a permitted use
in all districts.
(b) Conditional Uses.
Telecommunication towers which exceed
the maximum building height requirement
for the district in which they are located
shall only be permitted as a conditional use
in the AG-Agriculture, Public Lands &
Institutions, B-Business District, HBHighway
Business, I1-Industrial District
(Limited), and I2-Industrial District.
(c) Utilizing Existing Structures. A
conditional use permit for a new
telecommunication tower shall not be
granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that the telecommunications equipment
planned for the new tower cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved
tower or structure. Such demonstration may
include one (1) or more of the following
reasons:
1. No existing towers or structures are
located within the geographic area required
to meet the applicant’s engineering
requirements.
2. Existing towers or structures are not
of sufficient height to meet applicant’s
engineering requirements.
3. Existing towers or structures do not
have the structural capacity to support the
applicant’s proposed antenna and related
equipment and the existing tower or
structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or
replaced to accommodate planned
equipment at a reasonable cost.
4. The planned equipment would cause
interference affecting the usability of other
existing or planned equipment at the tower
or the existing antennas would cause
interference with the applicant’s proposed
antenna and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost.
5. The fees, costs, or contractual
provisions required by the owner to share an
existing tower or structure or adapt and
existing tower.
(d) Accommodation of Other Users.
Any proposed telecommunication tower
shall be designed, structurally, electrically,
and in all respects to accommodate both the
applicant’s antennas and comparable
antennas for at least two (2) additional users.
Towers must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower
and to accept antennas mounted at varying
heights.
(e) Federal Requirements. All
telecommunication towers must meet the
current standards and regulations of the
FAA, FCC, and any other agency of the
federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such
standards and relations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this section shall bring such towers and
antennas into compliance with the revised
standards and regulations within six (6)
months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations, unless a more
stringent compliance schedule is mandated
by the controlling federal agency. Failure to
bring towers and antennas into compliance
with revised standards and regulations shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the
tower or antenna by the governing authority
at the owner’s expense.
(f) Construction. All
telecommunication towers constructed,
erected, or located within the Village shall
comply with all applicable state and local
building codes and the applicable standards
for towers that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as
amended from time to time.
(g) Design. All new and modified
telecommunication towers and associated
accessory structures shall be designed, to the
extent possible, to blend in with the
surrounding environment, except as may be
required by rules of the FAA and FCC.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 57 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(h) Lighting. Telecommunication
towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless
required by the FAA or other applicable
authority. If lighting is required, it shall be
designed to cause the least disturbance to
surrounding views as possible.
(i) Setbacks. Telecommunication
towers and associated structures shall meet
the required setbacks for the district in
which they are located. In addition, towers
shall be set back a distance equal to the
height of the tower from any off-site
residential building.
(j) Signs. No signs, other than warning
or equipment information signs, shall be
located on any telecommunication tower.
(k) Security. The base of the
telecommunication tower shall be fenced
with materials impervious to sight and
secured so that it is not accessible by the
general public.
(5) Conditional Use Permits. If a
conditional use permit is required by this
section, the applicant shall submit a scaled
site plan and a scaled elevation view and
other supporting drawings, calculations, and
other documentation or information deemed
necessary by the Village to assess
compliance with the requirements and
purpose of this section and code. Any
information of an engineering nature that the
applicant submits shall be certified by a
licensed professional engineer.
(6) Removal of Abandoned Antennas
and Towers. Any antenna or
telecommunication tower that is not
operated for a continuous period of twelve
(12) months shall be considered abandoned.
The owner of such antenna or tower shall
remove them within ninety (90) days of
receipt of notice from the Village notifying
the owner of such abandonment. If the
antenna or tower is not removed within the
ninety (90) day period, the Village may
remove such antenna or tower at the owner’s
expense. If there are two (2) or more users
of a single tower, then this provision shall
not become effective until all users cease
operation.
18.20 LAKES AND PONDS. The
following regulations shall apply to all
artificial lakes and ponds hereinafter
constructed or developed within the Village.
(1) Location.
(a) Artificial lakes and artificial ponds
two thousand (2,000) square feet or larger in
size may only be permitted in any zoning
district by conditional use approval.
(b) Artificial ponds of less than two
thousand (2,000) square feet are permitted in
any zoning district of this ordinance and
shall conform to these regulations including
the site plan and excavation permit
requirements.
(c) Wildlife ponds may only be
permitted in Agricultural - Farmland
Preservation (AG-FP), Agriculture (AG), or
Rural Residential (RR) zoning and must
reside in an existing wetland area. Design
standards are to be governed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
and/or the Soil Conservation Service and
Agriculture Conservation Service. All size
wildlife ponds shall require conditional use
recommendation from the Planning &
Zoning Commission and approval by the
Board.
(2) Approval Process.
(a) The property owner, developer, or
assigned agent shall make application for
and receive conditional use approval from
the Board with review and recommendation
from the Planning & Zoning Commission
prior to requesting an excavation permit and
beginning construction. The property owner
shall request and obtain the required
excavation permit for all lake or pond
development, regardless of size, prior to
beginning construction.
(b) The Building Inspector shall issue
an excavation permit for artificial lakes and
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 58 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
ponds requiring conditional use approval,
following the Village’s approval of the
conditional use as prescribed above, in
accordance with the conditions and
requirements of the conditional use
approval.
(c) The Building Inspector shall issue an
excavation permit for all pond construction
of less than two thousand (2,000) square feet
and conduct the necessary inspections to
ensure the compliance of pond construction
with the requirements of this code.
(3) Site Plans. A site plan shall be
required for all lake or pond construction,
submitted with all conditional use approval
applications as part of the application itself,
and submitted for review by the Building
Inspector for compliance with these
regulations for all ponds not requiring
conditional use approval prior to the
issuance of an excavation permit. All site
plans shall provide the following
information:
(a) A map drawn at a minimum scale of
one inch (1”) to two hundred feet (200’)
showing the proposed lake or pond size,
existing buildings on the property
(residential and other), existing natural
features of the property (i.e. wetlands,
watercourses, topographic features, etc.).
and the adjoining property within five
hundred feet (500’) of the site.
(b) A layout of proposed residential lots
and other buildings, if applicable.
(c) The type and location of sanitary
facilities to be installed if residential
development is to take place or the existing
sanitary facility location and type.
(d) Reasonable proof that the ground
water table is at a sufficient level to support
the requirements of water depth for the
applicable designation (lake or pond).
Water levels shall not be artificially
maintained by use of a well to protect the
potable water source of surrounding
properties.
(e) Surface water runoff with two foot
(2’) contour topography.
The developer shall submit ten (10)
copies of the site plan to the Planning &
Zoning Commission for lake or pond
construction requiring conditional use
approval. A minimum of three (3) copies
shall be submitted to the Building Inspector
for pond construction not requiring
conditional use approval.
(4) Development Standards.
(a) All artificial lakes and ponds, other
than a fish or wildlife facility, garden ponds,
or landscape ponds, shall meet the following
design standards:
1. The center portion of any artificial
lake shall be excavated deep enough to
maintain a water depth of ten feet (10’).
2. The center portion of any pond, other
than a fish or wildlife facility, shall be
excavated deep enough to maintain a water
depth of eight feet (8’).
3. The perimeter (land side) shall have a
slope not greater than one foot (1’) of fall in
five feet (5’) of travel (5:1) for a minimum
of fifteen feet (15’) from the highwater
mark.
4. The perimeter (water side) shall have
a slope not greater than one foot (1’) of fall
in three feet (3’) of travel (3:1) for a
minimum of fifteen feet (15’) from the
highwater mark.
5. No lake or pond shall be constructed
within fifty feet (50’) of an existing or
proposed soil absorption onsite sanitary
waste disposal system. No lake or pond
shall be constructed within twenty-five feet
(25’) of an existing or proposed holding
tank, sanitary waste disposal system.
6. No lake or pond shall be constructed
within fifty feet (50’) of any existing or
proposed residence or other structure.
7. No lake or pond shall be constructed
within thirty feet (30’) of any property line
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 59 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
except for lakes or ponds that cross property
lines may be approved conditioned upon a
maintenance agreement approved by the
Board and recorded with the Register of
Deeds office.
8. The perimeter of the lake or pond
shall be landscaped and seeded within six
(6) months after completion of the
excavation.
9. A performance bond of one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500) per acre shall
be required of the property owner/developer
for lakes and ponds of one (1) acre or more
in size.
(b) Garden ponds or landscape ponds
shall meet the following design standards:
1. Must be lined with plastic, rubber, or
similar material.
2. Shall be designed to be stepped at a
maximum of one foot (1’) intervals to a
depth of not more than three feet (3’).
3. Shall not be closer than ten feet (10’)
to the occupied portion of a residential
structure (not garages, decks, or accessory
uses attached to the dwelling).
4. Shall not be closer than twenty feet
(20’) to a property line.
5. Shall be designed with a pump or
circulating system to maintain water quality.
6. Shall be designed to be entirely self
contained, allowing no possibility of
overflow or release of any non-native
species into the surrounding lands or
waterways.
(5) Other Requirements.
(a) The constructed lake or pond shall
meet the requirements of the Brown County
Shoreland and floodplain ordinances.
(b) Artificial lakes or ponds constructed
adjacent to a navigable body of water shall
comply with the regulations set forth by the
Wisconsin State Statutes and the
Department of Natural Resources. The
Building Inspector or Planning & Zoning
Commission may require the
owner/developer to obtain a determination
of navigability from the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources for
watercourses in close proximity to or
associated with the proposed lake or pond.
(c) The groundwater table in the
surrounding area and adjacent to the lake or
pond shall be protected.
(d) The Division of Environmental
Health requirements shall be met to ensure
proper safety of swimmers.
18.21 EARTH EXCAVATIONS AND
FILL. The following regulations shall
apply to all future fill or excavations of
sand, gravel, stone, loam dirt, and other
earth products within the Village. All
existing gravel pits, sand pits, and stone
quarries within the Village shall also be
regulated by this code. Excavations
required to develop man-made bodies of
water shall be administered by separate
Village codes.
(1) Applicability and Permit
Requirements.
(a) Gravel Pits, Sand Pits, and Stone
Quarries.
1. The excavation of gravel, sand, stone,
and other earthen materials from gravel pits,
sand pits, stone quarries, or other similar
excavation sites is allowed with a
conditional use permit in the Agriculture
(AG), Agriculture-Farmland Preservation
(AG-FP) Rural Residential (RR), and
Industrial Districts (I1, I2).
2. Application for conditional use
permits shall be made as provided for in
Section 18.04 (3) (d). All applications must
include a detailed site plan containing all
information listed in Section 18.21 (2) (a) &
(b).
a. If the conditional use permit is
approved by the Board, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the permit. The
permit shall be valid for two (2) years upon
issuance.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 60 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
b. Upon expiration of the permit, the
Village shall inspect the site to determine
compliance with any conditions attached to
the permit as well as compliance with the
existing regulations. The Village has the
right to attach additional conditions to the
re-issuance of the permit. If the regulations
have been complied with, then the permit
may be reissued by the Board for another
two (2) year period.
(b) Other Earth Excavations and Fill.
1. A permit is required for fill
(temporary or permanent) or excavation of
sand, gravel, clay, silt, loam, rock, stone,
muck, dirt, soil, and other earthen materials.
a. Inside any building setback,
floodplain, drainage way, or easement; or
b. Greater than one hundred (100) cubic
yards over a period of one (1) year on any
single parcel of land recorded in the Brown
County Register of Deeds office.
2. Exceptions. A permit is not required
for:
a. Necessary foundation and trench
excavation only in connection with work on
the premises for which a building permit has
been issued.
b. Normal agricultural activities.
c. Excavation, fill, and grading for
public road construction purposes within the
right-of-way.
d. All excavation or fill associated with
the development of an approved plat prior to
acceptance/completion of the public roads.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall have
the authority to issue permits for fill and for
all excavations not included in Section 18.21
(1) (a). Application for a fill permit shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator by the
property owner or his or her assigned agent.
All applications must include a detailed site
plan containing all information listed in
Section 18.21 (2) (a).
(2) Site Plan Requirements.
(a) The following information shall be
submitted on a site plan when applying for a
fill or excavation permit:
1. Existing and proposed contours of the
site at intervals of twenty feet (20’) if
required. Spot elevations may also be
acceptable.
2. Existing and proposed drainage
patterns of the site.
3. Drainage and erosion control plans.
4. Approximate amount of earth
material to be placed, and/or excavated,
and/or removed from the site.
(b) The following additional
information shall be submitted on a site plan
when applying for an excavation permit to
operate a gravel pit, sand pit, or stone
quarry:
1. A map showing the location of the
premises and the adjoining properties within
five hundred feet (500’). The map shall be
drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch
(1”) equals two hundred feet (200’).
2. Proposed truck and machinery access
to the site.
3. Types and location of temporary or
permanent buildings to be erected on the
site.
4. Approximate number of trucks and
other types of machinery to be used at the
site.
5. Designated hours of operation.
6. A timetable for the commencement
and cessation of nonmetallic mining
operations and, if seasonal operations are
intended, the months of operation shall be
identified.
7. Measures to be taken to screen the
operation from view of surrounding land
uses or a written explanation of why such
measures are not needed.
8. Measures to be taken to ensure dust
control of the site.
9. Amount of and location of parking
spaces.
10. Location and means of storing fuel.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 61 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
11. Security plans for site.
12. Proposed regrading and revegetation
of the site after completion of the fill or
excavating operation.
(3) Operation of Gravel Pits, Sand
Pits, and Stone Quarries. The following
regulations shall apply to the operation of all
gravel pits, sand pits, stone quarries, and
other similar sites of excavation. All
existing sites of excavation shall comply
with this section prior to any additional
expansions or alterations of the existing site.
(a) Trucks and Machinery.
1. No fixed machinery shall be erected
or maintained within two hundred feet
(200’) of any property or street line.
2. Truck access to the fill or excavation
site shall be so arranged to minimize danger
to traffic and nuisance to surrounding
property.
(b) Material Handling.
1. No excavation shall take place within
fifty feet (50’) of any property line or street
line if below the established grade of the
street.
2. No blasting within one hundred feet
(100’) of any adjoining property line.
3. No screening, sifting, washing,
crushing, or other forms of processing shall
be conducted upon the premises unless it is
located more than five hundred feet (500’)
from a residential dwelling.
(c) Other Requirements.
1. At all stages of operations, proper
drainage shall be provided to prevent the
collection and stagnation of water and to
prevent harmful effects upon surrounding
properties.
2. The premises shall be filled and/or
excavated and graded in conformity with the
plan as approved. Any deviation from the
plan shall be cause for the Board to revoke
the permit upon the recommendations of the
Planning & Zoning Commission.
3. When excavating and removal
operations are no longer used, as determined
by the Zoning Administrator, the excavated
area shall be graded so that no gradients in
disturbed earth shall be steeper than a slope
of 3-1 (horizontal-vertical). A layer of
arable topsoil capable of supporting
perennial grasses shall be spread over the
excavated area, except exposed rock
surfaces to a minimum depth of four inches
(4”). The area shall be seeded with a noninvasive
perennial grass capable of survival
in this climate and maintained until a
uniform growth is established.
4. If the excavation site shall fall within
a floodplain, shoreland, or conservancy, the
regulations as set forth in the Shoreland-
Floodplain Protection Ordinance for the
Village shall apply.
5. Village employees shall be allowed
on the premises during scheduled operating
hours for inspection purposes.
6. Any violation of this section shall be
subject to the regulations of the Section
18.99 (9) of this code.
7. A performance bond in such amount
as the Administrator shall deem sufficient to
ensure completion of the work following
excavation pursuant to the conditions set
forth in this ordinance. Said performance
bond may be in the form of a cash bond,
certificate of deposit, or insurance bond, the
minimum value of which shall be the
weekly extraction value of material taken
from the site, plus an amount to cover the
cost of restoration of the site in question.
8. Copies of all permits required by
overlying jurisdictions.
(4) Erosion Control.
(a) All erosion control must be installed
and maintained per any and all ordinances
and requirements of any and all overlying
jurisdictions having authority over the site.
(b) All tracking and/or erosion must be
placed back on the site at the close of
business each day.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 62 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
18.22 PDD – PLANNED
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
(1) Application to Existing Use
Districts. This section shall operate as a
conditional use and as an alternate to the
permitted use and regulations applicable to
existing district, except the Agricultural -
Farmland Preservation (AG-FP) and
Agriculture (AG) Districts, and shall be
applicable only to those lands which are
hereby and may hereafter be zoned Planned
Development District by the Board. Basic
underlying zoning requirements for land
conditionally zoned as a Planned
Development District, shall continue in full
force and effect and shall be solely
applicable until such time as the Board
grants final approval as hereinafter provided.
All Planned Commercial Districts approved
prior to January 21, 2008 will fall under the
guidelines of this section.
(2) Purpose. The purpose of the
Planned Development District and the
regulations applicable to the same are to
encourage and provide means for effecting
desirable and quality development by
permitting greater flexibility and design
freedom than permitted under the basic
district regulations, and to accomplish a well
balanced aesthetically satisfying Village and
economically desirable development of
building sites within a Planned Development
District. These regulations are established
to permit latitude in the development of the
building sites if such development is found
to be in accordance with the purpose, spirit,
and intent of this code and is found not to be
hazardous, harmful, offensive, or otherwise
adverse to the environment, property values
or the character of the neighborhood or the
health, safety, and welfare of the
community. It is intended to permit and
encourage diversification, variation, and
imagination in the relationship of uses,
structures, open spaces and heights of
structures for developments conceived and
implemented as comprehensive and
cohesive unified projects. It is further
intended to encourage more rational and
economic development with relationship to
public services and to encourage and
facilitate preservation of open space and
other natural features such as woodlands,
floodplains, and wetlands.
(3) Definitions.
(a) Basic Zoning Regulations. Means
such zoning regulations as are applicable to
the use district other than the regulations set
forth in this section.
(b) Building Site. Is a tract of land not
divided by public streets or into lots,
excepting single family dwelling purposes,
and which will not be subdivided, or where
the tract of land, if so divided is in single
ownership or is owned by a condominium
group. (The site must be located on a public
street or highway.)
(c) Comprehensive Plan. Shall mean
the official guide for the physical, social,
and economic growth of the Village, which
is now or may hereafter be in effect.
(d) Density. Shall mean the number of
dwelling units permitted per square foot of
land area or number of dwelling units
permitted per acre of land use.
(e) Final Plan. The final drawing
described in Appendix A, Exhibit 10,
indicating the proposed manner for layout of
the PBD to be submitted to the Planning &
Zoning Commission for approval.
(f) Preliminary Plan. Shall mean the
preliminary drawings described in Section
18.22 (8), indicating the proposed manner
and/or layout of the Planned Development
District to be submitted to the Planning &
Zoning Commission for approval.
(g) Open Space. Shall mean a parcel or
parcels of land or an area of water, or a
combination thereof with the site designated
and intended for the use or enjoyment of
residents of the Planned Development
District.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 63 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(h) Improved Open Space. Shall mean
the above parcels and any structure or
improvements which are placed upon such
parcels (i.e. restrooms, tennis courts, ball
diamonds, etc.).
(i) Unimproved Open Space. Shall
mean open space kept free of structure or
improvements except for hiking, horseback
riding, bicycle trails, ponds, picnic areas,
and nature parks.
(j) Planned Development District. Shall
mean an area of land, controlled by a single
owner, corporation, or other legal entity,
which is to be developed as a single unit,
and is referred to as PDD.
(4) Uses Permitted.
(a) Basic Zoning Uses. The following
uses are permitted in a Planned
Development District upon obtaining all
necessary approvals required under this
ordinance:
1. All uses permitted under the basic
zoning regulations applicable to the zoning
district in which the particular property is
located.
2. Where a building site is situated in
more than one (1) use district, all uses
permitted under basic zoning regulations of
one (1) district may be extended into the
adjacent district, but only under the
condition that the maximum area of such
extension shall not exceed an area computed
to be fifty percent (50%) of the smaller of
the areas of the portion of the property
located in either district.
3. Recreational, commercial, and
institutional uses may be included to serve
the residents of the PDD and/or residents of
the surrounding area, provided such uses can
be supported by the residents as indicated by
an appropriate market study provided by the
developer. Also, parking, signage, and any
additional use restrictions for the uses shall
be addressed in the code adopted that
authorizes and establishes the proposed
PDD development.
(b) Building Restrictions. Requirements
for building height, size, and floor area, lot
size, setbacks (front, side, rear, and corner
side), density and open space shall be
delineated in the final development plan and
the code adopted that authorizes and
establishes the proposed PDD. In no case
shall these requirements be less than stated
in other sections of the PDD ordinance and
shall be found to not be hazardous, harmful,
offensive, or otherwise adverse to the
environment, property values, or the
character of the proposed development,
surrounding neighborhood or community or
adverse to the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the PDD and/or community
as a whole. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
if the final development plan does not
address a specific zoning requirement (the
“Non-addressed Requirement”), the
provisions of the Suamico Zoning
Ordinance shall apply to the development
plan to the extent of the non-addressed
requirements.
(5) General Provisions.
(a) Engineering Design Standards.
Normal standards or operational policy
regarding right-of-way widths, provisions of
sidewalks, street lighting and similar
environmental design criteria shall not be
mandatory in a planned development, but
precise standards satisfactory to the Village,
pursuant to the criteria as set forth in Section
18.22 (6) shall be made a part of the
approval plan and shall be enforceable as
part of the code.
1. Unless approved by the Village, all
sewer and water utility extensions shall
remain public.
(b) Approvals. The developer shall
develop the site in accordance with the
terms and conditions of development
presented to and approved by the Board.
Any changes or additions to the original
approved development site, structures, or
plans of operation shall require resubmittal
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 64 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
and recommendation by the Planning &
Zoning Commission and approval by the
Board.
(c) Rescinding Approval. Failure to
comply with conditions, commitments,
guarantees, or the recommendations
established in the approval of such
development project shall be cause for
rescinding the approval of the same. Upon
notice given by the Building Inspector, the
developer then shall be required to appear
before the Board at its next public meeting
to explain any such failure to comply. The
Board at such hearing shall determine
whether or not the developer shall have
failed to comply, and if there has been such
a failure, may either:
1. Rescind its approval, whereupon such
recession and cessation of all rights and
privileges of the developer and owner,
including the right to complete construction
or to construct any building or other
structure or improvement, shall become
effective on the thirty-first (31st) day
following mailing by certified mail to the
developer at his or her last known address of
a written notice of such decision; or
2. Adjourn such hearing for a period not
to exceed sixty-five (65) days to enable the
developer to comply; whereupon, if the
developer is then in substantial compliance
and has then established to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that there will be
compliance in the future, the rights and
privileges of the developer and owner shall
continue for such period of time that there
be such compliance, or does not establish to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that
there will be compliance in the future, the
Board will proceed in accordance with
Section 18.22, 1.
(6) Criteria for Approval. As a basis
for determining the acceptability of a PDD
proposal, the following criteria shall be
applied to the development proposal, with
specific considerations as to whether or not
it is consistent with the spirit and intent of
this code, has been prepared with competent
professional advice and guidance and
produces significant benefits in terms of
environmental design:
(a) Character and Intensity of Land
Use. The uses proposed and their intensity
and arrangement on the site shall be a visual,
aesthetic, and operational character which:
1. Is compatible to the physical nature
of the site, with particular concern for
preservation of natural features, tree growth,
and open space.
2. Would produce an attractive
environment of sustained aesthetic and
ecologic desirability, economic stability, and
functional practicality compatible with the
general development plans as established by
the community.
3. Would not adversely affect the
anticipated provision for school, sewer,
water, snow removal, garbage pickup, fire
protection, or other municipal services.
4. Would provide sufficient and
accessible off-street parking and loading
facilities. The parking requirements shall be
determined in the specific approval of the
preliminary and final development plans and
delineated in the code adopted that
authorizes and establishes the proposed
PDD. However, the Village’s off-street
parking requirements shall be used as a
guide to determine adequate off-street
parking provision. Creativity in addressing
the provision of parking is encouraged.
Alternate parking arrangements may be used
(such as exterior or interior satellite parking
lots, provision of mass transportation, etc.)
to provide adequate parking within the
requirements of the PDD code.
(b) Landscaping of Parking Areas. The
parking site shall be planned to provide a
desirable transition from the streetscape and
to provide for adequate landscaping,
pedestrian movement, and parking areas. In
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 65 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
keeping with this purpose, the following
design standard shall be set forth:
1. Where natural or existing topographic
features contributed to the beauty and utility
of a development, consideration shall be
given to this preservation. Modification to
topographic features should only occur
where it contributes to good appearance.
2. Plant material shall be selected for
interest in its ultimate growth. Further, it is
recommended that native materials be
employed for their ability to tolerate the
prevailing adverse conditions.
3. In locations where plant materials
will be susceptible to injury by pedestrians
and/or motor vehicles; appropriate curbs,
tree guards or other protective devices shall
be employed.
4. Parking areas shall be arranged so as
to prevent through traffic to other parking
areas.
5. Parking areas shall be screened from
adjacent structures, roads and traffic arteries
with hedges, dense planting, earth berms,
changes in grade, or walls except where
parking areas are designed as an intricate
part of the street.
6. All parking areas shall be adequately
lighted. All such lighting shall be so
arranged as to direct the light away from the
adjoining residences.
7. All off-street loading and unloading
areas shall be paved, and the design thereof
approved by the Planning & Zoning
Commission.
8. All parking areas and off-street
loading and unloading areas shall be graded
and drained so as to dispose of all surface
water without erosion, flooding, and other
inconveniences.
(c) Engineering Design Standards. The
width of rights-of-way, width and location
of street or other paving, requirements for
outdoor lighting, location of sanitary and
storm sewer and water lines, and provision
for drainage and other similar environmental
engineering considerations shall be based
upon a determination as to the appropriate
standards necessary to implant the specific
function in the specific situation; provided,
however, that in no case shall construction
standards be less than necessary to ensure
the public safety and welfare.
(d) Preservation and Maintenance of
Open Space. Adequate provisions shall be
made for the permanent preservation and
maintenance of common “open space” and
rights-of-way either by private reservation
or dedication to the public.
1. In the case of private reservation, the
open area to be reserved shall be protected
against building development by conveying
to the Village, as part of the conditions for
project approval, an open space easement
over such open areas restricting the areas
against any further building or use except as
is consistent with that of providing
landscaped open spaces for aesthetic and
recreational satisfaction of the surrounding
residences. Buildings or uses for
noncommercial recreational or cultural
purposes compatible with the open space
objective may be permitted only where
specifically authorized as part of the
development plan, or, subsequently, with the
express approval of the Board following the
recommendation of site and operational
plans by the Planning & Zoning
Commission.
2. In the case of roadways and other
rights-of-way which are not dedicated to the
public, as part of the conditions for project
approval there shall be granted to the
Village such easements over the same as
may be necessary to enable the Village to
provide suitable and adequate fire
protection, sanitary and storm sewer water,
and other required municipal services to the
project area.
3. The care and maintenance of such
open space reservations and rights-of-way
shall be assured either by establishment of
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 66 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
an appropriate management organization for
the project or by agreement with the Village
for establishment of a special service district
and levy the cost thereof as a special
assessment on the tax bill of properties
within the project area. In any case the
Village shall have the right to carry out, and
levy an assessment for the cost of any
maintenance which it feels necessary if it is
not otherwise taken care of to the
satisfaction of the Village. The manner of
assuring maintenance and assessing such
cost to individual properties shall be
determined prior to the approval of the final
project plans and shall be included in the
title of each property. The developer shall
submit a landscape maintenance schedule
with the final plan for approval by the
Village that satisfies the above requirements.
4. Ownership and tax liability of private
open space reservations and rights-of-way
shall be established in a manner acceptable
to the Village and made a part of the
conditions of plan approval.
(e) Accommodation of Pedestrian
Traffic.
1. Sidewalks and/or other walkways and
bicycle paths shall be provided where
necessary for the boundaries. Special
attention shall be given to connections
accommodating pedestrian movement
between the dwelling units, common open
space, recreation facilities, commercial
establishments, and parking facilities or
areas.
2. Walkway widths and surface
treatments of all walkways shall be
designated with regard to their function and
the anticipated manner of usage. The
natural feature of the area traversed by the
walkway system and suitable lighting in
scale with the project shall also be
considered.
3. Utilization of pedestrian ramps shall
be encouraged where necessary to either
resolve conflicts with vehicular traffic or
facilitate the movement of elderly and/or
children.
(f) Setback Requirements. Setbacks for
parking areas and structures shall be
established by the conditions governing the
particular Planned Commercial District so as
to ensure compatibility with adjoining
developments, uses, and zoning but no
parking area or structure shall be permitted
within:
1. Fifteen feet (15’) from any county
highway or Village arterial street right-ofway;
2. Ten feet (10’) of the right-of-way line
of a collector or local street.
(g) Signs and Outdoor Graphics. All
signage shall comply with Section 18.17
unless specific signage regulations are
contained in the conditions of each approval
by the Board authorizing the establishment
of the Planned Development District.
(h) Factors and Requirements to be
Considered by the Planning & Zoning
Commission and the Board.
1. Height of structures.
2. Auto parking facilities.
3. Screening and fencing.
4. Landscaping.
5. Setbacks.
6. Open space and reservations.
7. The site itself as it relates to
neighborhood environment, compatibility to
existing neighborhood use, and general
neighborhood characteristics.
8. Nature and use of the proposed
structures, and design, architecture, and
materials to be used.
9. Highway access to the site, number of
openings, and location of same.
10. Traffic generation, number of
vehicles parked, and rate of turnover per
hour.
11. Drainage.
12. Capacities required for sewer, water,
and other necessary utilities.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 67 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
13. Educational capacity capabilities
(number of families and school load).
14. Economic impact on the Village, its
inducements, attractions, and detractions.
15. Lighting.
16. Proposed methods and hours of
operation.
17. Comparison of open space as
required by the underlying basic zones with
that proposed project.
18. Operational control.
19. Commencement and completion
dates.
20. Highway dedication.
21. Deed restrictions and sureties
deemed necessary to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the community.
22. Such other limitations, conditions,
special requirements, or characteristics to
the use as may be deemed necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
Village.
(i) Implementation Schedule. The
proponents of a planned development shall
submit a reasonable schedule for
implementation of the development to the
satisfaction of the Planning & Zoning
Commission and the Board, including
suitable provisions (and the Village may
require the furnishing of a sufficient
performance bond) for assurance that each
phase could and should be brought to
completion in a manner which shall not
result in adverse effect upon the community
as a result of termination at the end of any
phase.
(7) Pre-Application Conference. Prior
to filing of an application for PDD, the
applicant of the proposed PDD is
encouraged to arrange a conference with the
Village. The primary purpose of the
conference shall be to provide the applicant
with an opportunity to gather information
and obtain guidance as to the general
suitability of the proposal for the area for
which it is proposed and its conformity to
the provisions of this chapter before
incurring substantial expense in the
preparation of plans, surveys, and other data.
(8) Procedure. The procedure for
approval of a planned development project
shall consist of two (2) phases:
(a) Preliminary Approval. Consisting
of approval of the proposed project in
principle only.
(b) Final Approval. Consisting of
approval of the proposed project in all its
terms and details.
(9) Preliminary Approval.
(a) Notice and Fee. A person desiring
to develop a particular site as a planned
development project shall apply to the
Building Inspector on such forms as shall be
provided by the Village and shall pay a fee
equal to that currently required for a
Preliminary Planned Development District
application which must accompany said
forms. Such application shall contain the
names, mailing addresses, and telephone
numbers of the owners and developers, and
a description of the development site.
Appropriate supporting documents and
maps, as required in Section 18.22 (9) (d)
shall be filed with the application.
(b) Notice to Committee. The Building
Inspector shall inform the Planning &
Zoning Commission of such desire and shall
secure a date for a preliminary discussion
between the developer and the Planning &
Zoning Commission, and shall notify such
developer of such date.
(c) Planning & Zoning Commission
Recommendations. The Planning & Zoning
Commission, after such preliminary
discussions and such further discussions as
may be required with the developer, shall
report in writing such proposed project
development to the Board, together with its
recommendation for either approval or
disapproval of the same. Such report and
recommendation of the Planning & Zoning
Commission shall be made to the Board no
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 68 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
later than four (4) months from the filing of
the application with the Building Inspector.
A recommendation of approval by the
Planning & Zoning Commission shall in no
way be binding on the Board.
(d) Information Required. The
following information shall be provided by
the applicant in adequate detail to satisfy the
Planning & Zoning Commission for its
recommendation regarding preliminary
approval:
1. A statement describing the general
character of the intended development.
2. An accurate map of the project area,
drawn to scale no less than one inch (1”)
equals two hundred feet (200’), showing the
nature, use, and character of abutting
properties prepared by a registered surveyor.
3. Four (4) copies of a general
development plan of the proposed project
drawn at a scale no less than one inch (1”)
equals two hundred feet (200’) showing the
following information in sufficient detail to
make possible the evaluation of the criteria
for approval as set forth in Section 18.22 (6)
(a), (b), (c), (d), and (h) of this section:
a. Tract boundaries and a statement of
the total acreage of the tract;
b. Significant existing physical features
within the tract, with two feet (2’) contour
topographic information, including natural
drainage patterns and water resources such
as streams, drainage swales, watercourses,
ponds, lakes, wetlands, floodplains subject
to one hundred (100) year flood frequency
and proposed changes in those features;
c. Zoning district(s) on and within four
hundred feet (400’) adjacent to the proposed
project;
d. Property lines (if any) within the
proposed project;
e. All contemplated land uses within the
tract;
f. An indicator of the contemplated
intensity of use; i.e., gross density in
residential development; number of
prospective tenants in office, commercial
and industrial development or recreational
development;
g. Number and type of dwelling units;
h. Existing buildings that may affect
future development and proposed location of
all principal structures and associated
parking area;
i. Proposed lot coverage of buildings
and structures;
j. Proposed circulation systems
(pedestrian, bicycle, auto, mass transit) by
type, how they relate to the existing network
outside this site;
k. Existing rights-of-way and easements
which may affect the PDD project;
l. In the case of plans which call for
development in stages, a map at an
appropriate scale showing the successive
stages;
m. The location of sanitary and storm
sewer lines, watermains, fire hydrants and
lighting;
n. The location of recreational and open
space areas and areas reserved or dedicated
for public uses, such as schools, parks, etc.;
o. Description of proposed system for
drainage;
p. General landscape treatment.
4. Appropriate statistical data on the
size of the development, residential density,
ratio of various land uses, economic analysis
of the development, and any other data
pertinent to the evaluation under the criteria
of Section 18.22 (6) (a), (b), (c), (d), and
(h).
5. Architectural drawings and sketches
illustrating the design and character of
proposed structures.
6. General outline of intended
organization structure related to property
owner’s association, deed restrictions, and
private provision of common services, if
any.
7. Economic feasibility and impact
report may be required by the Planning &
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 69 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
Zoning Commission to provide satisfactory
evidence of the project’s economic
feasibility, of available adequate financing,
and of not adversely affecting the economic
prosperity of the Village or the values of
surrounding properties.
(10) Amendment of Preliminary
Approval. The recommendation of the
Planning & Zoning Commission and the
preliminary approval of the Board shall be
based on and include as conditions thereto
the building, site, and operational plans for
the development as approved, as well as all
other commitments offered or required with
regard to project value, character, or other
factors pertinent to an assurance that the
proposed development will be carried out
basically as presented in the approved plans.
Detailed construction time, and the approval
of such preliminary plan shall be conditional
upon the subsequent submittal and approval
of more specific and detailed plans. Any
subsequent change or addition to the plans
or use shall first be submitted to the
Planning & Zoning Commission, and if, in
the opinion of the Planning & Zoning
Commission, such change or addition
constitutes a substantial alteration of the
original plan, it shall timely make an
appropriate recommendation to the Board
relating to an amendment of the preliminary
approval.
(11) Final Approval.
(a) Petition for Final Approval. When
the Board has issued its preliminary
approval of the proposed plan, then the
developer may file with the Clerk a petition
executed by the owner of the property to be
developed, or its agent, for the final
approval, stating that it seeks to develop
such property under the provisions of this
section. Such petition, accompanied by a
final planned development district fee, shall
include (unless previously submitted):
1. The names, mailing addresses, and
telephone numbers of any additional owners
and developers of the development site, and
the names of owners and developers listed
on the application that no longer have an
interest in the project, in the event there has
been a change in owners or developers since
the date of application.
2. An accurate topographical map
showing topographical data at two foot (2’)
intervals and extending within one hundred
feet (100’) beyond the exterior boundaries of
such site, showing all public rights-of-way
and all buildings accurately located within
one hundred feet (100’) of the exterior
boundaries of such site. Such map shall
contain all available utilities, including
drainage and capacities thereof and high
water elevations along rivers.
3. A scale plot plan showing the
location, type, and size of every proposed
structure and its proposed use; also
driveways, driveway access roads, parking
facilities, lighting appliances, recreation
areas, loading docks, open spaces,
screening, fencing, and landscaping areas,
and utility easements.
4. A statistical table showing the size of
the site in square feet, the acreage (exclusive
of public streets), proposed population
densities and open areas (both in square feet
and as a percentage of the project area).
5. Architectural drawings of all
buildings and structures and sketches
showing the design characteristics and
treatment of exterior elevations and typical
floor plans of proposed structures.
6. A table showing the approximate cost
of structures.
7. A statement showing the starting and
completion dates of the project.
8. Any other pertinent data, statements,
drawings, or plans which may be required
by the Planning & Zoning Commission or
the Board.
9. The following additional information
for commercial and industrial developments:
a. Square feet of buildings.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 70 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
b. Square feet of offices, production
areas, and the proposed number of
employees in such area.
c. Details of proposed use or uses and
manner of operation; and
d. The municipal services that may be
required to serve the area.
(b) Plan Approval. Approval of the
preliminary plan shall entitle the developer
to final approval if the final development
plan is submitted within twelve (12) months
of the date of the preliminary plan and
conforms to such layout and conditions of
the approved preliminary plan and required
final approval information. The Planning &
Zoning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the Board within fortyfive
(45) days of the submittal of a final
plan. The Board then shall have an
additional forty-five (45) days after receipt
of the Planning & Zoning Commission
recommendation in which to make a
decision.
(c) Expiration of Plan. If construction
has not begun and/or no use established in
the PDD or one (1) of its stages within
twenty-four (24) months of final approval
date, the final development plan shall lapse
and be of no further effect.
(d) Changes. Minor changes in the
location, setting, and heights of buildings
and structures may be authorized by the
Planning & Zoning Commission without
additional hearing if required by engineering
or other circumstances not foreseen at the
time the final plan was approved. A planned
development district amendment fee shall
accompany any such request. No change
authorized by this section may cause any of
the following:
1. A change in the use or character of
the development.
2. An increase in overall coverage of
structures.
3. An increase in the intensity of use.
4. An increase in the problems of traffic
circulation and public utilities.
5. A reduction in approved open space.
6. A reduction of off-street parking and
loading spaces.
7. A reduction in required pavement
widths.
8. All other changes in use, or
rearrangement of lots, blocks, and building’s
tracts, every change in the provision of
common open space and changes other than
listed above must be made by the Planning
& Zoning Commission. Such amendments
may be required by changes in community
policy.
(12) Interpretation. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions
of this code shall be held to the minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed
in favor of the Village and shall not be
deemed in a limitation or repeal of any other
power granted by the Wisconsin statutes.
Development shall be planned, reviewed,
and carried out in conformance with all
municipal, state, and other laws and
regulations. However, in interpreting and
applying the provisions of this subchapter or
any PDD adopted under this subchapter they
shall take precedence and be controlling
when there is conflict between their
provision and those of the zoning provisions
of this code.
18.23 TCOD – TOWN CENTER
OVERLAY DISTRICT.
(1) Purpose of the Town Center
Overlay District (TCOD).
(a) The TCOD is intended to permit
developments that will, over a period of
time, be enhanced by coordinated area site
planning, diversified location of structures
and/or mixing of compatible uses. Such
developments are intended to provide a safe
and efficient system for pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; to create more active social
places; to provide an opportunity for
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 71 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
developers to create economic activities that
serve the needs of Village residents; to
provide attractive recreation, green spaces,
town squares and plazas, and public activity
spaces as integral parts of the development;
to enable economical design of utilities and
community facilities; and to ensure adequate
standards of construction and planning. The
TCOD under this section will allow for
flexibility of overall development design,
with benefits from such flexibility intended
to be derived by both the developer and the
community, while at the same time
maintaining, where judged appropriated by
the Board, other standards or use
requirements as set forth in the underlying
base zoning district. The TCOD shall be
applicable only within the district as
depicted in the accompanying map within
the Town Center Plan (TCP).
(b) The unified and planned
development of a site in a single,
partnership, or corporate ownership or
control or in common ownership under the
Unit Ownership Act set for in Wis. Stats.
Ch. 703 (condominiums) may be permitted
by the Village upon specific petition, with
such development encompassing one (1) or
more principal uses or structures and related
accessory uses or structures, when all
regulations and standards as set forth in this
section have been met.
(2) Area Requirements for TCOD
Project. Areas designated as a TCOD
project shall be under single or corporate
ownership or control and shall contain a
minimum development area of either one
half (½) acres or the size of the lots and
parcels existing as of the adoption date of
this TCOD.
(3) Uses, Structures, Lot Area and
Dimensions, Density, Parking,
Landscaping, Heights, Setback Yards,
and Other Requirements. Uses, structures,
individual lot sizes, densities, setbacks,
yards, dimensional requirements,
landscaping requirements, parking
requirements, height requirements, and other
requirements required by the underlying
base use district may be modified and shall
be considered as permitted uses if, in the
judgement of the Planning & Zoning
Commission, Design Review Commission,
and Board, the proposed project is
compatible with the site design, illustrations,
guidelines, and related features as shown in
the TCP.
(4) Procedure.
(a) Pre-Petition Conference. Prior to
official submittal of the petition for approval
of a proposed project or development for the
TCOD, the owner or his or her agent making
such petition shall meet with the Village
Staff to discuss the scope and proposed
nature of the contemplated development.
Subsequent to such meeting, all costs for
Village Staff and consultants associated with
the proposed project shall be borne by the
owner or his or her agent by agreement with
the Village.
(b) The Petition. Following the prepetition
conference, the owner or his or her
agent may file a petition with the Planning
and Zoning Commission and Design Review
Commission for an approval of a TCOD
proposal thereby permitting the application
of the provisions of this section to the
designated area.
(c) Such petition shall be accompanied
by the appropriate fee as well as a statement
which sets forth the relationship of the
proposed project to the TCOD, the TCP, and
any other plans or studies deemed relevant
by the Village and the general character and
use of all structures and site changes to be
included in the proposed project, including
but not limited to the following items:
1. Total area to be included in the
project, are of open space, commercial area
computations, parking and traffic estimates,
density computations, proposed number of
dwelling units, population analysis,
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 72 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
availability of or requirements for municipal
services and any other similar data pertinent
to a comprehensive evaluation of the
proposed development.
2. A general summary of the estimated
value of structures and site improvement
costs, including landscaping and special
features.
3. A general outline of the
organizational structure of a property owner
or management association, which may be
proposed to be established for the purpose of
providing any necessary private services.
4. Any proposed departures from the
standards of development as set forth in the
Village zoning regulations, land division
ordinance, sign ordinance, other Village
regulations or administrative rules or other
guidelines.
5. The expected date of commencement
of physical development as set forth in the
proposal and also an outline of any
development staging which is planned.
(d) Subsequent to or in conjunction with
the petition (as determined by Village Staff),
the applicant shall submit a general
development plan (GDP) which shall
include, in addition to other site plan and
architectural review requirements, the
following:
1. A preliminary plat or certified survey
map, if required, depicting the plan of the
development.
2. A legal description of the boundaries
of lands included in the proposed project.
3. A description of the relationship
between the proposed project and the
surrounding areas, including all other areas
within the boundary to the TCP as requested
by Village staff.
4. The location of roads, driveways,
parking facilities, sidewalks, trails, bicycle
facilities, and related circulation
components.
5. The size, arrangement, and location
of any individual building sites and
proposed building groups on each individual
lot.
6. The location of recreational and open
space areas and areas reserved or dedicated
for parks, town squares or town plazas, and
drainage ways.
7. The type, size, and location of all
structures.
8. Specific landscaping treatment,
including detailed street cross sections
showing roadside landscaping standards.
9. Architectural plans, elevations and
perspective drawings and sketches
illustrating the design and character of
proposed structures.
10. The existing and proposed location
of sanitary sewer, water supply facilities and
stormwater drainage facilities.
11. The existing and proposed location
of all private utilities or other easements.
12. Characteristics of soils related to
contemplated specific uses.
13. Existing topography onsite with
contours at no greater than two foot (2’)
intervals.
14. Anticipated uses of adjoining lands
in regard to roads, surface water drainage
and compatibility with existing adjacent
land uses.
15. If the development is to be staged, a
staging plan.
(5) Referral to Planning & Zoning
Commission. The petition and GDP for a
TCOD shall be referred to the Planning &
Zoning Commission for its review and
recommendation with regard to all aspects
of the GDP except those to be submitted to
the Design Review Commission as listed in
Section 18.23 (6) below. The Planning &
Zoning Commission may add any additional
conditions or restrictions which it may deem
necessary or appropriate to promote the
spirit and intent of this section and the
purpose of this section or may reject or
recommend denial of the application as
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 73 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
inconsistent with the goals, intentions, or
details of the TCP.
(6) Referral to Design Review
Committee. The petition and GDP for
TCOD shall be referred to the Design
Review Committee for its review and
recommendation with regard to the design,
architecture, and materials to be used in the
proposed structures, proposed lighting plan
and light fixture style, landscaping plan, and
signage. The Design Review Committee
may add any additional conditions or
restrictions which it may deem necessary or
appropriate to promote the spirit and intent
of this section and the purpose of this
section or may reject or recommend denial
of the application as inconsistent with the
goals, intentions, or details of the TCP.
(a) If the proposed development
includes a historic structure, historic site, or
is located within a historic district as
designated through the procedures outlined
in Chapter 16 Subchapter IV the
submissions to the Design Review
Committee shall instead be made to the
Historic Preservation Commission for its
review and recommendation.
(7) Basis for Approval.
(a) The Planning & Zoning Commission
and Design Review Committee in making its
recommendations and the Board in making
its determinations shall consider:
1. Whether the petitions for the
proposed TCOD project have indicated that
they intend to begin the physical
development of the designated project
within twelve (12) months following the
approval of the petition for a TCOD project
and that the development will be carried out
according to a reasonable construction
schedule satisfactory to the Village.
2. Whether the proposed TCOD project
is consistent in all respects with the purpose
of this section and with the spirit and intent
of this section; is in conformity with the
TCP and other Village plans and studies that
are relevant to this area; that such
development would not be contrary to the
general welfare and economic prosperity of
the Village or of the immediate
neighborhood; and that the benefits and
improved design of the resultant
development justify the establishment of a
TCOD project.
(b) The Planning & Zoning
Commission, Design Review Committee,
and the Common Council shall not give
their respective recommendations or
approvals unless it is found that:
1. The proposed site shall be provided
with adequate drainage facilities for surface
and storm waters.
2. The proposed project shall be
accessible from roads that are adequate to
carry the traffic that can be expected to be
generated by the proposed development.
3. No undue constraint or burden will be
imposed on Village services and facilities.
4. Adequate utilities shall be provided.
5. Adequate guarantee is provided for
permanent preservation of open space areas,
town squares and plazas, green spaces, and
other open spaces as shown on the approved
site plan either by private reservations and
maintenance or by dedication to the public.
(8) Changes or Additions. Any
subsequent change or addition to the plans
or uses shall first be submitted for approval
to the Planning & Zoning Commission, and
if in the opinion of the Planning & Zoning
Commission such change or addition
constitutes a substantial alteration of the
original plan, a public hearing before the
Board shall be required and notice thereof
shall be given pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
(9) Developer’s Agreement and
Restrictive Covenants. The terms and
conditions of the TCOD shall be set forth in
a developer’s agreement and restrictive
covenants as deemed necessary by the
Village.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 74 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(10) Excluded Areas. Lands currently
zoned Agricultural-Farmland Preservation
are not eligible for inclusion in any Town
Center Overlay District.
18.97 NONCONFORMITY. The purpose
and intent of this chapter is to provide for
the regulation of nonconforming buildings,
structures, land and other uses and to specify
those circumstances and conditions under
which such nonconforming buildings,
structures, land and uses shall be permitted
to continue.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Nonconforming Use. A use which
existed lawfully prior to the adoption,
amendment, or comprehensive revision of a
zoning ordinance, which does not comply
with present zoning provisions. A use
permitted by zoning statutes or ordinances to
continue notwithstanding that similar uses
are no longer permitted in the area in which
it is located.
(b) Nonconforming Structure. A
structure which was legal prior to the
adoption, amendment, or comprehensive
revision of a zoning ordinance, but which
now violates the size, location, or
dimensional limits of its zoning district.
(c) Nonconforming Lot. A lot which
had legal dimensions or square footage prior
to the adoption, amendment, or
comprehensive revision of a zoning
ordinance, but which now fails to conform
to the requirements of its zoning district.
(2) General.
(a) Any nonconforming building,
structure, land, or other use which existed
lawfully at the time of the adoption of this
code and which remains nonconforming,
and any such building, structure, land, or
other use which shall become
nonconforming upon the adoption of this
code, or of any subsequent amendments
thereto, may be continued subject to the
regulations which follow.
(b) Any nonconforming building,
structure, land, or other use which is covered
by Section 19 or Section 20 shall have the
more restrictive code apply.
(3) Nonconforming Use.
(a) If a nonconforming use is
discontinued or terminated for a period of
twelve (12) months, any future use of the
building, structure, land, or other use shall
thereafter conform to the provisions of this
code.
(b) The structural alteration/repair of a
structure containing a nonconforming use
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
structures assessed value over the life of the
structure.
(c) Additions to a structure containing a
nonconforming use shall not be allowed.
(d) Once a nonconforming use has been
changed to conform, it shall not revert back
to a nonconforming use.
(4) Nonconforming Structure.
(a) Primary Structures.
1. Additions shall be allowed as long as
the addition complies with all the
requirements of all applicable ordinances.
2. Repairs and alterations shall be
allowed except for structures deemed a
public safety hazard.
3. No repair or alteration shall cause a
structure to be more nonconforming except
when necessary for the structure to comply
with applicable local, state, or federal
requirements.
(b) Accessory Structures.
1. Repairs and alterations of a structure
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
structure’s assessed value over the life of the
structure, except for structures deemed a
public safety hazard.
2. No additions shall be allowed.
3. No repair and alteration shall cause a
structure to be more nonconforming except
when necessary for the structure to comply
with applicable local, state, or federal
requirements.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 75 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(c) Structures Damaged by Violent
Wind, Vandalism, Fire, Flood, Ice, Snow,
Mold, or Infestation.
1. Wis. Stats. §62.23(7)(hc) & §61.351
shall apply.
(5) Nonconforming Lots.
(a) All lots shall be considered
buildable if:
1. It was a legal conforming lot at the
time of it creation.
2. It has frontage on an improved public
street.
3. All other applicable codes and
requirements shall be met.
(6) Public Safety Hazards.
(a) No structure deemed a public safety
hazard shall be allowed to be repaired or
altered without review and approval of the
Public Health & Safety Committee.
18.98 ADMINISTRATION AND
ENFORCEMENT. This section of the
ordinance shall set forth the requirements to
adequately provide and develop the proper
administration and enforcement of this
ordinance.
(1) General.
1. This section shall provide the
authority and necessary requirements for
issuance of variances, appeals, amendments,
conditional uses, special exceptions, and
penalties.
(2) Planning & Zoning Commission.
The Planning & Zoning Commission
(referred to as Planning Commission) shall
be the authorized planning agency,
administer the said zoning ordinance, and
shall perform the duties of the Planning &
Zoning Committee as set forth in Wis. Stats.
§62.23 (and as amended).
(a) Jurisdiction. The Planning
Commission shall carry out the following
duties as enumerated in Wis. Stats. §62.23
under this ordinance:
1. Carry out the administration of this
zoning ordinance.
2. Review all applications for
conditional uses, special exceptions, and
amendments to this ordinance and report
said findings and recommendations to the
Board in the manner designated by this
ordinance for conditional uses, special
exceptions, and amendments.
3. Provide and maintain a public
information bureau relative to all matters
arising out of this ordinance.
4. Maintain permanent and current
records of this ordinance including, but not
limited to all maps, land divisions,
amendments, conditional uses, special
exceptions, variances, appeals, and
applications thereof.
5. Initiate, direct, and review from time
to time a study of the provisions of this
ordinance and to make reports of its
recommendations to the Board.
(b) Meetings.
1. All meetings of the Planning
Commission shall be held on the second
(2nd) Wednesday of the month or at the call
of the chairperson of the Commission and at
such times as the Commission may
determine.
2. The Commission shall keep minutes
of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall also keep records of its hearings and
other official actions.
(c) Decisions. All actions of the
Planning Commission shall require the vote
of a majority of the members of the
Commission.
(d) Membership. Shall be as specified
in Village Code Section 2.07.
(3) Board of Appeals. The Board of
Appeals is hereby established under Village
Code Section 1.03 and as authorized under
the provisions of the Wisconsin State
Statutes, Chapter 62.23(7)(e) and as
amended.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 76 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(a) Jurisdiction. The Board of Appeals
is hereby entrusted with the jurisdiction and
authority to:
1. Hear and decide appeals from any
order, requirement, decision, or
determination made under the provisions of
this ordinance.
2. Hear and act upon the application for
variances from the terms provided in this
ordinance in the manner prescribed by and
subject to the standards established herein.
3. Hear and decide all matters referred
to it or upon which it is required to act upon
under this ordinance as prescribed by Wis.
Stats. §62.23(7)(e) (and as amended).
4. To hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination
made by an administrative official in the
enforcement of Wis. Stats. §62.23(7)(e) or
of any ordinance adopted thereto.
5. To authorize upon appeal in specific
cases such variance from the terms of the
land use and planning ordinance as will not
be contrary to the public interest where
owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of the
ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship, and so that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed and substantial
justice done. To have the powers and duties
provided for Boards of Appeals under
62.23(7)(e)7 Wisconsin Statutes and shall
carry out their duties in the manner provided
for Boards of Appeals by 62.23(7)(e)
Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Meetings and Rules.
1. All meetings of the Board of Appeals
shall be governed by Wisconsin Statute
62.23(7)(e).
2. The Board shall adopt its own rules
and procedures not in conflict with this
ordinance or with the applicable Wisconsin
state statutes.
(c) Decisions. All decisions and
findings of the Board of Appeals on appeals
or upon application for a variance shall be
by the concurring vote of the majority of the
Board and after said hearing shall in all
instances be final administrative decisions
and shall be subject to judicial review as by
law may be provided.
(d) Board Membership. Shall be as
specified in Village Code Section 1.03.
(4) Variances.
(a) Application.
1. An application for a variance shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator. The
application shall contain such information as
the Board of Appeals by rule may require.
Notice of the time and place of such public
hearing shall be published as a Class 1
Notice and also by mailing notice thereof to
parties in interest, said publication and
mailing to be made at least ten (10) days
prior to the date of the hearing. The Board
of Appeals shall thereafter reach its decision
within sixty (60) days from the filing of the
appeal.
(b) Standards for Variances. The Board
of Appeals shall not vary the regulations as
set forth in the Zoning Code unless it shall
make findings based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case.
1. Because of the particular physical
surrounds, shape, or topographical condition
of the specific property involved, a
particular hardship to the owner would result
as distinguished from a mere inconvenience
if the strict letter of the regulations were to
be carried out.
2. Conditions upon which a petition for
a variation is based are unique to the
property for which the variance is sought,
and are not applicable generally to other
property within the same zoning
classification.
3. Alleged difficulty or hardship is
caused by this ordinance and has not been
created by any person presently having an
interest in the property.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 77 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
4. Granting of the variation shall not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious
to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is
located.
5. Proposed variation shall not impair an
adequate supply of light and air to adjacent
property, or substantially increase the
congestion of the public streets, or increase
the danger of fire, or endanger the public
safety, or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
(5) Appeals. An appeal may be taken
to the Board of Appeals by any person, firm,
or corporation, or by any office, department,
board, or bureau aggrieved by a decision of
the Administrative Officer. The process for
such appeals shall be governed by
Wisconsin Statute 62.23(7)(e).
(6) Amendments to the Zoning Code.
(a) Authority. The Board may from
time to time in the manner hereafter set forth
amend the regulations imposed in the
districts or amend district boundary lines
provided that in all amendatory ordinances
adopted under the authority of this section,
due allowance shall be made for the intent
purpose of said changes as per 18.02,
Purpose and Severability of this ordinance.
(b) Initiation. Amendments may be
proposed by any governmental body or any
interested person or organization.
(c) Application. An application for an
amendment shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator in such form and
accompanied by such information as
required by the Planning & Zoning
Commission. Said application shall be
reviewed and a written recommendation
submitted thereon to the Board.
(d) Hearing Notice. The Board shall
hold public hearing on each application for
an amendment. Time, place, and purpose of
the hearing shall be published as a Class 2
Notice.
(e) Findings and Recommendations.
1. The Planning Commission shall make
written findings of fact and shall submit
together with its recommendations to the
Board prior to the public hearing.
2. Where the purpose and effect of the
proposed amendment is to change the
zoning classification of particular property,
the Planning Commission shall make
findings based upon the evidence presented
to it in each specific case with respect to the
following matters:
a. Existing uses of property within the
general area of the property in question.
b. Zoning classification of property
within the general area of the property in
question.
c. Suitability of the property in question
to the uses permitted under the existing
zoning classification.
d. Trend of development, if any in the
general area of the property in question,
including changes if any, which have taken
place in its present zoning classification.
e. Adequate public facilities to serve the
development are present or will be provided.
f. Providing these facilities will not be
an unreasonable burden to the Village.
g. The land is suitable for development
and development will not cause
unreasonable air and water pollution, soil
erosion, or adverse effects on rare or
irreplaceable natural areas.
h. The Planning Commission may
recommend the adoption of an amendment
changing the zoning classification of the
property in question to any higher
classification than that requested by the
applicant.
i. The Planning Commission shall not
recommend the adoption of a proposed
amendment unless it finds that the adoption
of such amendment is in the public interest
and is not solely for the interest of the
applicant.
(f) Board Action.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 78 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
1. The Board shall not act upon a
proposed amendment to this ordinance until
it has received a written report and
recommendation from the Planning
Commission on the proposed amendment.
2. The Board may grant or deny any
application for an amendment provided,
however, that in the event of a written
protest, Wis. Stats. 62.23(7)(d)2m is
followed.
3. If an application for a proposed
amendment is not acted upon finally by the
Board within ninety (90) days of the date
upon which such application is received by
the Board, it shall be deemed to have been
denied.
4. This section shall not interfere with
the Board's ability to alter, supplement, or
change the boundaries or regulations
established in this ordinance.
(7) Conditional Uses.
(a) Purpose. To place unique land use
characteristics within favorable zoning
districts to ease conflicts on neighboring
lands and public need, conditional uses shall
be of two (2) types.
1. Uses publicly operated or
traditionally affected with a public interest.
2. Private uses in character of an
unusual nature that their operation may give
use to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property as public
facilities.
(b) Initiation. Any person having a
freehold interest in land, or a possessory
interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a
contractual interest which may become a
freehold interest or an exclusive possessory
interest, and which is specifically
enforceable; may file an application to use
such land for one or more of the conditional
uses provided for in this ordinance in the
zoning district in which the land is located.
(c) Application. The application for a
conditional use shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator on a form so
prescribed by the Planning Commission.
The application shall be accompanied by
such plans and/or data prescribed by the
Planning Commission and shall include a
statement in writing by the applicant and
adequate evidence showing that the
proposed conditional use will conform to the
standards set forth in the respective zone
districts. Such application shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission and a written
recommendation submitted thereon to the
Board.
(d) Hearing on Application. Upon
receipt in proper form of the written
recommendation referred to Section 18.99
(7) (c), the Board shall hold a public hearing
on the proposed conditional use.
(e) Authorization. For each condition
listed in an application for a conditional use,
the Planning Commission shall report to the
Board its findings and recommendations,
including the stipulation of additional
conditions and guarantees that such
conditions will be complied with when they
are deemed necessary for the protection of
the public interest. If an application for a
proposed conditional use is not acted upon
within ninety (90) days of the date upon
which such application is received by the
Board, it shall be deemed to have been
denied.
(f) Standards. No conditional use shall
be recommended by the Planning
Commission unless said Commission shall
find that the conditions comply with Section
18.02.
(g) Conditions and Guarantees. Before
issuing a conditional use, the Planning
Commission may recommend that the Board
shall stipulate conditions and restrictions
upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance, and operation of
the conditional use as is deemed necessary
for the protection of the public interest and
to secure compliance with the standards and
requirements specified in Section 18.99 (7)
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 79 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
(f) above. In all cases in which conditional
uses are granted, the Board shall require
such evidence and guarantees as it may
deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being
and will be complied with.
(8) Special Exceptions.
(a) Purpose. A special or unique
situation, excluding a change in use or a use
prohibited in a zoning district, which may
authorized by the Planning & Zoning
Commission and is specifically set forth in
the ordinance as a special exception and
which may justify the waiver of the
regulations applicable thereto and does not
necessarily require the demonstration of an
unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty.
(b) Initiation. Any person having a
freehold interest in land or a possessory
interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a
contractual interest which may become a
freehold interest or an exclusive possessory
interest, and which is specifically
enforceable, may file an application for a
special exception provided for in this
ordinance in the Zoning District in which
the land is located.
(c) Application. The application for a
special exception shall be filed with the
Planning Commission on a form so
prescribed by the Planning Commission.
The application shall be accompanied by
such plans and/or data prescribed by the
Planning Commission, and shall include a
statement in writing by the applicant and
adequate evidence showing that the
proposed special exception will conform to
the standards set forth in the respective zone
districts. Such application shall be reviewed
and acted upon by the Planning
Commission.
(d) Hearing on Application. The
Planning & Zoning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the proposed special
exception.
(e) Authorization. For each special
exception application, the Planning
Commission including the stipulation of
additional conditions and guarantees that
such conditions will be complied with when
they are deemed necessary for the protection
of the public interest. If an application for a
proposed special exception is not acted upon
within ninety (90) days of the date upon
which such application is received by the
Planning & Zoning Commission, it shall be
deemed to have been denied.
(f) Standards. No special exception
shall be approved by the Planning & Zoning
Commission unless said Commission shall
find that the conditions comply with Section
18.02 of the Zoning Code, Intent, Purpose,
and Severability.
18.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY,
AND ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any person who violates,
or knowingly allows or permits any
violation of, any provision of this ordinance,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) per violation. Failure or refusal to
pay forfeiture may result in imprisonment
for a period of not more than ninety (90)
days for each offense. A separate offense
and violation shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 80 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
18-Zoning Code Page 81 of 81 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 18
Ordinance 2008-10 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 5-5-08
Ordinance 2008-16 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 6-2-08
Ordinance 2008-22 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code and Creating Section 18.23
Town Center Overlay District
Adopted 7-14-08
Ordinance 2009-03 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 2-16-09
Ordinance 2009-18 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 6-15-09
Ordinance 2009-19 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 8-17-09
Ordinance 2009-20 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 9-14-09
Ordinance 2010-06 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 1-18-10
Ordinance 2012-09 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 6-4-12
Ordinance 2013-03 Rescinding section 18.07, EA and Creating Section 18.07, AG-FP
Adopted 3-18-13
Ordinance 2014-02 Amending Chapter 18.17 Sign Regulations
Adopted 1-6-14
Ordinance 2014-10 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 6-16-14
Ordinance 2014-13 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 9-15-14
Ordinance 2014-15 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 11-17-14
Ordinance 2014-16 Amending Chapter 18 Zoning Code
Adopted 12-15-14
Ordinance 2015-10 Amending Chapter 18.18 Off-Street Parking
Adopted 9-21-15
Ordinance 2015-14 Amending Chapter 18.08 Rural Residential (4) Lot Requirements
Adopted 11-2-15
Ordinance 2016-11 Amending Chapter 18 Residential Sewer of the Village Code
Adopted 9-19-16
Ordinance 2018-09 Amending Chapter 18
Adopted 8-20-18
Ordinance 2020-05 Amending Chapter 18.10
Adopted 2-7-20
Village of Suamico
Chapter 19
19-Floodplain District Page 1 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
Date of Public Hearing: February 17, 2014
Date of Adoption: February 17, 2014
Dates of Publication: January 31 & February 7, 2014
19.01 Statutory Authorization, Finding of Fact, Statement of Purpose, Title, and General
Provisions................................................................................................................................ 1
19.02 General Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts ......................................... 4
19.03 Floodway District (FW) ............................................................................................... 5
19.04 Floodfringe District (FF) ............................................................................................. 7
19.05 General Floodplain District (GFP).............................................................................. 9
19.06 Nonconforming Uses .................................................................................................. 10
19.07 Administration ........................................................................................................... 13
19.08 Amendments .............................................................................................................. 19
19.09 Enforcement and Penalties ........................................................................................ 20
19.10 Definitions .................................................................................................................. 21
19.01 STATUTORY
AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF
FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE,
TITLE, AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) Statutory Authorization. This
ordinance is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in Wis. Stats. §61.35, §62.23
and the requirements in Wis. Stats. §87.30.
(2) Finding of Fact. Uncontrolled
development and use of the floodplains and
rivers of this municipality would impair the
public health, safety, convenience, general
welfare and tax base.
(3) Statement of Purpose. This
ordinance is intended to regulate floodplain
development to:
(a) Protect life, health and property;
(b) Minimize expenditures of public
funds for flood control projects;
(c) Minimize rescue and relief efforts
undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers;
(d) Minimize business interruptions and
other economic disruptions;
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities
in the floodplain;
(f) Minimize the occurrence of future
flood blight areas in the floodplain;
(g) Discourage the victimization of
unwary land and homebuyers;
(h) Prevent increases in flood heights
that could increase flood damage and result
in conflicts between property owners; and
(i) Discourage development in a
floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or
structure outside of the floodplain.
(4) Title. This ordinance shall be known
as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for the
Village of Suamico, Wisconsin.
(5) General Provisions.
(a) Areas to be Regulated. This
ordinance regulates all areas that would be
covered by the regional flood or base flood
as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) or other maps approved by the
DNR. Base flood elevations (BFE) are
derived from the flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as AE,
A1-A30, and AH Zones on the FIRM. Other
regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 2 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
zones. Regional flood elevations (RFE) may
be derived from other studies. If more than
one map or revision is referenced, the most
restrictive shall apply.
(b) Official Maps & Revisions. The
boundaries of all floodplain districts are
designated as A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 on
the maps based on the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the
base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes
to the boundaries of the floodplain or
floodway in the in the FIS or on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be
reviewed and approved by the DNR and
FEMA through the Letter of Map Change
process (see s. 19.08 Amendments) before it
is effective. No changes to RFE’s on non-
FEMA maps shall be effective until approved
by the DNR. These maps and revisions are
on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator, Village of Suamico. If more
than one map or revision is referenced, the
most restrictive information shall apply.
Official Maps: Based on the Brown
County Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated
(March 17, 2014), volume numbers
(55009CV001B, 55009CV002B, and
55009CV003B)
1. Brown County Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM), panel numbers (55009C0045F,
55009C0063F, 55009C0064F,
55009C0065F, 55009C0067F,
55009C0068F, 55009C0069F,
55009C0086F, 55009C0088F,
55009C0151F, 55009C0152F,
55009C0153F, 55009C0154F,
55009C0157F, 55009C0158F,
55009C0159F, 55009C0176F and
55009C0178F) dated August 18, 2009, and
55009C0135G dated March 17, 2014, along
with the corresponding profiles that are
based on the FIS. Approved by: The DNR
and FEMA.
Official Maps: Based on other studies.
1. Floodplain Study Appendix: Any
maps referenced in this section must be
approved by the DNR and be more
restrictive than those based on the FIS at the
site of the proposed development.
a. The Hidden Lake Dam, Dam Failure
Analysis and all associated Inundation map,
Floodway data table & profiles.
(c) Establishment of Districts. The
regional floodplain areas are divided into
three (3) districts as follows:
1. The Floodway District (FW) is the
channel of a river or stream and those
portions of the floodplain adjoining the
channel required to carry the regional
floodwaters and are contained within AE
Zones as shown on the FIRM.
2. The Floodfringe District (FF) is that
portion of the floodplain between the
regional flood limits and the floodway and
displayed as AE Zones on the FIRM.
3. The General Floodplain District
(GFP) is those areas that may be covered by
floodwater during the regional flood and
does not have a BFE or floodway boundary
determined, including A, AH, and AO zones
on the FIRM.
(d) Locating Floodplain Boundaries.
Discrepancies between boundaries on the
official floodplain zoning map and actual
field conditions shall be resolved using the
criteria in Section 19.01 (5) (d) 1 or 2 below.
If a significant difference exists, the map
shall be amended according to
Section 19.08. The Zoning Administrator
can rely on a boundary derived from a profile
elevation to grant or deny a land use permit,
whether or not a map amendment is
required. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for documenting actual predevelopment
field conditions and the basis
upon which the district boundary was
determined and for initiating any map
amendments required under this section.
Disputes between the Zoning Administrator
and an applicant over the district boundary
line shall be settled according to
Section 19.07 (3) (c) and the criteria in
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 3 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
Section 19.01 (5) (d) 1 and 2 below.
1. If flood profiles exist, the map scale
and the profile elevations shall determine the
district boundary. The regional or base flood
elevations shall govern if there are any
discrepancies.
2. Where flood profiles do not exist, the
location of the boundary shall be determined
by the map scale.
(e) Removal of Lands from Floodplain.
Compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance shall not be grounds for removing
land from the floodplain unless it is filled at
least two feet (2’) above the regional or base
flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land
outside the floodplain, and the map is
amended pursuant to Section 19.08.
Note: This procedure does not remove the
requirements for the mandatory purchase of
flood insurance. The property owner must
contact FEMA to request a Letter of Map
Change (LOMC).
(f) Compliance. Any development or
use within the areas regulated by this
ordinance shall be in compliance with the
terms of this ordinance, and other applicable
local, state, and federal regulations.
(g) Municipalities and State Agencies
Regulated. Unless specifically exempted by
law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties
are required to comply with this ordinance
and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats.
13.48(13), applies. The construction,
reconstruction, maintenance and repair of
state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation is exempt
when Wis. Stats. §30.2022 applies.
(h) Abrogation and Greater
Restrictions.
1. This ordinance supersedes all the
provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance
enacted under Wis. Stats. §61.35 or §87.30,
which relate to floodplains. If another
ordinance is more restrictive than this
ordinance, that ordinance shall continue in
full force and effect to the extent of the
greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
2. This ordinance is not intended to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants or easements. If this
ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
(i) Interpretation. In their interpretation
and application, the provisions of this
ordinance are the minimum requirements
liberally construed in favor of the governing
body and are not a limitation on or repeal of
any other powers granted by the Wisconsin
statutes. If a provision of this ordinance,
required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is
unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in
light of the standards in effect on the date of
the adoption of this ordinance or in effect on
the date of the most recent text amendment
to this ordinance.
(j) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
The flood protection standards in this
ordinance are based on engineering
experience and scientific research. Larger
floods may occur or the flood height may be
increased by man-made or natural causes.
This ordinance does not imply or guarantee
that non-floodplain areas or permitted
floodplain uses will be free from flooding and
flood damages. This ordinance does not
create liability on the part of, or a cause of
action against, the municipality or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damage
that may result from reliance on this
ordinance.
(k) Severability. Should any portion of
this ordinance is declared unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this ordinance shall not be
affected.
(l) Annexed Areas for Cities and
Villages. The Brown County floodplain
zoning provisions in effect on the date of
annexation shall remain in effect and shall be
enforced by the municipality for all annexed
areas until the municipality adopts and
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 4 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
enforces an ordinance which meets the
requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm.
Code and 44 CFR 59-72 National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed
lands are described on the municipality's
official zoning map. County floodplain
zoning provisions are incorporated by
reference for the purpose of administering
this section and are on file in the office of the
Municipal Zoning Administrator. All plats
or maps of annexation shall show the
regional flood elevation and the location of
the floodway.
(m) General Development Standards.
The community shall review all permit
applications to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a proposed building site is in a
flood-prone area, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall be designed
or modified and adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be
constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage; be constructed to minimize flood
damages; to ensure that utility & mechanical
equipment is designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
Subdivisions shall be reviewed for
compliance with the above standards. All
subdivision proposals (including
manufactured home parks) shall include
regional flood elevation and floodway data
for any development that meets the
subdivision definition of this ordinance and
all other requirements in 19.07(1) (b).
Adequate drainage shall be provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards and all
public utilities and facilities, such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems are located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages.
19.02 GENERAL STANDARDS
APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN
DISTRICTS.
(1) Hydraulic and Hydrologic
Analyses.
(a) No floodplain development shall:
1. Obstruct flow, defined as
development which blocks the conveyance of
floodwaters by itself or with other
development, increasing regional flood
height; or
2. Cause any increase in the regional
flood height due to floodplain storage area
lost.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall deny
permits if it is determined the proposed
development will obstruct flow or increase
regional flood heights based on the officially
adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless
the provisions of Section 19.08 Amendments
are met.
(2) Watercourse Alterations. No land
use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse
in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until
the local official has notified in writing all
adjacent municipalities, the Department and
FEMA regional offices and required the
applicant to secure all necessary state and
federal permits. The standards of 19.02 (1)
must be met and the flood carrying capacity
of any altered or relocated watercourse shall
be maintained.
As soon as is practicable, but not later
than six (6) months after the date of the
watercourse alteration or relocation and
pursuant to 19.08 Amendments the
community shall apply for a Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such
alterations must be reviewed and approved
by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC
process.
(3) Wis. Stats. Ch. 30, Ch. 31,
Development. Development which requires
a permit from the Department, under Wis.
Stats. Ch. 30 and Ch. 31, such as docks,
piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 5 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
navigational aids, may be allowed if the
necessary permits are obtained and
amendments to the floodplain zoning
ordinance are made according to Section
19.08 Amendments.
(4) Public or Private Campgrounds.
Public or private campgrounds shall have a
low flood damage potential and shall meet
the following provisions:
(a) The campground is approved by the
Department of Health Services.
(b) A land use permit for the
campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator.
(c) The character of the river system and
the elevation of the campground is such that
a seventy-two (72) hour warning of an
impending flood can be given to all
campground occupants.
(d) There is an adequate flood warning
procedure for the campground that offers the
minimum notice required under this section
to all persons in the campground. This
procedure shall include a written agreement
between the campground owner, the
municipal emergency government
coordinator and the chief law enforcement
official which specifies the flood elevation at
which evacuation shall occur, personnel
responsible for monitoring flood elevations,
types of warning systems to be used and the
procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and
the methods and personnel responsible for
conducting the evacuation.
(e) This agreement shall be for no more
than one (1) calendar year, at which time the
agreement shall be reviewed and updated -
by the officials identified in 19.02 (4) (d) - to
remain in compliance with all applicable
regulations, including those of the state
department of health and family services and
all other applicable regulations.
(f) Only camping units that are fully
licensed, if required, and ready for highway
use are allowed;
(g) The camping units may not occupy
any site in the campground for more than
one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days,
at which time the camping unit must be
removed from the floodplain for a minimum
of twenty-four (24) hours.
(h) All camping units that remain onsite
for more than thirty (30) days shall be issued
a limited authorization by the campground
operator, a written copy of which is kept on
file at the campground. Such authorization
shall allow placement of a camping unit for a
period not to exceed one hundred eighty
(180) days and shall ensure compliance with
all the provisions of this section.
(i) The municipality shall monitor the
limited authorizations issued by the
campground operator to assure compliance
with the terms of this section.
(j) All camping units that remain in place
for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days must meet the applicable
requirements in either Section 19.03, 19.04,
or 19.05 for the floodplain district in which
the structure is located.
(k) The campground shall have signs
clearly posted at all entrances warning of the
flood hazard and the procedures for
evacuation when a flood warning is issued.
(l) All service facilities, including but not
limited to refuse collection, electrical service,
natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage
systems and wells shall be properly anchored
and placed at or floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation.
19.03 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).
(1) Applicability. This section applies
to all floodway areas on the floodplain
zoning maps and those identified pursuant to
Section 19.05(4).
(2) Permitted Uses. The following
open space uses are allowed in the floodway
district and the floodway areas of the general
floodplain district, if:
They are not prohibited by any other
ordinance;
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 6 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
They meet the standards in Section 19.03
(3) and Section 19.03 (4); and
All permits or certificates have been
issued according to Section 19.07 (1):
(a) Agricultural uses, such as farming,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture,
viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
(b) Nonstructural industrial and
commercial uses, such as loading areas,
parking areas and airport landing strips.
(c) Nonstructural recreational uses, such
as golf courses, tennis courts, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries,
shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting
and fishing areas and hiking and horseback
riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of
Section 19.03 (3) (d).
(d) Uses or structures accessory to open
space uses, or classified as historic structures
that comply with Section 19.03 (3) and
Section 19.03 (4).
(e) Extraction of sand, gravel or other
materials that comply with Section 19.03 (3)
(d).
(f) Functionally water-dependent uses,
such as docks, piers or wharves, dams,
flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and
river crossings of transmission lines, and
pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. Ch. 30
and Ch. 31.
(g) Public utilities, streets and bridges
that comply with Section 19.03 (3) (c).
(3) Standards for Developments in
Floodway Areas.
(a) General.
1. Any development in floodway areas
shall comply with Section 19.02 and have a
low flood damage potential.
2. Applicants shall provide the following
data to determine the effects of the proposal
according to Section 19.02 (1) and Section
19.07 (1) (b) 3:
a. A cross-section elevation view of the
proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse,
showing if the proposed development will
obstruct flow; or
b. An analysis calculating the effects of
this proposal on regional flood height.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall deny
the permit application if the project will
increase flood elevations upstream or
downstream based on the data submitted for
Section 19.03 (3) (a) 2 above.
(b) Structures. Structures accessory to
permanent open space uses or functionally
dependent on a waterfront location may be
allowed by permit if the structures comply
with the following criteria:
1. The structure is not designed for
human habitation and does not have a high
flood damage potential and is constructed to
minimize flood damage;
2. Shall have a minimum of two
openings on different walls having a total net
area not less than one square inch for every
foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all
such openings being no higher than one foot
above grade. The openings shall be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters;
3. Must be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement;
4. Mechanical and utility equipment
must be elevated or flood proofed to or
above the flood protection elevation.
5. It must not obstruct flow of flood
waters or cause any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the regional flood.
(c) Public Utilities, Streets, and
Bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges
may be allowed by permit, if:
1. Adequate floodproofing measures are
provided to the flood protection elevation;
and
2. Construction meets the development
standards of Section 19.02 (1).
(d) Fills or Deposition of Materials.
Fills or deposition of materials may be
allowed by permit, if:
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 7 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
1. The requirements of Section 19.02 (1)
are met;
2. No material is deposited in the
navigable channel unless a permit is issued by
the Department pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch.
30, and a permit pursuant to S. 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344 has
been issued, if applicable, and the other
requirements of this section are met;
3. The fill or other materials will be
protected against erosion by riprap,
vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading;
and
4. The fill is not classified as a solid or
hazardous material.
(4) Prohibited Uses. All uses not listed
as permitted uses in Section 19.03 (2) are
prohibited, including the following uses:
(a) Habitable structures, structures with
high flood damage potential, or those not
associated with permanent open-space uses;
(b) Storing materials that are buoyant,
flammable, explosive, injurious to property,
water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish
or other aquatic life;
(c) Uses not in harmony with or
detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining
districts;
(d) Any private or public sewage
systems, except portable latrines that are
removed prior to flooding and systems
associated with recreational areas and
Department-approved campgrounds that
meet the applicable provisions of local
ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm.
Code;
(e) Any public or private wells which are
used to obtain potable water, except those
for recreational areas that meet the
requirements of local ordinances and
Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(f) Any solid or hazardous waste
disposal sites;
(g) Any wastewater treatment ponds or
facilities, except those permitted under S.
NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code;
(h) Any sanitary sewer or water supply
lines, except those to service existing or
proposed development located outside the
floodway which complies with the
regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
19.04 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF).
(1) Applicability. This section applies
to all floodfringe areas shown on the
floodplain zoning maps and those identified
pursuant to Section 19.05 (4).
(2) Permitted Uses. Any structure,
land use, or development is allowed in the
floodfringe district if the standards in Section
19.04 (3) are met, the use is not prohibited
by this or any other ordinance or regulation
and all permits or certificates specified in
Section 19.07 (1) have been issued.
(3) Standards for Development in
Floodfringe Areas. Section 19.02 (1) shall
apply in addition to the following
requirements according to the use requested.
Any existing structure in the floodfringe
must meet the requirements of section 19.06
Nonconforming Uses.
(a) Residential Uses. Any habitable
structure, including a manufactured home,
which is to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, or moved into the
floodfringe area, shall meet or exceed the
following standards:
1. The elevation of the lowest floor,
excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be
at or above the flood protection elevation on
fill. The fill shall be one foot (1’) or more
above the regional flood elevation extending
at least fifteen feet (15’) beyond the limits of
the structure.
2. The basement or crawlway floor may
be placed at the regional flood elevation if it
is dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is
allowed below the regional flood elevation;
3. Contiguous dryland access shall be
provided from a structure to land outside of
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 8 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
the floodplain, except as provided in Section
19.04 (3) (a) 4;
4. In developments where existing street
or sewer line elevations make compliance
with Section 19.04 (3) (a) 3 impractical, the
municipality may permit new development
and substantial improvements where access
roads are at or below the regional flood
elevation, if:
a. The municipality has written
assurance from police, fire and emergency
services that rescue and relief will be
provided to the structure(s) by wheeled
vehicles during a regional flood event; or
b. The municipality has a DNRapproved
emergency evacuation plan.
(b) Accessory Structures or Uses.
1. An accessory structure which is not
connected to a principal structure shall be
constructed with its lowest floor no less than
six inches (6”) above the regional flood
elevation.
(c) Commercial Uses. Any commercial
structure which is erected, altered or moved
into the floodfringe area shall meet the
requirements of Section 19.04 (3) (a).
Subject to the requirements of Section 19.04
(3) (e), storage yards, surface parking lots
and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system
exists to protect life and property.
(d) Manufacturing and Industrial Uses.
Any manufacturing or industrial structure
which is erected, altered or moved into the
floodfringe area shall have the lowest floor
elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation or meet the flood proofing
standards in Section 19.07 (5). Subject to
the requirements of Section 19.04 (3) (e),
storage yards, surface parking lots and other
such uses may be placed at lower elevations
if an adequate warning system exists to
protect life and property.
(e) Storage of Materials. Materials that
are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or
injurious to property, water quality or
human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall
be stored at or above the flood protection
elevation or floodproofed in compliance with
Section 19.07 (5). Adequate measures shall
be taken to ensure that such materials will
not enter the water body during flooding.
(f) Public Utilities, Streets and Bridges.
All utilities, streets and bridges shall be
designed to be compatible with
comprehensive floodplain development
plans; and
1. When failure of public utilities, streets
and bridges would endanger public health or
safety, or where such facilities are deemed
essential, construction of and substantial
improvements to such facilities may only be
permitted if they are floodproofed in
compliance with Section 19.07 (5) to the
flood protection elevation;
2. Minor roads or non-essential utilities
may be constructed at lower elevations if
they are designed to withstand flood forces
to the regional flood elevation.
(g) Sewage Systems. All sewage
disposal systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
water into the system, pursuant to Section
19.07 (5)(c), to the flood protection
elevation and shall meet the provisions of all
local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(h) Wells. All wells shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
water into the system, pursuant to Section
19.07 (5) (c) to the flood protection
elevation and shall meet the provisions of
Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(i) Solid Waste Disposal Sites. Disposal
of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in
floodfringe areas.
(j) Deposition of Materials. Any
deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this ordinance.
(k) Manufactured Homes.
1. Owners or operators of all
manufactured home parks and subdivisions
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 9 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
shall provide adequate surface drainage to
minimize flood damage and prepare, secure
approval, and file an evacuation plan,
indicating vehicular access and escape
routes, with local emergency management
authorities.
2. In existing manufactured home parks,
all new homes, replacement homes on
existing pads, and substantially improved
homes shall:
a. have the lowest floor elevated to the
flood protection elevation; and
b. be anchored so they do not float,
collapse or move laterally during a flood.
3. Outside of existing manufactured
home parks, including new manufactured
home parks and all single units outside of
existing parks, all new, replacement and
substantially improved manufactured homes
shall meet the residential development
standards for the floodfringe in Section
19.04 (3) (a).
(l) Mobile Recreational Vehicles. All
mobile recreational vehicles that are onsite
for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days or more or are not fully licensed and
ready for highway use shall meet the
elevation and anchoring requirements in
Section 19.04 (3) (k) 2 and 3. A mobile
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect
utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
19.05 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN
DISTRICT (GFP).
(1) Applicability. The provisions for
this district shall apply to all floodplains
mapped as A, AO, or AH
(2) Permitted Uses. Pursuant to
Section 19.05 (4), it shall be determined
whether the proposed use is located within a
floodway or floodfringe area. Those uses
permitted in floodway (Section 19.03 (2))
and floodfringe areas (Section 19.04 (2)) are
allowed within the general floodplain district,
according to the standards of Section 19.05
(3), provided that all permits or certificates
required under Section 19.07 (1) have been
issued.
(3) Standards for Development in the
General Floodplain District. Section
19.03 applies to floodway areas; Section
19.04 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest
of this ordinance applies to either district.
(a) In AO/AH zones the structures
lowest floor must meet one of the conditions
listed below, whichever is higher;
1. At or above the flood protection
elevation; or
2. Two (2) feet above the highest
adjacent grade around the structure; or
3. The depth as shown on the FIRM
(b) In AO/AH zones, provide plans
showing adequate drainage paths to guide
floodwaters around structures.
(4) Determining Floodway and
Floodfringe Limits. Upon receiving an
application for development within the
general floodplain district, the Zoning
Administrator shall:
(a) Require the applicant to submit two
(2) copies of an aerial photograph or a plan
which shows the proposed development with
respect to the general floodplain district
limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal
description of the property, fill limits and
elevations, building floor elevations and
flood proofing measures; and the flood zone
as shown on the FIRM.
(b) Require the applicant to furnish any
of the following information deemed
necessary by the Department to evaluate the
effects of the proposal upon flood height and
flood flows, regional flood elevation and to
determine floodway boundaries:
1. A hydrologic and Hydraulic Study as
specified in section 19.07 (1) (b) 3;
2. Plan (surface view) showing
elevations or contours of the ground;
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 10 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations;
size, location and layout of all proposed and
existing structures on the site; location and
elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types and other
pertinent information;
3. Specifications for building
construction and materials, floodproofing,
filling, dredging, channel improvement,
storage, water supply and sanitary facilities.
19.06 NONCONFORMING USES.
(1) General.
(a) Applicability. If these standards
conform with Wis. Stats. §62.23(7)(h), they
shall apply to all modifications or additions
to any nonconforming use or structure and
to the use of any structure or premises which
was lawful before the passage of this
ordinance or any amendment thereto.
(b) The existing lawful use of a structure
or its accessory use which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance may continue subject to the
following conditions:
1. No modifications or additions to a
nonconforming use or structure shall be
permitted unless they comply with this
ordinance. The words "modification" and
"addition" include, but are not limited to, any
alteration, addition, modification, structural
repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such
existing use, structure or accessory structure
or use. Maintenance is not considered a
modification; this includes painting,
decorating, paneling and other nonstructural
components and the maintenance, repair or
replacement of existing private sewage or
water supply systems or connections to
public utilities. Any costs associated with
the repair of a damaged structure are not
considered maintenance.
The construction of a deck that does not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet and
that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a
principal structure is not an extension,
modification or addition. The roof of the
structure may extend over a portion of the
deck in order to provide safe ingress and
egress to the principal structure.
2. If a nonconforming use or the use of a
nonconforming structure is discontinued for
twelve (12) consecutive months, it is no
longer permitted and any future use of the
property, and any structure or building
thereon, shall conform to the applicable
requirements of this ordinance.
3. The municipality shall keep a record
which lists all nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures, their present
equalized assessed value, the cost of all
modifications or additions which have been
permitted, and the percentage of the
structure's total current value those
modifications represent.
4. No modification or addition to any
nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use, which over the
life of the structure would equal or exceed
fifty percent (50%) of its present equalized
assessed value, shall be allowed unless the
entire structure is permanently changed to a
conforming structure with a conforming use
in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous
dry land access must be provided for
residential and commercial uses in
compliance with Section 19.04 (3) (a). The
costs of elevating a nonconforming building
or a building with a nonconforming use to
the flood protection elevation are excluded
from the fifty percent (50%) provisions of
this paragraph.
5. No maintenance to any
nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use, the cost of which
would equal or exceed 50% of its present
equalized assessed value, shall be allowed
unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a
conforming use in compliance with the
applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 11 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
Contiguous dry land access must be provided
for residential & commercial uses in
compliance with section 19.04 (3)(a)
6. If on a per event basis the total value
of the work being done under 4 and 5 above
equals or exceeds 50% of the present
equalized assessed value the work shall not
be permitted unless the entire structure is
permanently changed to a conforming
structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements
of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access
must be provided for residential &
commercial uses in compliance with 19.04
(3)(a).
7. Except as provided in subd. 8, below,
if any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use is
destroyed or is substantially damaged, it
cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt
unless the use and the structure meet the
current ordinance requirements. A structure
is considered substantially damaged if the
total cost to restore the structure to its predamaged
condition equals or exceeds 50% of
the structure’s present equalized assessed
value.
8. For nonconforming buildings that are
substantially damaged or destroyed by a
nonflood disaster, the repair or
reconstruction of any such nonconforming
building may be permitted in order to restore
it to the size and use in effect prior to the
damage event, provided that the minimum
federal code requirements below are met and
all required permits have been granted prior
to the start of construction.
a. Residential Structures
1. Shall have the lowest floor, including
the basement, elevated to or above the base
flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns,
posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls
must meet the requirements of section
19.07(5)(b).
2. Shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy and shall be constructed with
methods and materials resistant to flood
damage.
3. Shall be constructed with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or elevated so
as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
4. In A zones, obtain, review and utilize
any flood data available from a federal, state
or other source.
5. In AO zones with no elevations
specified, shall have the lowest floor,
including basements, meet the standards in
section 19.05(3)(a).
6. In AO zones, shall have adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around & away from
the structure.
b. Nonresidential Structures
1. Shall meet the requirements of section
19.06(1)(b)8 a 1-6.
2. Shall either have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the
regional flood elevation; or, together with
attendant utility & sanitary facilities, shall
meet the standards in section 19,07(5)(a) or
(b).
3. In AO zones with no elevations
specified, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, meet the standards in
section 19.05(3)(a).
c. A nonconforming historic structure
may be altered if the alteration will not
preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure, the
alteration will comply with Section 19.03 (3)
(a), flood resistant materials are used, and
construction practices and floodproofing
methods that comply with Section 19.07 (5)
are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures shall be exempt from the
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 12 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
development standards of section
19.06(1)(b)8a if it is determined that the
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
(2) Floodway District.
(a) No modification or addition shall be
allowed to any nonconforming structure or
any structure with a nonconforming use in a
floodway area, unless such modification or
addition:
1. Has been granted a permit or variance
which meets all ordinance requirements;
2. Meets the requirements of Section
19.06 (1);
3. Shall not increase the obstruction to
flood flows or regional flood height;
4. Any addition to the existing structure
shall be floodproofed, pursuant to Section
19.07 (5), by means other than the use of fill,
to the flood protection elevation; &
5. If any part of the foundation below
the flood protection elevation is enclosed,
the following standards shall apply:
a. The enclosed area shall be designed
by a registered architect or engineer to allow
for the efficient entry and exit of flood
waters without human intervention. A
minimum of two (2) openings must be
provided with a minimum net area of at least
one (1) square inch for every one (1) square
foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of
the opening can be no more than twelve
inches (12”) above the adjacent grade;
b. The parts of the foundation located
below the flood protection elevation must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials;
c. Mechanical and utility equipment
must be elevated or floodproofed to or
above the flood protection elevation; and
d. The use must be limited to parking or
limited storage.
(b) No new onsite sewage disposal
system, or addition to an existing onsite
sewage disposal system, except where an
addition has been ordered by a government
agency to correct a hazard to public health,
shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an
existing onsite sewage disposal system in a
floodway area shall meet the applicable
requirements of all municipal ordinances and
Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(c) No new well or modification to an
existing well used to obtain potable water
shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an
existing well in a floodway area shall meet
the applicable requirements of all municipal
ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) Floodfringe District.
(a) No modification or addition shall be
allowed to any nonconforming structure or
any structure with a nonconforming use
unless such modification or addition has been
granted a permit or variance by the
municipality, and the modification or
addition shall be placed on fill or
floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation in compliance with the standards
for that particular use in Section 19.04 (3),
except where Section 19.06 (3) (b) is
applicable.
(b) Where compliance with the
provisions of Section 19.06 (3) (a) would
result in unnecessary hardship and only
where the structure will not be used for
human habitation or be associated with a
high flood damage potential, the Board of
Appeals, using the procedures established in
Section 19.07 (3), may grant a variance from
those provisions of Section 19.06 (3) (a) for
modifications or additions, using the criteria
listed below. Modifications or additions
which are protected to elevations lower than
the flood protection elevation may be
permitted if:
1. No floor is allowed below the
regional flood elevation for residential or
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 13 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
commercial structures;
2. Human lives are not endangered;
3. Public facilities, such as water or
sewer, will not be installed;
4. Flood depths will not exceed two feet
(2’);
5. Flood velocities will not exceed two
feet (2’) per second; and
6. The structure will not be used for
storage of materials as described in
Section 19.04 (3) (e).
(c) All new private sewage disposal
systems, or addition to, replacement, repair
or maintenance of a private sewage disposal
system shall meet all the applicable
provisions of all local ordinances and Ch.
SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(d) All new wells, or addition to,
replacement, repair or maintenance of a well
shall meet the applicable provisions of this
ordinance and Ch. NR 811 and NR 812,
Wis. Adm. Code.
19.07 ADMINISTRATION. Where a
Zoning Administrator, Planning Agency or a
Board of Adjustment/Appeals has already
been appointed to administer a Zoning
Ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. §59.69,
§59.692 or §62.23(7), these officials shall
also administer this ordinance.
(1) Zoning Administrator.
(a) Duties & Powers
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
administer this ordinance and shall have the
following duties and powers:
1. Advise applicants of the ordinance
provisions, assist in preparing permit
applications and appeals, and assure that the
regional flood elevation for the proposed
development is shown on all permit
applications.
2. Issue permits and inspect properties
for compliance with provisions of this
ordinance, and issue certificates of
compliance where appropriate.
3. Inspect and assess all damaged
floodplain structures and perform a
substantial damage assessment to determine
if substantial damage to the structures has
occurred.
4. Keep records of all official actions
such as:
a. All permits issued, inspections made,
and work approved;
b. Documentation of certified lowest
floor and regional flood elevations for
floodplain development;
c. Floodproofing certificates
d. Water surface profiles, floodplain
zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming
uses and structures including changes,
appeals, variances and amendments.
e. All substantial damage assessment
reports for floodplain structures.
f. List of nonconforming structures and
uses.
5. Submit copies of the following items
to the Department regional office:
a. Within ten (10) days of the decision, a
copy of any decisions on variances, appeals
for map or text interpretations, and map or
text amendments;
b. Copies of any case-by-case analyses,
and any other information required by the
Department including an annual summary of
the number and types of floodplain zoning
actions taken.
c. Copies of substantial damage
assessments performed and all related
correspondence concerning the assessments.
6. Investigate, prepare reports, and
report violations of this ordinance to the
municipal zoning agency and attorney for
prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also
be sent to the Department regional office.
7. Submit copies of amendments to the
FEMA regional office.
(b) Land Use Permit. A land use permit
shall be obtained before any new
development; repair, modification or addition
to an existing structure; or change in the use
of a building or structure, including sewer
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 14 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
and water facilities, may be initiated.
Application to the Zoning Administrator
shall include:
1. General Information.
a. Name and address of the applicant,
property owner and contractor;
b. Legal description, proposed use, and
whether it is new construction or a
modification;
2. Site Development Plan. A site plan
drawn to scale shall be submitted with the
permit application form and shall contain:
a. Location, dimensions, area and
elevation of the lot;
b. Location of the ordinary highwater
mark of any abutting navigable waterways;
c. Location of any structures with
distances measured from the lot lines and
street center lines;
d. Location of any existing or proposed
onsite sewage systems or private water
supply systems;
e. Location and elevation of existing or
future access roads;
f. Location of floodplain and floodway
limits as determined from the official
floodplain zoning maps;
g. The elevation of the lowest floor of
proposed buildings and any fill using the
vertical datum from the adopted study –
either National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD);
h. Data to determine the regional flood
elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location
of the development and to determine
whether or not the requirements of section
19.03 or 19.04 are met; and
i. Data sufficient to determine if the
proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional
flood height or discharge according to
section 19.02(1). This may include any of
the information noted in section 19.03(3)(a).
3. Hydraulic & Hydrologic Studies to
Analyze Developments.
All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be
completed under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer registered in the State.
The study contractor shall be responsible for
the technical adequacy of the study. All
studies shall be reviewed and approved by
the Department.
a. Zone A floodplains;
1. Hydrology
The appropriate method shall be based
on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis.
Admin. Code, Hydrologic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
2. Hydraulic modeling
The regional flood elevation shall be based
on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis.
Admin. Code, Hydrologic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood Elevation
and the following;
i. determination of the required limits of
the hydraulic model shall be based on
detailed study information for downstream
structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to
determine adequate starting WSEL for the
study.
ii. channel sections must be surveyed.
iii. minimum four foot contour data in
the overbanks shall be used for the
development of cross section overbanking
and floodplain mapping.
iv. a maximum distance of 500 feet
between cross sections is allowed in
developed areas with additional intermediate
cross sections required at transitions in
channel bottom slope including a survey of
the channel at each location.
v. the most current version of
HEC_RAS shall be used.
vi. a survey of bridge and culvert
openings and the top of road is required at
each structure.
vii. additional cross sections are required
at the downstream and upstream limits of the
proposed development and any necessary
intermediate locations based on the length of
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 15 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
reach if greater than 500 feet.
viii. standard accepted engineering
practices shall be used when assigning
parameters for the base model such as flow,
Manning’s N values, expansion and
contraction coefficients of effective flow
limits. The base model shall be calibrated to
past flooding data such as high water marks
to determine the reasonableness of the model
results. If no historical data is available,
adequate justification shall be provided for
any parameters outside standard accepted
engineering practices.
ix. the model must extend past the
upstream limit of the difference in the
existing and proposed flood profiles in order
to provide a tie-in to existing studies. Height
difference between the proposed flood
profile and the existing study profiles shall be
no more than 0.00 feet.
3. Mapping
A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross section locations,
floodway/floodplain limits based on best
available topographic data, geographic limits
of the proposed development and whether
the proposed development is located in the
floodway.
i. If the proposed development is located
outside of the floodway, then it is determined
to have no impact on the regional flood
elevation.
ii. If any part of the proposed
development is in the floodway, it must be
added to the base model to show the
difference between existing and proposed
conditions. The study must insure that all
coefficients remain the same as in the
existing model, unless adequate justification
based on standard accepted engineering
practices is provided.
b. Zone AE Floodplains
1. Hydrology
If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be
used shall be based on the standards in ch.
NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code,
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Discharge.
2. Hydraulic modeling
The regional flood elevation shall be based
on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis.
Admin. Code, Hydrologic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood Elevation
and the following;
i. Duplicate Effective Model
The effective model shall be reproduced to
ensure correct transference of the model data
and to allow integration of the revised data
to provide a continuous FIS model upstream
& downstream of the revised reach. If data
from the effective model is available, models
shall be generated that duplicate the FIS
profiles and the elevations shown in the
Floodway Data Table in the FIS report
within 0.1 foot.
ii. Corrected Effected Model
The Corrected Effective Model shall not
include any man-made physical changes since
the effective model data, but shall import the
model into the most current version of
HEC_RAS for Department review.
iii. Existing (Pre-Project Conditions)
Model.
The Existing Model shall be required to
support conclusions about the actual impacts
of the project associated with the Revised
(Post-Project) Model or to establish more
up-to-date models on which to base the
Revised (Post-Project) Model.
iv. Revised (Post-Project Conditions)
Model.
The Revised (Post-Project Conditions)
Model shall incorporate the Existing Model
and any proposed changes to the topography
caused by the proposed development. This
model shall reflect proposed conditions.
v. All changes to the Duplicate Effective
Model and subsequent models must be
supported by certified topographic
information, bridge plans, construction plans
and survey notes.
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 16 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
vi. Changes to the hydraulic models shall
be limited to the stream reach for which the
revision is being requested. Cross sections
upstream and downstream of the revised
reach shall be identical to those in the
effective model and result in water surface
elevations and topwidths computed by the
revised models matching those in the
effective models upstream and downstream
of the revised reach as requested. The
Effective Model shall not be truncated.
3. Mapping
Maps and associated engineering data shall
be submitted to the Department for review
which meet the following conditions;
i. Consistency between the revised
hydraulic models, the revised floodplain and
floodway delineations, the revised flood
profiles, topographic work map, annotated
FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway
Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge
plans.
ii. Certified topographic map of suitable
scale, contour interval, and a planimetric
map showing the applicable items. If a digital
version of the map is available, it may be
submitted in order that the FIRM may be
more easily revised.
iii. Annotated FIRM panel showing the
revised 1% and 0.2% annual chance
floodplains and floodway boundaries.
iv. If an annotated Firm and/or FBFM
and digital mapping data (GIS or CADD) are
used then all supporting documentation or
metadata must be included with the data
submission along with the Universal
Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and
State Plane Coordinate System in
accordance with FEMA mapping
specifications.
v. The revised floodplain boundaries
shall tie into the effective floodplain
boundaries.
vi. All cross sections from the effective
model shall be labeled in accordance with the
effective map and a cross section lookup
table shall be included to relate to the model
input numbering scheme.
vii. Both the current and proposed
floodways shall be shown on the map.
viii. The steam centerline, or profile
baseline used to measure stream distances in
the model shall be visible on the map.
4. Expiration. All permits issued under
the authority of this ordinance shall expire no
more than 180 days after issuance. The
permit may be extended for a maximum of
180 days for good and sufficient causes after
issuance.
(c) Certificate of Compliance. Except
where no permit is required, no land shall be
occupied or used, and no building which is
hereafter constructed, altered, added to,
modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall
be occupied until a certificate of compliance
is issued by the Zoning Administrator,
subject to the following provisions:
1. The certificate of compliance shall
show that the building or premises or part
thereof, and the proposed use, conform to
the provisions of this ordinance;
2. Application for such certificate shall
be concurrent with the application for a
permit;
3. If all ordinance provisions are met,
the certificate of compliance shall be issued
within ten (10) days after written notification
that the permitted work is completed;
4. The applicant shall submit a
certification signed by a registered
professional engineer, architect or land
surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and
floodproofing elevations are in compliance
with the permit issued. Floodproofing
measures also require certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect
that floodproofing measures meet the
requirements of Section 19.07 (5).
(d) Other Permits. The applicant must
secure all necessary permits from federal,
state, and local agencies, including those
required by the U.S. Army Corps of
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 17 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
Engineers under S. 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972,
33 U.S.C. 1344.
(2) Zoning Agency.
(a) The Planning & Zoning Commission
shall:
1. oversee the functions of the office of
the Zoning Administrator; and
2. review and advise the governing body
on all proposed amendments to this
ordinance, maps and text.
(b) This zoning agency shall not:
1. grant variances to the terms of the
ordinance in place of action by the Board of
Appeals; or
2. amend the text or zoning maps in
place of official action by the governing
body.
(3) Board of Appeals. The Board of
Appeals, created under Wis. Stats.
§62.23(7)(e) is hereby authorized or shall be
appointed to act for the purposes of this
ordinance. The Board shall exercise the
powers conferred by Wisconsin statutes and
adopt rules for the conduct of business. The
Zoning Administrator may not be the
secretary of the Board.
(a) Powers and Duties. The Board of
Appeals shall:
1. Appeals. Hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement or administration
of this ordinance.
2. Boundary Disputes. Hear and decide
disputes concerning the district boundaries
shown on the official floodplain zoning map.
3. Variances. Hear and decide, upon
appeal, variances from the ordinance
standards.
(b) Appeals to the Board.
1. Appeals to the Board may be taken by
any person aggrieved, or by any officer or
department of the municipality affected by
any decision of the Zoning Administrator or
other administrative officer. Such appeal
shall be taken within thirty (30) days unless
otherwise provided by the rules of the
Board, by filing with the official whose
decision is in question, and with the Board, a
notice of appeal specifying the reasons for
the appeal. The official whose decision is in
question shall transmit to the Board all
records regarding the matter appealed.
2. Notice and Hearing for Appeals
Including Variances.
a. Notice. The Board shall:
1. Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
2. Publish adequate notice pursuant to
Wisconsin statutes, specifying the date, time,
place and subject of the hearing;
3. Assure that notice shall be mailed to
the parties in interest and the Department
regional office at least ten (10) days in
advance of the hearing.
b. Hearing. Any party may appear in
person or by agent. The board shall:
1. Resolve boundary disputes according
to Section 19.07 (3) (c).
2. Decide variance applications
according to Section 19.07 (3) (d).
3. Decide appeals of permit denials
according to Section 19.07 (4).
3. Decision. The final decision
regarding the appeal or variance application
shall:
a. Be made within a reasonable time;
b. Be sent to the Department regional
office within ten (10) days of the decision;
c. Be a written determination signed by
the chairman or secretary of the Board;
d. State the specific facts which are the
basis for the Board's decision;
e. Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify
the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed, in whole or in part,
dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or
grant or deny the variance application;
f. Include the reasons for granting an
appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated
by the applicant in the case of a variance,
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 18 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the
Board proceedings.
(c) Boundary Disputes. The following
procedure shall be used by the Board in
hearing disputes concerning floodplain
district boundaries:
1. If a floodplain district boundary is
established by approximate or detailed
floodplain studies, the flood elevations or
profiles shall prevail in locating the
boundary. If none exist, other evidence may
be examined.
2. In all cases, the person contesting the
boundary location shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present arguments and
technical evidence to the Board.
3. If the boundary is incorrectly mapped,
the Board should inform the zoning
committee or the person contesting the
boundary location to petition the governing
body for a map amendment according to
Section 19.08.
(d) Variance.
1. The Board may, upon appeal, grant a
variance from the standards of this ordinance
if an applicant convincingly demonstrates
that:
a. Literal enforcement of the ordinance
provisions will cause unnecessary hardship;
b. The hardship is due to adoption of the
floodplain ordinance and unique property
conditions. If the conditions are common to
adjacent lots or premises, the ordinance or
map would need to be amended;
c. The variance is not contrary to the
public interest; and
d. The variance is consistent with the
purpose of this ordinance in Section 19.01
(3).
2. In addition to the criteria in
Section 19.07 (3) (d) 1, to qualify for a
variance under FEMA regulations, the
following criteria must be met:
a. The variance may not cause any
increase in the regional flood elevation;
b. Variances can only be granted for lots
that are less than one-half (½) acre and are
contiguous to existing structures constructed
below the RFE;
c. Variances shall only be granted upon
a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall
be the minimum relief necessary, shall not
cause increased risks to public safety or
nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue
and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to
the purpose of the ordinance.
3. A variance shall not:
a. Grant, extend or increase any use
prohibited in the zoning district.
b. Be granted for a hardship based solely
on an economic gain or loss.
c. Be granted for a hardship which is
self-created.
d. Damage the rights or property values
of other persons in the area.
e. Allow actions without the
amendments to this ordinance or map(s)
required in Section 19.08 (1).
f. Allow any alteration of an historic
structure, including its use, which would
preclude its continued designation as an
historic structure.
4. When a floodplain variance is granted
the Board shall notify the applicant in writing
that it may increase risks to life and property
and flood insurance premiums could increase
up to $25.00 per $100.00 of coverage. A
copy shall be maintained with the variance
record.
(4) To Review Appeals of Permit
Denials.
(a) The Zoning Agency (Section 19.07
(2)) or Board shall review all data related to
the appeal. This may include:
1. Permit application data listed in
Section 19.07 (1) (b).
2. Floodway/floodfringe determination
data in Section 19.05 (4).
3. Data listed in Section 19.03 (3) (a) 2
where the applicant has not submitted this
information to the Zoning Administrator.
4. Other data submitted with the
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 19 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
application, or submitted to the Board with
the appeal.
(b) For appeals of all denied permits the
Board shall:
1. Follow the procedures of
Section 19.07 (3);
2. Consider zoning agency
recommendations; and
3. Either uphold the denial or grant the
appeal.
(c) For appeals concerning increases in
regional flood elevation the Board shall:
1. Uphold the denial where the Board
agrees with the data showing an increase in
flood elevation. Increases may only be
allowed after amending the flood profile and
map and all appropriate legal arrangements
are made with all adversely affected property
owners as per the requirements of section
19.08 Amendments; and
2. Grant the appeal where the Board
agrees that the data properly demonstrates
that the project does not cause an increase
equal to or greater than one one hundredth
(0.01) of a foot provided no other reasons
for denial exist.
(5) Floodproofing Standards for
Nonconforming Structures or Uses.
(a) No permit or variance shall be issued
for a non-residential structure designed to be
watertight below the regional flood elevation
until the applicant submits a plan certified by
a registered professional engineer or
architect that the floodproofing measures
will protect the structure or development to
the flood protection elevation and submits a
FEMA Floodproofing Certificate.
(b) For a structure designed to allow the
entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance
shall be issued until the applicant submits a
plan either:
1. Certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect; or
2. Meets or exceeds the following
standards
a. A minimum of two opening having a
total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade; and
c. Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings
or devices provided that the permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c) Floodproofing measures shall be
designed, as appropriate, to:
1. Withstand flood pressures, depths,
velocities, uplift and impact forces and other
regional flood factors;
2. Protect structures to the flood
protection elevation;
3. Anchor structures to foundations to
resist flotation and lateral movement; and
4. Minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters.
5. Minimize or eliminate discharges into
flood waters
(6) Public Information.
(a) Place marks on structures to show
the depth of inundation during the regional
flood.
(b) All floodplain maps, engineering data
and regulations shall be available and widely
distributed.
(c) All real estate transfers should show
what floodplain zoning district the real
property is in.
19.08 AMENDMENTS.
Obstructions or increases may only be
permitted if amendments are made to this
ordinance, the official floodplain zoning
maps, floodway lines and water surface
profiles, in accordance with section 19.08(1)
(a) In AE Zones with a mapped
floodway, no obstructions or increases shall
be permitted unless the applicant receives a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision from
FEMA and amendments are made to this
ordinance, the official floodplain zoning
maps, floodway lines and water surface
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 20 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
profiles, in accordance with 19.08(1). Any
such alterations must be reviewed and
approved by FEMA and the DNR
(b) In A zones increases equal to or
greater than 1.0 foot may only be permitted
if the applicant receives a Conditional Letter
of Map Revision from FEMA and
amendments are made to this ordinance, the
official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and
water surface profiles, in accordance with
section 19.08(1).
(1) General. The governing body shall
change or supplement the floodplain zoning
district boundaries and this ordinance in the
manner outlined in section 19.08(2) below.
Actions which require an amendment to the
ordinance and/or submittal of a Letter of
Map Change (LOMC) include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(a) Any fill or floodplain encroachment
that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood
height.
(b) Any change to the floodplain
boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on
the FIRM.
(c) Any changes to any other officially
adopted floodplain maps listed in
19.01(5)(b)2
(d) Any floodplain fill which raises the
elevation of the filled area to a height at or
above the flood protection elevation and is
contiguous to land lying outside the
floodplain.
(e) Correction of discrepancies between
the water surface profiles and floodplain
zoning maps.
(f) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning
ordinance text required by S. NR 116.05,
Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by
law, or for changes by the municipality.
(g) All channel relocations and changes
to the maps to alter floodway lines or to
remove an area from the floodway or the
floodfringe that is based on a base flood
elevation from a FIRM requires prior
approval by FEMA.
Note: Consult the FEMA website -
www.fema.gov - for the map change fee
schedule.
(2) Procedures. Ordinance
amendments may be made upon petition of
any party according to the provisions of Wis.
Stats. §62.23. Such petitions shall include all
necessary data required by Section 19.05 (4)
and 19.07 (1) (b). The Land Use Permit shall
not be issued until a Letter of Map Revision
is issued by FEMA for the proposed
changes.
(a) The proposed amendment shall be
referred to the zoning agency for a public
hearing and recommendation to the
governing body. The amendment and notice
of public hearing shall be submitted to the
Department regional office for review prior
to the hearing. The amendment procedure
shall comply with the provisions of Wis.
Stats. §62.23.
(b) No amendments shall become
effective until reviewed and approved by the
Department.
(c) All persons petitioning for a map
amendment that obstructs flow, increasing
regional flood height shall obtain flooding
easements or other appropriate legal
arrangements from all adversely affected
property owners and notify local units of
government before the amendment can be
approved by the governing body.
19.09 ENFORCEMENT AND
PENALTIES. Any violation of the
provisions of this ordinance by any person
shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the
municipal attorney who shall expeditiously
prosecute all such violators. A violator shall,
upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a
penalty of not less than twenty-five dollars
($25) and not more than fifty dollars ($50),
together with a taxable cost of such action.
Each day of continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense. Every
violation of this ordinance is a public
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 21 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
nuisance and the creation may be enjoined
and the maintenance may be abated by action
at suit of the municipality, the state, or any
citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§87.30.
19.10 DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically
defined, words and phrases in this ordinance
shall have their common law meaning and
shall be applied in accordance with their
common usage. Words used in the present
tense include the future, the singular number
includes the plural and the plural number
includes the singular. The word "may" is
permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary.
(1) A Zones. Those areas shown on the
official floodplain zoning map which would
be inundated by the regional flood. These
areas may be numbered or unnumbered A
Zones. The A Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the
availability of data for a given area.
(2) AH Zone. See “Area of Shallow
Flooding”
(3) AO Zone. See “Area of Shallow
Flooding”
(4) Accessory Structure or Use. A
facility, structure, building or use which is
accessory or incidental to the principal use of
a property, structure or building.
(5) Alteration. An enhancement,
upgrading or substantial change or
modifications other than an addition or repair
to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing,
heating, ventilating, air conditioning and
other systems within the structure.
(6) Area of Shallow Flooding. A
designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or
VO zone on a community’s Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an
average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable, and where
velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
(7) Base Flood. Means the flood having
a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as published
by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a
FIRM.
(8) Basement. Any enclosed area of a
building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below
ground level, on all sides.
(9) Building. See Structure.
(10) Bulkhead Line. A geographic line
along a reach of navigable water that has
been adopted by a municipal ordinance and
approved by the Department pursuant to
Wis. Stats. §30.11, and which allows limited
filling between this bulkhead line and the
original ordinary highwater mark, except
where such filling is prohibited by the
floodway provisions of this ordinance.
(11) Campground. Any parcel of land
which is designed, maintained, intended or
used for the purpose of providing sites for
nonpermanent overnight use by four (4) or
more camping units, or which is advertised
or represented as a camping area.
(12) Camping Unit. Any portable
device, no more than four hundred (400)
square feet in area, used as a temporary
shelter, including but not limited to a
camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup
truck, tent that is fully licensed, if
required, and ready for highway use.
(13) Certificate of Compliance. A
certification that the construction and the use
of land or a building, the elevation of fill or
the lowest floor of a structure is in
compliance with all of the provisions of this
ordinance.
(14) Channel. A natural or artificial
watercourse with definite bed and banks to
confine and conduct normal flow of water.
(15) Crawlways or Crawl Space. An
enclosed area below the first usable floor of
a building, generally less than five feet (5’) in
height, used for access to plumbing and
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 22 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
electrical utilities.
(16) Deck. An unenclosed exterior
structure that has no roof or sides, but has a
permeable floor which allows the infiltration
of precipitation.
(17) Department. The Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
(18) Development. Any artificial
change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the
construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures; the construction of
additions or alterations to buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the repair
of any damaged structure or the
improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or
improvement; the placement of buildings or
structures; subdivision layout and site
preparation; mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations; the storage, deposition or
extraction of materials or equipment; and the
installation, repair or removal of public or
private sewage disposal systems or water
supply facilities.
(19) Dryland Access. A vehicular
access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land
located in the floodplain to land outside the
floodplain, such as a road with its surface
above regional flood elevation and wide
enough for wheeled rescue and relief
vehicles.
(20) Encroachment. Any fill, structure,
equipment, building, use or development in
the floodway.
(21) Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that
administers the National Flood Insurance
Program.
(22) Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM). A map of a community on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both special flood hazard areas
(the floodplain) and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. This map can
only be amended by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(23) Flood or Flooding. A general and
temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas caused
by one (1) of the following conditions:
(a) The overflow or rise of inland
waters;
(b) The rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source;
(c) The inundation caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated
cyclical levels along the shore of Lake
Michigan or Lake Superior, or
(d) The sudden increase caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or
by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
(24) Flood Frequency. The probability
of a flood occurrence which is determined
from statistical analyses. The frequency of a
particular flood event is usually expressed as
occurring on the average once in a specified
number of years or as a percent chance of
occurring in any given year.
(25) Floodfringe. That portion of the
floodplain outside of the floodway which is
covered by flood waters during the regional
flood and associated with standing water
rather than flowing water.
(26) Flood Hazard Boundary Map. A
map designating approximate flood hazard
areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as
unnumbered A-Zones and do not contain
floodway lines or regional flood elevations.
This map forms the basis for both the
regulatory and insurance aspects of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study
and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(27) Flood Insurance Study. A
technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local
flood hazard areas. It provides maps
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 23 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
designating those areas affected by the
regional flood and provides both flood
insurance rate zones and base flood
elevations and may provide floodway lines.
The flood hazard areas are designated as
numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood
Insurance Rate Maps that accompany the
Flood Insurance Study form the basis for
both the regulatory and the insurance aspects
of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(28) Floodplain. Land which has been
or may be covered by flood water during the
regional flood. It includes the floodway and
the floodfringe and may include other
designated floodplain areas for regulatory
purposes.
(29) Floodplain Island. A natural
geologic land formation within the floodplain
that is surrounded, but not covered, by
floodwater during the regional flood.
(30) Floodplain Management. Policy
and procedures to ensure wise use of
floodplains, including mapping and
engineering, mitigation, education, and
administration and enforcement of floodplain
regulations.
(31) Flood Profile. A graph or a
longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of
a flood event to locations of land surface
elevations along a stream or river.
(32) Floodproofing. Any combination
of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures,
water and sanitary facilities and contents of
buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose
of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
(33) Flood Protection Elevation. An
elevation of two feet (2’) of freeboard above
the water surface profile elevation designated
for the regional flood. (Also see
Freeboard.)
(34) Flood Storage. Those floodplain
areas where storage of floodwaters has been
taken into account during analysis in
reducing the regional flood discharge.
(35) Floodway. The channel of a river
or stream and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel required to
carry the regional flood discharge.
(36) Freeboard. A safety factor
expressed in terms of a specified number of
feet above a calculated flood level.
Freeboard compensates for any factors that
cause flood heights greater than those
calculated, including ice jams, debris
accumulation, wave action, obstruction of
bridge openings and floodways, the effects of
watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage
areas due to development and aggregation of
the river or stream bed.
(37) Habitable Structure. Any
structure or portion thereof used or designed
for human habitation.
(38) Hearing Notice. Publication or
posting meeting the requirements of Wis.
Stats. Ch. 985. For appeals, a Class 1
Notice, published once at least seven (7)
days before the hearing, is required. For all
zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class
2 Notice, published twice, once each week
consecutively, the last at least seven (7) days
before the hearing. Local ordinances or
bylaws may require additional notice,
exceeding these minimums.
(39) High Flood Damage Potential.
Damage that could result from flooding that
includes any danger to life or health or any
significant economic loss to a structure or
building and its contents.
(40) Highest Adjacent Grade. The
highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
(41) Historic Structure. Any structure
that is either:
(a) Listed individually in the National
Register of Historic Places or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 24 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(c) Individually listed on a state
inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(d) Individually listed on a local
inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have
been certified either by an approved state
program, as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or by the Secretary of the
Interior in states without approved
programs.
(42) Increase in Regional Flood
Height. A calculated upward rise in the
regional flood elevation, 0.00 foot, based on
a comparison of existing conditions and
proposed conditions which are directly
attributable to development in the floodplain
but not attributable to manipulation of
mathematical variables such as roughness
factors, expansion and contraction
coefficients and discharge.
(43) Land Use. Any nonstructural use
made of unimproved or improved real estate.
(Also see Development.)
(44) Lowest Adjacent Grade.
Elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any of the exterior walls of a
building.
(45) Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of
the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the non-elevation
design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
(46) Maintenance. The act or process
of restoring to original soundness, including
redecorating, refinishing, non-structural
repairs, or the replacement of existing
fixtures, systems or equipment with
equivalent fixtures, systems or structures.
(47) Manufactured Home. A structure
transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" includes a mobile home but does not
include a "mobile recreational vehicle."
(48) Mobile/Manufactured Home
Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for sale or
rent.
(49) Mobile/Manufactured Home
Park or Subdivision, Existing. A parcel of
land, divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale, on which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots
is completed before the effective date of this
ordinance. At a minimum, this would include
the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads.
(50) Mobile/Manufactured Home
Park, Expansion to Existing. The
preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed. This includes the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads.
(51) Mobile Recreational Vehicle. A
vehicle which is built on a single chassis, four
hundred (400) square feet or less when
measured at the largest horizontal projection,
designed to be self-propelled, carried or
permanently towable by a licensed light-duty
vehicle, is licensed for highway use if
registration is required and is designed
primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Manufactured homes that are towed or
carried onto a parcel of land, but do not
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 25 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
remain capable of being towed or carried,
including park model homes, do not fall
within the definition of "mobile recreational
vehicles."
(52) Model, Corrected Effective. A
hydraulic engineering model that corrects
any errors that occur in the Duplicate
Effective Model, adds any additional cross
sections to the Duplicate Effective Model, or
incorporates more detailed topographic
information than that used in the current
effective model
(53) Model, Duplicate Effective. A
copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the
effective FIS and referred to as the effective
model.
(54) Model, Effective. The hydraulic
engineering model that was used to produce
the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
(55) Model, Existing (Pre-project) A
modification of the Duplicate Effective
Model or Corrected Effective Model to
reflect any man made modifications that have
occurred within the floodplain since the date
of the effective model but prior to the
construction of the project for which the
revision is being requested. If no
modification has occurred since the date of
the effective model, then this model would
be identical to the Corrected Effective Model
or Duplicate Effective Model.
(56) Model, Revised (Post-project) A
modification of the Existing or Pre-project
Conditions Model, Duplicate Effective
Model or Corrected Effective Model to
reflect revised or post-project conditions.
(57) Municipality or Municipal. The
county, city or village governmental units
enacting, administering and enforcing this
Zoning Ordinance.
(58) NAVD or North American
Vertical Datum. Elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
(59) NGVD or National Geodetic
Vertical Datum. Elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
(60) New Construction. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction"
means structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the
effective date of floodplain zoning
regulations adopted by this community and
includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For the purpose of
determining flood insurance rates, it includes
any structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
(61) Nonconforming Structure. An
existing lawful structure or building which is
not in conformity with the dimensional or
structural requirements of this ordinance for
the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
(For example, an existing residential
structure in the floodfringe district is a
conforming use. However, if the lowest
floor is lower than the flood protection
elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
(62) Nonconforming Use. An existing
lawful use or accessory use of a structure or
building which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance for the area of
the floodplain which it occupies (Such as a
residence in the floodway).
(63) Obstruction to Flow. Any
development which blocks the conveyance of
floodwaters such that this development alone
or together with any future development will
cause an increase in regional flood height.
(64) Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
That map, adopted and made part of this
ordinance, as described in Section 19.01 (5)
(b), which has been approved by the
Department and FEMA.
(65) Open Space Use. Those uses
having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
(66) Ordinary Highwater Mark. The
point on the bank or shore up to which the
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 26 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
presence and action of surface water is so
continuous as to leave a distinctive mark
such as by erosion, destruction or prevention
of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of
aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
(67) Person. An individual or group of
individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
(68) Private Sewage System. A
sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one (1) structure with a septic tank
and soil absorption field located on the same
parcel as the structure. It also means an
alternative sewage system approved by the
Department of Commerce, including a
substitute for the septic tank or soil
absorption field, a holding tank, a system
serving more than one (1) structure or a
system located on a different parcel than the
structure.
(69) Public Utilities. Those utilities
using underground or overhead transmission
lines such as electric, telephone and
telegraph, and distribution and collection
systems such as water, sanitary sewer and
storm sewer.
(70) Reasonably Safe from Flooding.
Means base flood waters will not inundate
the land or damage structures to be removed
from the special flood hazard area and that
any subsurface waters related to the base
flood will not damage existing or proposed
buildings.
(71) Regional Flood. A flood
determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin.
A regional flood is a flood with a one
percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, and if depicted
on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the
BFE.
(72) Start of Construction. The date
the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within
one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond initial
excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling, nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways, nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For an alteration, the actual
start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
(73) Structure. Any manmade object
with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to,
placed upon or set into the ground, stream
bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to,
roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid
storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
(74) Subdivision. Has the meaning
given in Wis. Stats. §236.02(12).
(75) Substantial Damage. Damage of
any origin sustained by a structure, whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged
condition would equal or exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the equalized assessed
value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
(76) Substantial Improvement. Any
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or improvement of a building or structure,
the cost of which equals or exceeds 50
percent of the equalized assessed value of
Village of Suamico
19-Floodplain District Page 27 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
the structure before the improvement or
repair is started. If the structure has
sustained substantial damage, any repairs are
considered substantial improvement
regardless of work performed. The term
does not, however, include either any project
for the improvement of a building required to
correct existing health, sanitary or safety
code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions; or any
alteration of a historic structure provided
that the alteration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
(77) Unnecessary Hardship. Where
special conditions affecting a particular
property, which were not self-created, have
made strict conformity with restrictions
governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height
or density unnecessarily burdensome or
unreasonable in light of the purposes of the
ordinance.
(78) Variance. An authorization by the
Board of Adjustment or Appeals for the
construction or maintenance of a building or
structure in a manner which is inconsistent
with dimensional standards (not uses)
contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance.
(79) Violation. The failure of a
structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the floodplain zoning
ordinance. A structure or other development
without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
(80) Watershed. The entire region
contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
(81) Water Surface Profile. A
graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a
watercourse for each position along a reach
of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A
water surface profile of the regional flood is
used in regulating floodplain areas.
(82) Well. Means an excavation
opening in the ground made by digging,
boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to
obtain groundwater regardless of its intended
use.
Village of Suamico
Chapter 19
19-Floodplain District Page 28 of 28 Adopted 2-17-14
Chapter 19
Ordinance 2014-05 Amending Chapter 19, Floodplain District
Adopted 2-17-14
Ordinance 2019-04 Amending Chapter 19, Floodplain District
Adopted 4-15-19
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 1 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
Chapter 20
SHORELAND-WETLANDS
Officially adopted by the Village Board: April 3, 2006
20.01 Statutory Authorization, Finding of Fact, Statement of Purpose, and Title ............ 1
20.02 General Provisions ....................................................................................................... 2
20.03 Land Division Review and Sanitary Regulations ....................................................... 3
20.04 Dimensions of Building Sites ....................................................................................... 6
20.05 Setbacks from the Water ............................................................................................. 7
20.06 Removal of Shore Cover .............................................................................................. 8
20.07 Filling, Grading, Lagooning, Dredging, Ditching, and Excavating ........................... 8
20.08 Shoreland-Wetland District ...................................................................................... 10
20.09 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures ...................................................................... 13
20.10 Administrative Provisions ......................................................................................... 13
20.11 Changes and Amendments ........................................................................................ 17
20.13 Definitions .................................................................................................................. 17
20.99 Penalty, Severability, and Enforcement ................................................................... 19
20.01 STATUTORY
AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF
FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE,
AND TITLE.
(1) Statutory Authorization. This
ordinance is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in Wis. Stats. §59.69, §59.692,
§59.694, and §281.31 and NR 115 Wis.
Adm. Code. These rules and laws shall
apply until amended and then shall apply as
amended.
(2) Finding of Fact. Uncontrolled use
of the shorelands and pollution of the
navigable waters of the Village of Suamico
would adversely affect the public health,
safety, convenience, and general welfare and
impair the tax base. The legislature of
Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to
the counties to further the maintenance of
safe and healthful conditions; prevent and
control water pollution; protect spawning
grounds, fish and aquatic life; control
building sites, placement of structures and
land uses; and to preserve shore cover and
natural beauty. This responsibility is hereby
recognized by the Village of Suamico,
Brown County, Wisconsin.
(3) Purpose. For the purpose of
promoting the public health, safety,
convenience and welfare, this ordinance has
been established to:
(a) Further the Maintenance of Safe and
Healthful Conditions and Prevent and
Control Water Pollution through:
1. Limiting structures to those areas
where soil and geological conditions will
provide a safe foundation.
2. Establishing minimum lot sizes to
provide adequate area for private sewage
disposal facilities.
3. Controlling filling and grading to
prevent serious soil erosion problems.
(b) Protect Spawning Grounds, Fish,
and Aquatic Life through:
1. Preserving Wetlands and other fish
and aquatic habitat.
2. Regulating pollution sources.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 2 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
3. Controlling shoreline alterations,
dredging, and lagooning.
(c) Control Building Sites, Placement of
Structures, and Land Uses through:
1. Separating conflicting land uses.
2. Prohibiting certain uses detrimental
to the shoreland area.
3. Setting minimum lot sizes and
widths.
4. Regulating side yards and building
setbacks from waterways.
(d) Preserve Shore Cover and Natural
Beauty through:
1. Restricting the removal of natural
shoreland cover.
2. Preventing shoreline encroachment
by structures.
3. Controlling shoreland excavation and
other earth moving activities.
4. Regulating the use and placement of
boathouses and other structures.
(4) Title. Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
for the Village of Suamico, Brown County,
Wisconsin.
20.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) Areas to be Regulated. Areas
regulated by this ordinance shall include all
the lands (referred to herein as shorelands)
in the Village of Suamico which are:
(a) Within one thousand feet (1,000’) of
the ordinary high water mark of navigable
lakes, ponds, or flowages. Lakes, ponds, or
flowages in the Village of Suamico shall be
presumed to be navigable if they are listed in
the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources publication, “Surface Water
Resources of Brown County” or are shown
on United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps.
(b) Within three hundred feet (300’) of
the ordinary high water mark of navigable
rivers or streams, or to the landward side of
the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
Rivers and streams in the Village of
Suamico shall be presumed navigable if they
are designated as continuous waterways or
intermittent waterways on United States
Geological Survey quadrangle maps. Flood
hazard boundary maps, flood insurance rate
maps, flood boundary-floodway maps,
county soil survey maps, or other existing
county floodplain zoning maps shall be used
to delineate floodplain areas.
(c) Determinations of navigability and
ordinary high water mark location shall
initially be made by the Zoning
Administrator. When questions arise, the
Zoning Administrator shall contact the
appropriate district office of the Department
for a final determination of navigability or
ordinary high water mark.
(d) Under Wis. Stats. §Ch. 281.31 (2m)
notwithstanding any other provision of law
or administrative rule promulgated
thereunder, this shoreland zoning ordinance
does not apply to any of the following:
1. Lands adjacent to farm drainage
ditches if all of the following apply;
a. The lands are not adjacent to a natural
navigable stream or river
b. Those parts of the drainage ditches
adjacent to these lands were nonnavigable
streams before ditching.
2. Lands adjacent to artificially
constructed drainage ditches, ponds, or
stormwater retention basins that are not
hydrologically connected to a natural
navigable water body.
3. Lands adjacent to an impoundment
described under s. 30.10(2)(b) that does not
discharge directly into a natural navigable
waterway.
(2) Shoreland Zoning Maps. The
maps designated below are hereby adopted
and made part of this ordinance. They are
on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator for the Village of Suamico.
(a) United States Geological Survey
Quadrangle Maps for the Village of
Suamico (most recent).
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 3 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
(b) Wetlands on the DNR Surface
Water Data Viewer.
(c) Floodplain zoning maps indicated in
Chapter 19.
(3) Compliance. The use of any land or
water, the size, shape, and placement of lots,
the use, size, type, and location of structures
on lots, the installation and maintenance of
water supply and waste disposal facilities,
the filling, grading, lagooning, dredging of
any lands, the cutting of shoreland
vegetation, and the subdivision of lots shall
be in full compliance with the terms of this
ordinance and other applicable local, state,
or federal regulations. (However, see
Section 20.09 for standards applicable to
non-conforming uses.) Buildings, signs, and
other structures shall require a permit unless
otherwise expressly excluded by a provision
of this ordinance. Property owners,
builders, and contractors are responsible for
compliance with the terms of this ordinance.
(4) Municipalities and State Agencies
Regulated. Unless specifically exempted
by law, all cities, villages, towns, and
counties are required to comply with this
ordinance and obtain all necessary permits.
State agencies are required to comply when
Wis. Stats. §13.48(13), applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance,
and repair of state highways and bridges by
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation
are exempt when Wis. Stats. §30.12(4)(a),
applies.
(5) Abrogation and Greater
Restrictions. The provisions of this
ordinance supersede all the provisions of
any county zoning ordinance adopted under
Wis. Stats. §59.692, which relate to
shorelands. However, where an ordinance
adopted under a statute other than Wis.
Stats. §59.692 is more restrictive than this
ordinance, that ordinance shall continue in
full force and effect to the extent of the
greater restrictions but not otherwise.
(a) This ordinance is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants, or easements.
However, where this ordinance imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this
ordinance shall prevail.
(b) The following provisions of the
Village of Suamico Zoning Ordinance are
hereby incorporated by reference; these
provisions shall only apply to the shoreland
area where they impose greater restrictions
than this ordinance otherwise imposes.
(6) Interpretation. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions
of this ordinance shall be held to be
minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the Village and shall
not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by Wisconsin Statutes.
Where a provision of this ordinance is
required by a standard in Ch. NR 115, Wis.
Adm. Code, and where the ordinance
provision is unclear, the provision shall be
interpreted in light of the Ch. NR 115
standards in effect on the date of the
adoption of this ordinance or in effect on the
date of the most recent text amendment to
this ordinance.
(7) Severability. If any portion of this
ordinance is adjudge unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this ordinance shall not be
affected.
20.03 LAND DIVISION REVIEW AND
SANITARY REGULATIONS.
(1) Land Division Review. The
Village shall review, pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§236.45, all land divisions in shoreland
areas which create three (3) or more parcels
or building sites of five (5) acres each or less
within a five (5) year period. In such
review, the following factors shall be
considered:
(a) Hazards to the health, safety, or
welfare of future residents.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 4 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
(b) Proper relationship to adjoining
areas.
(c) Public access to navigable waters, as
required by law.
(d) Adequate storm drainage facilities.
(e) Conformity to state law and
administrative code provisions.
(2) Limited Rezoning to Achieve
Reduced Lot Sizes and Setbacks.
(a) Purpose. In some instances where
an individual lot or small tract of land has
unique characteristics, such as unique
terrain, which would result in unnecessary
hardship as defined in Section 20.13 (2) (n),
if the owner were required to comply with
one (1) or more of the requirements for
minimum lot sizes, width, and setback, the
Board of Appeals may grant a variance. In
other instances where larger areas are
involved, the appropriate method for seeking
a relaxation of the same minimum standards
is by rezoning to establish a Planned
Development District overlay. The Planned
Development District is intended to permit
smaller lots and setbacks where the physical
layout of the lots is so arranged (often by
setting them back farther from navigable
water) as to better assure the control of
pollution and preservation of ground cover
than would be expected if the lots were
developed with the normal lot sizes and
setbacks and without special conditions
placed upon the Planned Development
District at the time of its approval. A
condition of all Planned Development
Districts is the preservation of certain open
space, preferably on the shoreland, in
perpetuity.
(b) Requirements for Planned
Development Districts. The Board may at
its discretion, upon its own motion or upon
petition, approve a Planned Development
District either by approving first (1st) an
overlay district and then a plat or by
approving only a plat for the specific
planned residential project upon finding,
after a public hearing, that all of the
following facts exist:
1. Area. The area proposed for the
Planned Residential Unit Development is at
least forty (40) acres in size.
2. Pollution Control. The location and
nature of the septic systems, which will
serve the home sites individually or
collectively, will assure that effluent from
the septic systems will not reach the ground
or surface waters in a condition which
would contribute to health hazards, taste,
odor, turbidity, fertility, or impair the
aesthetic character of navigable waters.
3. Preservation of Ground Cover. The
location of home sites and the dedication of
part of the land for use by the public or
residents of the Planned Development
District will preserve the ground cover of
the shoreland and scenic beauty of the
navigable waters, prevent erosion, and other
pertinent factors. Land not used for lots and
streets shall be dedicated in perpetuity to
remain in open space. This may be
accomplished by conveyance in common to
each of the owners of lots in the
development or to a corporation formed by
them, or by dedication to the county, town,
or municipality. Lands dedicated to the
public must be accepted by action of the
governing body of the accepting unit of
government. If the land is to be conveyed to
owners of lots in the development, a
homeowner’s association or similar legally
constituted body shall be created to maintain
the open space land. Any restriction placed
on platted land by covenant, grant of
easement, or any other manner which was
required by a public body or which names a
public body as grantee, promisee, or
beneficiary, shall vest in the public body the
right to enforce the restriction at law or in
equity against anyone who has or acquires
an interest in the land subject to the
restriction.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 5 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
4. Density. The number of platted home
sites shall not exceed those which would
have been possible if the same land were
platted in accordance with the minimum lot
sizes, setbacks, and widths provided by the
applicable provisions of the zoning
ordinance. This figure shall be determined
by dividing the total area of the subdivision,
excluding streets, by the minimum lot sizes
required by Section 20.04 of this ordinance.
5. Lot Sizes, Widths, Setbacks, and
Tree-Cutting. The lot sizes, widths, and
setbacks shall not be less than those
provided for in current status Ch. H85, Wis.
Adm. Code, and shall not be so small as to
cause pollution or erosion along streets or
other public ways and waterways or so small
as to substantially depreciate the property
values in the immediate neighborhood.
Shore cover provisions in Section 20.06
shall apply except that maximum width of a
lake frontage opening shall be one hundred
feet (100’).
(c) Procedure for Establishing a
Planned Development District. The
procedure for establishing limited rezoning
in the form of a Planned Development
District shall be as follows:
1. Petition. A petition setting forth all
of the facts required in Section 20.03 (2) (b)
shall be submitted to the Clerk with
sufficient copies to provide for distribution
by the Clerk as required by Section 20.03
(2) (c) 2.
2. Review and Hearing. The petition
shall be submitted to the Village Zoning
Agency established as required by Wis.
Stats. §59.97(3)(d), which shall review and
forward for a public hearing and action to
the Village Board as required by law.
Copies of the petition and notice of the
hearing shall also be sent to the appropriate
district office of the Department as
described in Section 20.11 (2) of this
ordinance. The Village Zoning Agency’s
report to the Village Board shall reflect the
recommendations of any federal, state, or
local agency with which the Village Zoning
agency consults. If a petition seeks approval
of a Planned Development District plat
without first (1st) seeking the granting of an
overlay district, a hearing shall be held on
such plat as in any regular amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance. If, however, a hearing is
first (1st) held on the overlay for a Planned
Development District, a second (2nd) public
hearing need not be held in connection with
the approval of a subsequent plat or plats
which comply with the overlay district as
approved.
3. Findings and Conditions of Approval.
The Board shall make written findings as to
the compliance or non-compliance of the
proposed overlay district with each of the
applicable requirements set forth in Section
20.03 (2) (b). If the petition is granted in
whole or part, the Board shall attach such
written conditions to the approval as are
required by and consistent with Section
20.03 (2) (b). The conditions of approval
shall in all cases establish the specific
restrictions applicable regarding minimum
lot sizes, width, setbacks, and the location of
septic systems and the preservation of
ground cover and open space.
4. Planning Studies. A landowner or
petitioner may at his or her own expense
develop the facts required to establish
compliance with the provisions of Section
20.03 (2) (b) or may be required to
contribute funds to the Village to defray all
or part of the cost of such studies being
undertaken by the Village or any agency or
person with whom the Village contracts for
such work.
(3) Sanitary Regulations. The Village
shall have no jurisdiction over sanitary
regulations for the protection of health and
preservation and enhancement of water
quality. Brown County shall be the
approving authority for all regulations.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 6 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
(a) Where public water supply systems
are not available, private well construction
shall be required to conform to Ch. NR 112,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) Where a public sewage collection
and treatment system is not available, design
and construction of private sewage disposal
systems shall be governed by a private
sewage system ordinance adopted by the
county under Wis. Stats. §59.065.
20.04 DIMENSIONS OF BUILDING
SITES.
(1) Lots not Served by Public
Sanitary Sewer.
(a) Minimum Area and Width for each
Main Building. The minimum lot area shall
be fifty thousand (50,000) square feet and
the minimum lot width shall be two hundred
feet (200’) with at least one hundred feet
(100’) of frontage at the ordinary high water
mark.
(b) Side Yards. There shall be a side
yard for each main building. The minimum
width of one (1) main side yard shall be
twenty feet (20’). The minimum combined
width of both main side yards shall be forty
feet (40’). There shall be a side yard of
twenty feet (20’) for accessory structures
excluding fences.
(2) Lots Served by Public Sanitary
Sewer.
(a) Minimum Area and Width for each
Main Building. The minimum lot area shall
be fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet
and the minimum lot width shall be one
hundred feet (100’) with at least sixty-five
feet (65’) of frontage at the ordinary high
water mark.
(b) Side Yards. The minimum width of
one (1) main side yard shall be ten feet
(10’). The minimum combined width of
both main side yards shall be twenty feet
(20’). There shall be a side yard of ten feet
(10’) for accessory structures excluding
fences.
(3) Substandard Lots.
(a) Substandard Lots Served by a Public
Sanitary Sewer. A substandard lot served by
a public sanitary sewer which is at least
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet in area and is at least fifty feet (50’) in
width at the building setback line and at
least fifty feet (50’) in width at the ordinary
high water mark may be used as a building
site for a single-family dwelling upon
issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning
Administrator if it meets all of the following
requirements:
1. Such use is permitted in the Zoning
District.
2. The lot was on record in the county
Register of Deeds office prior to March 19,
1969.
3. The lot was in separate ownership
from abutting lands prior to the effective
date of this ordinance. If abutting lands and
the substandard lot were owned by the same
owner as of the effective date of this
ordinance, the substandard lot shall not be
sold or used without full compliance with
the terms of this ordinance, including
minimum area and width requirements
found in Section 20.04 (1) and 20.04 (2) of
this ordinance.
4. All other dimensional requirements
of this ordinance (including side yard and
setback) will be complied with.
(b) Substandard Lots not Served by
Public Sanitary Sewer. A substandard lot
not served by public sanitary sewer, which is
at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet in
area and at least sixty-five feet (65’) in
width a the building setback line and at least
sixty-five feet (65’) in width at the ordinary
high water mark may be used as a building
site for a single-family dwelling upon
issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning
Administrator if it meets all of the
requirements of Section 20.04 (3) (a) 1, 2, 3,
and 4 of this ordinance.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 7 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
(c) Other Substandard Lots. Except for
lots which meet the requirements of Section
20.04 (3) (a) or 20.04 (3) (b), a building
permit for the improvement of a lot having
lesser dimensions than those stated in
Section 20.04 (1) and 20.04 (2) shall be
issued only after granting of a variance by
the Board of Appeals.
(4) Lots in Cluster Subdivisions. Lots
in cluster subdivisions not served by public
sanitary sewers may be reduced to the
minimum allowed by the county private
sewage system ordinance pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Section 20.03 (2) of
this ordinance.
20.05 SETBACKS FROM THE
WATER.
(1) Lots that Abut on Navigable
Waters. All buildings and structures,
except piers, boat hoists, boathouses, and
open fences which may require a lesser
setback shall be set back at least fifty feet
(50’) from the ordinary high water mark of
navigable waters.
(2) Reduced Building Setbacks. A
setback of less than that required by Section
20.05 (1) may be permitted by the Zoning
Administrator where there is a principal on
each side of the applicant’s lot, within two
hundred feet (200’) of the proposed site that
is built to less than the required setback. In
such case, the setback shall be the average
of the setbacks of the nearest main building
on each side of the proposed site. No
structure shall be permitted closer than
thirty-five feet (35’) to the ordinary high
water mark using setback average unless a
variance is obtained from the Board of
Appeals pursuant to Section 20.10 (5) of this
ordinance. Any other setback reduction may
be permitted by the Board of Appeals
pursuant to Section 20.10 (5) of this
ordinance.
(3) Stairways, Walkways, and Lifts.
A stairway, walkway, or lift is permitted in
the shoreland setback area only when it is
essential to provide pedestrian access to the
pier because of steep slopes or rocky, wet, or
unstable soils, and when the following
conditions are met:
(a) There are no other locations or
facilities on the property which allow
adequate access to a pier. Only one (1)
stairway or one (1) lift is allowed, not both,
except where there is an existing stairway
and the lift will be mounted to or is
immediately adjacent to the existing
stairway.
(b) Such structures shall be placed on
the most visually inconspicuous route to the
shoreline and shall avoid environmentallysensitive
areas.
(c) Vegetation, which stabilizes slopes
or screens structural development from
view, shall not be removed.
(d) Structures shall be colored and
screened by vegetation so as to be
inconspicuous when viewed against the
shoreline.
(e) Canopies, roofs, and sides are
prohibited. Open railings may be provided
where required for safety.
(f) A maximum width of four feet (4’)
(outside dimension) is allowed for stairways,
walkways, and lifts.
(g) Landings are allowed when required
for safety purposes and shall not exceed
forty (40) square feet. Attached benches,
seats, tables, etc., are prohibited.
(h) Stairways, walkways, and lifts shall
be supported on piles or footings. Any
filling, grading, or excavation that is
proposed must meet the requirements of
Section 20.07 of the ordinance.
(4) Boathouses.
(a) Boathouses shall be designed and
constructed solely for the storage of boats
and related equipment and shall not be used
for human habitation.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 8 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
(b) Boathouses shall not be placed
waterward beyond the ordinary high water
mark.
(c) One (1) boathouse is permitted on a
lot as an accessory structure.
(d) Boathouses shall not be constructed
where the existing slope is more than twenty
percent (20%).
(e) Boathouses shall be set back a
minimum of five feet (5’) from the ordinary
high water mark and shall be constructed in
conformity with local floodplain zoning
standards.
(f) Boathouses shall not exceed one (1)
story and five hundred (500) square feet in
floor area.
20.06 REMOVAL OF SHORE COVER.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of tree and
shrubbery cutting regulations applicable to
the shoreland area is to protect scenic
beauty, control erosion, and reduce effluent
and nutrient flow from the shoreland. The
provisions shall not apply to the removal of
dead, diseased, or dying trees or shrubbery
at the discretion of the landowner, or to
silvicultural thinning upon recommendation
of a forester.
(2) Shoreline Cutting. Tree and
shrubbery cutting in an area parallel to the
ordinary high water mark and extending
thirty-five feet (35’) inland from all points
along the ordinary high water mark, shall be
limited in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) No more than thirty feet (30’) in any
one hundred feet (100’), as measured along
the ordinary high water mark, may be clear
cut to the depth of the thirty-five foot (35’)
area.
(b) Natural shrubbery shall be preserved
as far as practicable and, where removed, it
shall be replaced with other vegetation that
is equally effective in retarding runoff,
preventing erosion, and preserving natural
beauty.
(3) Paths. Any path, road, or passage
within the thirty-five foot (35’) area shall be
constructed and surfaced so as to effectively
control erosion.
(4) Cutting Plan. As an alternative to
Section 20.06 (2), a special cutting plan
allowing greater cutting may be permitted
by the Board of Appeals by issuance of a
special exception permit pursuant to Section
20.10 (4). An application for such a permit
shall include a sketch of the lot providing
the following information: location of
parking, topography of the land, existing
vegetation, proposed cutting, and proposed
replanting. The Board may grant such a
permit only if it finds that such special
cutting plans:
(a) Will not cause undue erosion or
destruction of scenic beauty; and
(b) Will provide substantial visual
screening from the water of dwellings,
accessory structures, and parking areas.
Where the plan calls for replacement
plantings, the Board may require the
submission of a bond which guarantees the
performance of the planned tree or
shrubbery replacement by the lot owner.
(5) Cutting More than Thirty-Five
Feet (35’) Inland. From the inland edge of
the thirty-five foot (35’) area to the outer
limits of the shoreland, the cutting of trees
and shrubbery shall be allowed when
accomplished using accepted forest
management and soil conservation practices
which protect water quality.
20.07 FILLING, GRADING,
LAGOONING, DREDGING,
DITCHING, AND EXCAVATING.
(1) General Standards. Filling,
grading, lagooning, dredging, ditching, or
excavating which does not require a permit
under Section 20.07 (2) may be permitted in
the shoreland area provided that:
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 9 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
(a) It is done in a manner designed to
minimize erosion, sedimentation, and
impairment of fish and wildlife habitat.
(b) Filling, grading, lagooning,
dredging, ditching, or excavating in a
shoreland-wetland district meets the
requirements of Section 20.08 (3) (b) and
20.08 (3) (c) of this ordinance.
(c) All applicable federal, state, and
local authority is obtained in addition to a
permit under this ordinance.
(d) Any fill placed in the shoreland area
is protected against erosion by the use of
riprap, vegetative cover, or a bulkhead.
(2) Permit Required. Except as
provided in Section 20.07 (3), a special
exception permit is required:
(a) For any filling or grading of any
area which is within three hundred feet
(300’) of landward of the ordinary high
water mark of navigable water and which
has surface drainage toward the water and
on which there is either:
1. Any filling or grading on slopes of
more than twenty percent (20%).
2. Filling or grading of more than one
thousand (1,000) square feet on slopes of
twelve percent (12%) to twenty percent
(20%).
3. Filling or grading of more than two
thousand (2,000) square feet on slopes less
than twelve percent (12%).
(b) For any construction or dredging
commenced on any artificial waterway,
canal, ditch, lagoon, pond, lake, or similar
waterway which is within three hundred feet
(300’) landward of the ordinary high water
mark of a navigable body of water or where
the purpose is the ultimate connection with a
navigable body of water.
(3) Soil Conservation Practices and
Agricultural Drainage Maintenance.
(a) Soil conservation practices such as
tiled terraces, runoff diversions, and grassed
waterways used for erosion control shall not
require a permit under Section 20.07 (2)
when designed and constructed to Soil
Conservation Service technical standards.
(b) The maintenance of existing
agricultural drainage systems shall be
permitted in conformity with the following
construction standards:
1. The maintenance dredging of farm
drainage ditches is limited to re-establishing
the original ditch cross section unless a
special exception permit under Section
20.07 (2) (b) is obtained.
2. Ditch banks shall be constructed at a
slope of two (2) horizontal to one (1)
vertical (fifty percent (50%) grade) or
flatter.
3. Ditch banks shall be maintained in a
sod cover and free of woody vegetation.
4. A ten foot (10’) wide buffer strip of
untilled, ungrazed sod cover shall be
maintained adjacent to the ditch bank.
(4) Permit Conditions. In granting a
special exception permit under Section
20.07 (2), the Board of Appeals shall attach
the following conditions, where appropriate,
in addition to those provisions specified in
Section 20.10(5).
(a) The smallest amount of bare ground
shall be exposed for as short a time as
feasible.
(b) Temporary ground cover (such as
mulch or jute netting) shall be used and
permanent vegetative cover shall be
established.
(c) Diversion berms or bales, silting
basins, terraces, filter fabric fencing, and
other methods shall be used to prevent
erosion.
(d) Lagoons shall be constructed to
avoid fish trap conditions.
(e) Fill shall be stabilized according to
accepted engineering standards.
(f) Filling shall comply with any local
floodplain zoning ordinance and shall not
restrict a floodway or destroy the flood
storage capacity of a floodplain.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 10 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
(g) Channels or artificial watercourses
shall be constructed with side slopes of two
(2) units horizontal distance to one (1) unit
vertical or flatter which shall be promptly
vegetated, unless bulkheads or riprap are
provided.
20.08 SHORELAND-WETLAND
DISTRICT.
(1) Designation. This district shall
include all shorelands within the jurisdiction
of this ordinance which are wetlands of five
(5) acres or more (excluding point symbols)
and which are shown on the Wisconsin
Wetland Inventory maps that are adopted
and made a part of this ordinance. A portion
of a wetland which is less than five (5) acres
in size shall be included in the shorelandwetland
district where the wetland as a
whole is five (5) acres or larger, but extends
across the corporate limits of a municipality,
across the county boundary, or across the
shoreland limits, so that the wetland is not
regulated in its entirety by the Village.
(a) Locating Shoreland-Wetland
Boundaries. Where an apparent discrepancy
exists between the shoreland-wetland district
boundary shown on the Wisconsin Wetland
Inventory maps and actual field conditions
at the time the maps were adopted, the
Zoning Administrator shall contact the
appropriate district office of the department
to determine if the shoreland-wetland
district boundary as mapped is in error. If
department staff concur with the Zoning
Administrator that a particular area was
incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to
immediately grant or deny a zoning permit
in accordance with the applicable to the
correct zoning district. The Zoning
Administrator shall initiate a map
amendment to correct the discrepancy.
(2) Purpose. This district is created to
maintain safe and healthful conditions, to
prevent water pollution, to protect fish
spawning grounds and wildlife habitat, to
preserve shore cover and natural beauty, and
to control building and development in
wetlands whenever possible. When
development is permitted in a wetland, the
development should occur in a manner that
minimizes adverse impacts upon the
wetland.
(3) Permitted Uses. The following
uses shall be allowed, subject to general
shoreland zoning regulations contained in
this ordinance, the provisions of Wis. Stats.
Ch. 30 and 31 and the provisions of other
applicable local, state, and federal laws:
(a) Activities and uses which do not
require the issuance of a zoning permit, but
which must be carried out without any
filling, flooding, draining, dredging,
ditching, tiling, or excavating except as
allowed under Section 20.08 (3) (b) or 20.08
(3) (c).
1. Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting,
swimming, and boating;
2. The harvesting of wild crops, such as
marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries,
tree fruits, and tree seeds, in a manner that is
not injurious to the natural reproduction of
such crops;
3. The pasturing of livestock;
4. The cultivation of agricultural crops;
5. The practice of silviculture, including
the planting, thinning, and harvesting of
timber; and
6. The construction or maintenance of
duck blinds.
(b) Uses which do not require the
issuance of a zoning permit and which may
include limited filling, flooding, draining,
dredging, ditching, tiling, or excavating but
only to the extent specifically provided
below:
1. Temporary water level stabilization
measures necessary to alleviate abnormally
wet or dry conditions that would have an
adverse impact on silviculture activities if
not corrected;
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 11 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
2. The cultivation of cranberries
including flooding, dike, and dam
construction or ditching necessary for the
growing and harvesting of cranberries;
3. The maintenance and repair of
existing agricultural drainage systems
including ditching, tiling, dredging,
excavating, and filling necessary to maintain
the level of drainage required to continue the
existing agricultural use. This includes the
minimum filling necessary for disposal of
dredged spoil adjacent to the drainage
system provided that dredged spoil is placed
on existing spoil banks where possible;
4. The construction or maintenance of
fences for the pasturing of livestock,
including limited excavating and filling
necessary for such construction or
maintenance;
5. The construction or maintenance of
piers, docks, or walkways built on pilings,
including limited excavating and filling
necessary for such construction or
maintenance.
6. The maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of existing
town and county highways and bridges,
including limited excavating and filling
necessary for such maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction.
(c) Uses which require the issuance of a
zoning permit under Section 20.10 (2) and
which may include limited filing, flooding,
draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, or
excavating, but only to the extent
specifically provided below:
1. The construction and maintenance of
roads which are necessary to conduct
silvicultural activities or agricultural
cultivation, provided that:
a. The road cannot as a practical matter
be located outside the wetland;
b. The road is designed and constructed
to minimize adverse impact upon the natural
functions of the wetland enumerated in
Section 20.08 (5) (b);
c. The road is designed and constructed
with the minimum cross-sectional area
practical to serve the intended use;
d. Road construction activities are
carried out in the immediate area of the
roadbed only.
2. The construction or maintenance of
non-residential buildings, provided that:
a. The building is essential for and used
solely in conjunction with the raising of
waterfowl, minnows, or other wetland or
aquatic animals; or some other use permitted
in the shoreland-wetland district;
b. The building cannot, as a practical
matter, be located outside the wetland;
c. Such building is not designed for
human habitation and does not exceed five
hundred (500) square feet in floor area; and
d. Only limited filling or excavating
necessary to provide structural support for
the building is authorized.
3. The establishment of public and
private parks and recreation areas, natural
and outdoor education areas, historic and
scientific areas, wildlife refuges, game bird
and animal farms, fur animal farms, fish
hatcheries, and public boat launching ramps
and attendant access roads, provided that:
a. Any private development is used
exclusively for the permitted use and the
applicant has received a permit or license
under Wis. Stats. Ch. 29, where applicable;
b. Filling or excavating necessary for
the construction or maintenance of public
boat launching ramps or attendant access
roads is allowed only where such
construction or maintenance meets the
criteria in Section 20.08 (3) (c) 1 a, b, c, and
d and;
c. Ditching, excavating, dredging, or
dike and dam construction in public and
private parks and recreation areas, natural
and outdoor education areas, historic and
scientific areas, wildlife refuges, game bird
and animal farms, fur animal farms, and fish
hatcheries is allowed only for the purpose of
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 12 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
improving wildlife habitat and to otherwise
enhance wetland values.
4. The construction or maintenance of
electric, gas, telephone, water, and sewer
transmission and distribution facilities, by
public utilities and cooperative associations
organized for the purpose of producing or
furnishing heat, light, power, or water to
their members and the construction or
maintenance of railroad lines provided that:
a. The transmission and distribution
facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a
practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
b. Such construction or maintenance is
done in a manner designed to minimize
adverse impact upon the natural functions of
the wetland enumerated in Section 20.08 (5)
(b).
(4) Prohibited Uses. Any use not listed
in Section 20.08, (3) (a), 20.08 (3) (b), or
20.08 (3) (c) is prohibited, unless the
wetland or portion of the wetland has been
rezoned by amendment of this ordinance in
accordance with Section 20.08 (5) of this
ordinance and Wis. Stats. §59.97(5)(e).
(5) Rezoning of Lands in the
Shoreland-Wetland District.
(a) For all proposed text and map
amendments to the shoreland-wetland
provisions of this ordinance, the appropriate
regional office of the department shall be
provided with the following:
1. A copy of every petition for a text or
map amendment to the shoreland-wetland
provisions of this ordinance, within five (5)
days of the filing of such petition with the
Clerk. Such petition shall include a copy of
the Wisconsin Wetland Inventory map
adopted as part of this ordinance describing
any proposed rezoning of a shorelandwetland;
2. Written notice of the public hearing
to be held on a proposed amendment at least
ten (10) days prior to such hearing;
3. A copy of the Village zoning
agency’s findings and recommendations on
each proposed amendment within ten (10)
days after the submission of those findings
and recommendations to the Board; and
4. Written notice of the Board’s
decision on the proposed amendment within
ten (10) days after it is issued.
(b) A wetland, or a portion thereof, in
the shoreland-wetland district shall not be
rezoned if the proposed rezoning may result
in a significant adverse impact upon any of
the following:
1. Storm and flood water storage
capacity;
2. Maintenance of dry season stream
flow, the discharge of groundwater to a
wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a
wetland to another area, or the flow of
groundwater through a wetland;
3. Filtering or storage of sediments,
nutrients, heavy metals, or organic
compounds that would otherwise drain into
navigable waters;
4. Shoreline protection against soil
erosion;
5. Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or
feeding grounds;
6. Wildlife habitat; or
7. Areas of special recreational, scenic,
or scientific interest, including scarce
wetland types.
(c) If the department notifies the Village
zoning agency that a proposed text or map
amendment to the shoreland-wetland
provisions of this ordinance may have a
significant adverse impact upon any of the
criteria listed in Section 20.08 (5) (b) of this
ordinance, that amendment, if approved by
the Board, shall contain the following
provision:
“This amendment shall not take effect
until more than thirty (30) days have elapsed
after written notice of the Board’s approval
of this amendment is mailed to the
Department of Natural Resources. During
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 13 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
that thirty (30) day period, the Department
of Natural Resources may notify the Board
that it will adopt a superseding shoreland
ordinance for the Village under Wis. Stats.
§59.971 (6). If the department does so
notify the Board, the effect of this
amendment shall be stayed until the Wis.
Stats §59.971 (6.6) adoption procedure is
completed or otherwise terminated.”
20.09 NON-CONFORMING USES AND
STRUCTURES.
(1) The lawful use of a building,
structure, or property which existed at the
time this ordinance, or an applicable
amendment to this ordinance, took effect
and which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance, including the
routine maintenance of such a building or
structure, may be continued, subject to the
following conditions:
(a) If a non-conforming use is
discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive
months, any future use of the building,
structure, or property shall conform to this
ordinance.
(b) The maintenance and repair of nonconforming
boathouses that extend water
ward beyond the ordinary high water mark
of any navigable waters shall comply with
the requirements of Wis. Stats. §30.121.
(c) If the non-conforming use of a
temporary structure is discontinued, such
non-conforming use may not be
recommenced.
(d) Uses which are nuisances shall not
be permitted to continue as non-conforming
uses.
20.10 ADMINISTRATIVE
PROVISIONS.
(1) Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator shall have the
following duties and powers:
(a) Advise applicants as to the
provisions of this ordinance and assist them
in preparing permit applications and appeal
forms.
(b) Issue permits and certificates of
compliance and inspect properties for
compliance with this ordinance.
(c) Keep records of all permits issued,
inspections made, work approved, and other
official actions.
(d) Provide copies of variances, special
exceptions, and decisions on appeals for
map or text interpretations and map or text
amendments within ten (10) days after they
are granted or denied to the appropriate
district office of the department.
(e) Investigate and report violations of
this ordinance to the appropriate Village
Zoning Committee and the district attorney
or corporation counsel.
(2) Zoning Permits.
(a) When Required. Except where
another section of this ordinance specifically
exempts certain types of development from
this requirement (as in Sections 20.08 (3) (a)
and 20.08 (3) (b)), a zoning permit shall be
obtained from the Zoning Administrator
before any new development, as defined in
Section 20.13 (2) (e), or any change in the
use of an existing building or structure, is
initiated.
(b) Application. An application for a
zoning permit shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator upon forms furnished by the
Village and shall include for the purpose of
proper enforcement of these regulations, the
following data:
1. Name and address of applicant and
property owner.
2. Legal description of the property and
type of proposed use.
3. A sketch of the dimensions of the lot
and location of buildings relative to the lot
lines, center line of abutting highways, and
the ordinary high water mark of any abutting
watercourses and water level on a date
specified.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 14 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
4. Location and description of any
existing private water supply or sewage
system or notification of plans for any such
installation.
(c) Expiration of Permit. Zoning
permits shall expire twelve (12) months
from date issued if no substantial work has
commenced.
(3) Certificates of Compliance.
(a) No land shall be occupied or used
and no building hereafter erected, altered, or
moved shall be occupied, until a certificate
of compliance is issued by the Zoning
Administrator.
1. The certificate of compliance shall
certify that the building or premises or part
thereof, and the proposed use thereof,
conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Application for such certificate shall
be concurrent with the application for a
zoning permit.
3. The certificate of compliance shall be
issued within ten (10) days after notification
of the completion of the work specified in
the zoning permit, if the building or
premises or proposed use thereof conforms
to all the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) The Zoning Administrator may issue
a temporary certificate of compliance for
part of a building pursuant to rules and
regulations established by the Board.
(c) Upon written request from the
owner, the Zoning Administrator shall issue
a certificate of compliance for any building
or premises existing at the time of the
adoption of this ordinance, certifying after
inspection the extent and type of use made
of the building ore premises and whether or
not such use conforms to the provisions of
this ordinance.
(4) Relaxation of Standards for
Persons with Disabilities. The Zoning
Department may issue a building permit to
relax dimensional standards of this
ordinance in order to provide reasonable
accommodation of persons with disabilities
as required by provisions of federal and state
law. Such relaxation shall be consistent
with federal guidelines for accommodation
of persons with disabilities and shall, where
practicable, be terminated when the facility
is no longer in use by a disabled person. A
person applying for a permit for construction
under this section shall establish the nature
and extent of the disability and that the
relaxation requested is the minimum
necessary to provide reasonable use of the
facility.
(5) Special Exception Permits.
(a) Application for a Special Exception
Permit. Any use listed as a special
exception in this ordinance shall be
permitted only after an application has been
submitted to the Zoning Administrator and a
special exception permit has been granted by
the Board of Appeals.
(b) Standards Applicable to all Special
Exceptions. In passing upon a special
exception permit, the Board of Appeals shall
evaluate the effect of the proposed use upon:
1. The maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions.
2. The prevention and control of water
pollution including sedimentation.
3. Compliance with local floodplain
zoning ordinances and opportunity for
damage to adjacent properties due to altered
surface water drainage.
4. The erosion potential of the site based
upon degree and direction of slope, soil
type, and vegetative cover.
5. The location of the site with respect
to existing or future access roads.
6. The need of the proposed use for a
shoreland location.
7. Its compatibility with uses on
adjacent land.
8. The amount of liquid and solid
wastes to be generated and the adequacy of
the proposed disposal systems.
9. Location factors under which:
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 15 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
a. Domestic uses shall be generally
preferred;
b. Uses not inherently a source of
pollution within an area shall be preferred
over uses that are or may be a pollution
source;
c. Use locations within an area tending
to minimize the possibility of pollution shall
be preferred over use locations tending to
increase that possibility.
(c) Conditions Attached to Special
Exceptions. Upon consideration of the
factors listed above, the Board of Appeals
shall attach such conditions, in addition to
those required elsewhere in this ordinance,
as are necessary to further the purposes of
this ordinance. Violations of any of these
conditions shall be deemed a violation of
this ordinance. Such conditions may include
specifications for, without limitation
because of specific enumeration: type of
shore cover; specific sewage disposal and
water supply facilities; landscaping and
planting screens; period of operation;
operational control; sureties; deed
restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking
and signs; and type of construction. To
secure information upon which to base its
determination, the Board of Appeals may
require the applicant to furnish, in addition
to the information required for a zoning
permit, the following information:
1. A plan of the area showing surface
contours, soil types, ordinary high water
marks, ground water conditions, subsurface
geology, and vegetative cover.
2. Location of buildings, parking areas,
traffic access, driveways, walkways, piers,
open space, and landscaping.
3. Plans of buildings, sewage disposal
facilities, water supply systems, and
arrangement of operations.
4. Specifications for areas of proposed
filling, grading, lagooning, or dredging.
5. Other pertinent information necessary
to determine if the proposed use meets the
requirements of this ordinance.
(d) Notice, Public Hearing, and
Decision. Before passing upon an
application for a special exception permit,
the Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing. Notice of such public hearing,
specifying the time, place, and matters to
come before the Board, shall be given as a
Class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. Ch. 985.
Such notice shall be provided to the
appropriate district office of the department
at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
The Board shall state in writing the grounds
for granting or refusing a special exception
permit.
(e) Recording. When a special
exception permit is approved, an appropriate
record shall be made of the land use and
structures permitted and such permit shall be
applicable solely to the structures, use, and
property so described. A copy of any
decision on a special exception permit shall
be provided to the appropriate district office
of the Department within ten (10) days after
it is granted or denied.
(f) Revocation. Where the conditions of
a special exception permit are violated, the
special exception permit shall be revoked by
the Board of Appeals.
(6) Variances. The Board of Appeals
may grant upon appeal a variance from the
dimensional standards of this ordinance
where an applicant convincingly
demonstrates that:
1. Literal enforcement of the provisions
of the ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship on the applicant;
2. The hardship is due to special
conditions unique to the property; and
3. Such variance is not contrary to the
public interest.
(a) No Use Variance. A variance shall
not grant or increase any use of property
which is prohibited in the zoning district.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 16 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
(b) Notice, Hearing, and Decision.
Before passing on an application for a
variance, the Board of Appeals shall hold a
public hearing. Notice of such hearing
specifying the time, place, and matters of
concern shall be given a Class 2 notice
under Wis. Stats. Ch. 985. Such notice shall
be provided to the appropriate regional
office of the department at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing. The Board shall
state in writing the reasons for granting or
refusing a variance and shall provide a copy
of such decision to the appropriate
department regional office within ten (10)
days of the decision.
(7) Board of Appeals. The President of
the Board shall appoint a Board of Appeals
consisting of five (5) members under Wis.
Stats. §59.99. The Board shall adopt such
rules for the conduct of the business of the
Board of Appeals as required by Wis. Stats.
§59.9(3).
(a) Powers and Duties.
1. The Board of Appeals shall adopt
such additional rules as it deems necessary
and may exercise all of the powers conferred
on such Boards by Wis. Stats. §59.99.
2. It shall hear and decide appeals where
it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirements, decision, or determination
made by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this
ordinance.
3. It shall hear and decide applications
for special exception permits pursuant to
Section 20.10 (4).
4. It may grant a variance from the
dimensional standards of this ordinance
pursuant to Section 20.10 (5).
5. In granting a special exception permit
or variance, the Board may not impose
conditions which are more restrictive than
any of the specific standards in the
ordinance. Where the ordinance is silent as
to the extent of restriction, the Board may
impose any reasonable permit conditions to
affect the purpose of this ordinance.
(b) Appeals to the Board. Appeals to
the Board of Appeals may be made by any
person aggrieved or by an officer,
department, board, or bureau of the Village
affected by any decision of the Zoning
Administrator or other administrative
officer. Such appeal shall be made within a
reasonable time, as provided by the rules of
the Board, by filing with the officer whose
decision is in question, and with the Board
of Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the
reasons for the appeal. The Zoning
Administrator or other officer whose
decision is in question shall promptly
transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record concerning the matter
appealed.
(c) Hearing Appeals and Applications
for Variances and Special Exception
Permits.
1. The Board of Appeals shall fix a
reasonable time for a hearing on the appeal
or application. The Board shall give public
notice thereof by publishing a Class 2 notice
under Wis. Stats. Ch. 985, specifying the
date, time, and place of the hearing and the
matters to come before the Board. Notice
shall be mailed to the parties in interest.
Written notice shall be given to the
appropriate regional office of the department
at least ten (10) days prior to hearings on
proposed shoreland variances, special
exceptions (conditional uses), and appeals
for map or text interpretations.
2. A decision regarding the appeal or
application shall be made as soon as
practical. Copies of all decisions on
shoreland variances, special exceptions
(conditional uses), and appeals for map or
text interpretation shall be submitted to the
appropriate regional office of the department
within ten (10) days after they are granted or
denied.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 17 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
3. The final disposition of an appeal or
application to the Board of Appeals shall be
in the form of a written resolution or order
signed by the President and Secretary of the
Board. Such resolution shall state the
specific facts which are the basis of the
Board’s determination and shall either
affirm, reverse, vary, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination
appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the
appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution
or grant the application.
4. At the public hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
(8) Fees.
(a) General. The Board may, by
resolution, adopt fees for the following:
1. Land use permits.
2. Building permits.
3. Certificates of Compliance.
4. Planned Development Districts
reviews.
5. Public hearings.
6. Legal notice publications.
7. Special exception permits.
20.11 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
The Village Board may from time to time
alter, supplement, or change the boundaries
of use districts and the regulations contained
in this ordinance in accordance with the
requirements of Wis. Stats. §59.97(5)(e),
Ch. NR 115, Wis. Adm. Code, and Section
20.08 (5) of this ordinance where applicable.
(1) Amendments to this ordinance may
be made on petition of any interested party
as provided in Wis. Stats. §59.97(5)(e).
(2) Every petition for a text or map
amendment filed with the Clerk shall be
referred to the Village zoning agency. A
copy of each petition shall be mailed to the
appropriate regional office of the department
within five (5) days of the filing of the
petition with the Clerk. Written notice of
the public hearing to be held on a proposed
amendment shall be provided to the
appropriate regional office of the department
at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
(3) A copy of the Village Board’s
decision on each proposed amendment shall
be forwarded to the appropriate regional
office of the department within ten (10) days
after the decision is issued.
20.13 DEFINITIONS.
(1) For the purpose of administering and
enforcing this ordinance, the terms or words
used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the
future; words in the singular number include
the plural number; and words in the plural
number include the singular number. The
word “shall” is mandatory, not permissive.
All distances unless otherwise specified
shall be measured horizontally.
(2) The following terms used in this
ordinance mean:
(a) Accessory Structure or Use. A
detached subordinate structure or a use
which is clearly incidental to, and
customarily found in connection with, the
principal structure or use to which it is
related, and which is located on the same lot
as the principal structure or use.
(b) Boathouse. Any permanent
structure designed solely for the purpose of
protecting or storing boats and related
equipment for noncommercial purposes.
(c) Village Zoning Agency. That
committee or commission created or
designated by the Village Board under Wis.
Stats. §59.97(2)(a) to act in all matters
pertaining to Village planning and zoning.
(d) Department. The Department of
Natural Resources.
(e) Development. Any man-made
change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to the
construction of buildings, structures, or
accessory structures; the construction of
additions or substantial alterations to
buildings, structures, or accessory structures;
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 18 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
the placement of mobile homes; ditching,
lagooning, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation, or drilling operations,
and the deposition or extraction of earthen
materials.
(f) Drainage System. One (1) or more
artificial ditches, tile drains, or similar
devices which collect surface runoff or
groundwater and convey it to a point of
discharge.
(g) Floodplain. The land which has
been or may be hereafter covered by flood
water during the regional flood. The
floodplain includes the floodway and the
flood fringe as those terms are defined in
Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code.
(h) Navigable Waters. Lake Superior,
Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes
within Wisconsin and all streams, ponds,
sloughs, flowages, and other waters within
the territorial limits of this state, including
the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters,
which are navigable under the laws of this
state. Under Wis. Stats. §Ch. 281.31 (2m)
notwithstanding any other provision of law
or administrative rule promulgated
thereunder, this shoreland zoning ordinance
does not apply to any of the following:
1. Lands adjacent to farm drainage
ditches if all of the following apply;
a. The lands are not adjacent to a natural
navigable stream or river
b. Those parts of the drainage ditches
adjacent to these lands were nonnavigable
streams before ditching.
2. Lands adjacent to artificially
constructed drainage ditches, ponds, or
stormwater retention basins that are not
hydrologically connected to a natural
navigable water body.
3. Lands adjacent to an impoundment
described under s. 30.10(2)(b) that does not
discharge directly into a natural navigable
waterway.
(i) Ordinary High Water Mark. The
point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so
continuous as to leave a distinctive mark
such as by erosion, destruction, or
prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other
easily recognized characteristics.
(j) Regional Flood. A flood determined
to be representative of large floods known to
have generally occurred in Wisconsin and
which may be expected to occur on a
particular stream because of like physical
characteristics, once in every one hundred
(100) years.
(k) Shorelands. Lands within the
following distances from the ordinary high
water mark of navigable waters: one
thousand feet (1,000’) from a lake, pond, or
flowage; and three hundred feet (300’) from
a river or stream or to the landward side of
the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
(l) Shoreland-Wetland District. The
zoning district created as a part of this
shoreland zoning ordinance, comprised of
shorelands that are designated as wetlands
on the wetland maps which have been
adopted and made part of this ordinance.
(m) Special Exception (Conditional
Use). A use which is permitted by this
ordinance provided that certain conditions
specified in the ordinance are met and that a
permit is granted by the Board of Appeals
or, where appropriate, the Planning and
Zoning Committee or Board.
(n) Unnecessary Hardship. That
circumstance where special conditions,
which were not self-created, affect a
particular property and make strict
conformity with restrictions governing area,
setbacks, frontage, height, or density
unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable
in light of the purposes of this ordinance.
(o) Variance. An authorization granted
by the Board of Appeals to construct, alter,
or use a building or structure in a manner
that deviates from the dimensional standards
of this ordinance.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 19 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
(p) Wetlands. Those areas where water
is at, near, or above the land surface long
enough to be capable of supporting aquatic
or hydrophytic vegetation and which have
soils indicative of wet conditions.
20.99 PENALTY, SEVERABILITY,
AND ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Penalty. Any development, any
building or structure constructed, moved, or
structurally altered, or any use established
after the effective date of this ordinance, by
any person, firm, association, corporation
(including building contractors or their
agents) shall be deemed a violation. The
Zoning Administrator or the Village zoning
agency shall refer violations to the district
attorney or corporation counsel who shall
expeditiously prosecute violations. Any
person, firm, association, or corporation who
violates or refuses to comply with any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25) nor more than two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500) per offense,
together with the taxable costs of action.
Each day which the violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Every
violation of this ordinance is a public
nuisance and the creation thereof may be
enjoined and the maintenance thereof may
be abated pursuant to Wis. Stats. §59.97(11).
(2) Severability. If a court of
competent jurisdiction deems any provision
of this ordinance invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of the same.
The several sections of this ordinance are
declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable,
such decision shall apply only to the specific
section or portion thereof directly specified
in the court's decision, portions remaining in
the ordinance shall retain the full force and
effect thereof.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Board or its designee, and/or Police
Department.
Village of Suamico
20-Shoreland-Wetlands Page 20 of 20 Adopted 4-03-06
Chapter 20
Ordinance 2014-12 Amending Chapter 20, Shoreland-Wetlands
Adopted 7-21-14
Ordinance 2019-07 Amending Chapter 20, Shoreland-Wetlands
Adopted 7-15-19
Ordinance 2020-06 Amending Chapter 20
Adopted 2-7-20
Village of Suamico
Chapter 25
25-General Provisions Page 1 of 7 Adopted 1-21-08
CONSTRUCTION & GENERAL PROVISIONS
25.01 Procedure for Creating or Changing Ordinances ........................................................ 1
25.02 Construction of Ordinances ............................................................................................ 2
25.03 When Rules of Construction Shall Not Apply ............................................................... 3
25.04 Effect to Repeal ................................................................................................................ 3
25.05 Clerk to File Documents Incorporated by Reference ................................................... 3
25.06 Penalty; Penalty Where No Penalty Provided............................................................... 3
25.07 Offenses Committed and Penalties Incurred Previous to Repeal ............................... 4
25.08 Prosecutions Pending Not Affected ................................................................................ 4
25.09 Title; Effective Date; Citation ......................................................................................... 4
25.10 Information Required ...................................................................................................... 4
25.11 Schedule of Deposits ........................................................................................................ 5
25.12 Form of Deposits .............................................................................................................. 5
25.13 Issuance of Citation ......................................................................................................... 5
25.14 Procedure .......................................................................................................................... 5
25.15 Non-Exclusivity ................................................................................................................ 5
25.16 Keeping Code Current; Reviser’s Amendments ........................................................... 5
25.17 Interpretation ................................................................................................................... 6
25.18 Conflict .............................................................................................................................. 6
25.19 Constitutionality ............................................................................................................... 6
25.01 PROCEDURE FOR CREATING
OR CHANGING ORDINANCES. The
following procedure shall be followed to
create or amend an ordinance in the Village.
(1) Proposed Village ordinances should
be:
(a) prepared in writing.
(b) carefully drafted, edited and revised,
if possible, by the appropriate Village
committee, the appropriate Village officers
and finally the Board. If necessary, the
Village Attorney should be asked by the
Board to review, draft, edit, and comment
upon the proposed ordinance.
(c) enacted in open session of the Board
and in full compliance with the open
meeting law. Two (2) readings of the
ordinance at successive meetings shall be
required unless a properly noticed public
hearing was held to apprise the public that
an ordinance change was being
contemplated by the Board. In the case of
an ordinance noticed by a public hearing, the
Board may dispense with the required
second (2nd) reading. In the case of an
emergency, this dual reading requirement
may be waived by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
the Board, thus dispensing with the second
(2nd) reading.
(d) enacted by a majority vote of a
quorum of the Board present and voting at
the time of the enactment of the ordinance.
If certain Board members abstain from a
vote, the record should note the abstention
and the reasons for abstention, if any.
(e) enacted by a motion to enact, a
second (2nd) to the motion, discussion on the
ordinance, and then a roll call vote of the
Board. Amendments to the ordinance
Village of Suamico
25-General Provisions Page 2 of 7 Adopted 1-21-08
should be in written form and should be
offered for enactment of the final ordinance.
(2) at the time of enactment, the
ordinance should advisably contain:
(a) the title of the ordinance;
(b) an intent or proper clause describing
the intent or purpose of the ordinance;
(c) a statutory authority clause
describing the general or specific statutory
authority for the Board to enact the
ordinance;
(d) a definition section;
(e) the body of the document, including
exceptions to coverage under the ordinance,
including the procedural process to be
followed under the ordinance and including
any applicability provision that describe
specific items covered by the ordinance;
(f) the enforcement and penalties
provision;
(g) the effective date and the
termination date, if any; and
(h) the date of publication or posting.
(3) The Village ordinance, once
enacted,
(a) shall be signed by the President and
signed, attested, certified, and dated by the
Clerk.
(b) shall be published or posted by the
Village pursuant to Wis. Stat. §61.50 or
§66.0103.
(c) shall have the affidavit of
publication or posting attached to it.
(d) shall be recorded in the Ordinance
Record Book, pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§889.04.
(4) The Village ordinance, once
enacted, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §61.50,
(a) shall be effective the day after
publication or the day after posting or at a
later date, if the later date is expressly so
provided in the ordinance.
(b) once enacted by the Board, if the
ordinance imposes a forfeiture, shall be
published and not posted pursuant to Wis.
Stats. §61.50.
(c) The Village ordinance, once enacted,
if the ordinance is posted, the Clerk shall
sign an affidavit attesting that the item was
posted as required by Wis. Stats. §61.50 and
the affidavit shall state the date and places of
posting. This affidavit shall be filed with
other records under the jurisdiction of the
Clerk.
(5) Failure to follow all of the forgoing
steps in creating or amending an ordinance
shall not render the ordinance invalid
providing a good faith effort was made to
comply with this ordinance when creating or
changing an ordinance.
25.02 CONSTRUCTION OF
ORDINANCES. In the construction of the
ordinances of the Village, the following
rules shall be observed unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the ordinance.
(1) General Rule. All words and
phrases shall be construed and understood
according to common and approved usage of
the language; but technical words and
phrases and such others as may have
acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning
in the law shall be construed and understood
according to such peculiar and appropriate
meaning.
(2) Person. Unless plainly inapplicable,
the word "person" extends and applies to
natural persons, firms, corporations,
associations, or partnerships or other bodies
politic and corporate and to all entities
capable of being sued.
(3) Tense. The use of any verb in the
present tense shall include the future, when
applicable.
(4) Shall Have Been. The words "shall
have been" include past and future cases.
(5) Acts by Agents. When an
ordinance requires an act to be done which
may be done by an agent as by the principal,
such requirement shall be construed to
Village of Suamico
25-General Provisions Page 3 of 7 Adopted 1-21-08
include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
(6) Reasonable Time. In all cases
where any ordinance requires any act to be
done in reasonable time or notice or
reasonable notice to be given, such
reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to
mean time only as may be necessary for the
prompt performance of such duty or
compliance with such notice.
(7) Time, How Computed. When
expressed in days, the time within which an
act is to be done as provided in any
ordinance or in any order issued pursuant to
any ordinance shall be computed by
excluding the first (1st) day and including
the last, provided if the last day is Sunday it
shall be excluded; and when any such time
is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday,
from midnight (12 a.m.) to midnight (12
a.m.), shall be excluded.
(8) Week. The word "week" shall be
construed to mean seven (7) days; but
publication in a newspaper of any notice or
other matter indicated to be for a stated
number of weeks shall be construed to mean
one (1) insertion in each week unless
specifically stated to be for each day of the
week or for more than one (1) day in each
week; and all publications heretofore made
in accordance with the terms of this
subsection are hereby validated.
(9) Statutes. The reference to
Wisconsin Statutes when used herein shall
be to the statutes current and in effect and as
amended after the date of adoption of this
Municipal Code as of the recodification of
2008.
25.03 WHEN RULES OF
CONSTRUCTION SHALL NOT
APPLY. The rules of construction set forth
in this chapter shall not be applied to any
ordinance which contains express provision
excluding such construction or when the
subject matter or context of such ordinance
may be repugnant thereto.
25.04 EFFECT TO REPEAL. When any
ordinance repealing a former ordinance,
clause, or provision shall be itself repealed,
such repeal shall not be construed to revive
such former ordinance, clause, or provision,
unless it shall be expressly so provided.
25.05 CLERK TO FILE DOCUMENTS
INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
Whenever in this code any standard, rule,
regulation, or other written or printed matter
is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed
incorporated in this code as if fully set forth
herein and the Clerk shall file, deposit and
keep in his or her office a copy of the code,
standard, rule, regulation, or other written or
printed matter as adopted. Materials so
filed, deposited, and kept shall be public
records open for examination with proper
care by any person during the Clerk's office
hours, subject to such orders or regulations
which the Clerk may prescribe for their
preservation.
25.06 PENALTY; PENALTY WHERE
NO PENALTY PROVIDED. In any case
where there shall be a violation of any
Village ordinance for which no penalty is
provided, the person violating the same shall
be subject to a forfeiture of not less than ten
dollars ($10) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500) for each offense. In addition,
upon failure to pay said forfeiture and costs,
a person may be confined in the Brown
County Jail for a period not to exceed ninety
(90) days or until said forfeiture and costs
are paid. Except as provided in the
following subsections:
(1) In any case where any ordinance or
section of an ordinance of the Village shall
not provide a greater penalty for a second
(2nd) or subsequent conviction for a violation
thereof, any person violating the same who
Village of Suamico
25-General Provisions Page 4 of 7 Adopted 1-21-08
shall previously have been convicted of a
violation thereof shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than ten dollars ($10)
nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000)
for each offense; except where the penalty
provided by any such ordinance or section
for a first (1st) violation thereof shall be
larger than the penalty herein provided, such
larger penalty shall be applicable.
(2) No violation of any ordinance of the
Village shall be or shall be construed to be a
misdemeanor, nor shall imprisonment be
imposed as a punishment for violation of
any ordinance of the Village except for
failure of the defendant to pay the forfeiture
imposed by the court, any other provision of
the general ordinances of the Village to be
contrary notwithstanding.
25.07 OFFENSES COMMITTED AND
PENALTIES INCURRED PREVIOUS
TO REPEAL. No offense committed and
no penalty of forfeiture incurred previous to
the time when any of the ordinances
aforesaid shall be affected by such repeal;
provided when any punishment, forfeiture,
or penalty shall have been mitigated by the
provisions of these general ordinances, such
provision shall apply to and control any
judgment to be pronounced after these
general ordinances shall take effect for any
offense committed before that time.
25.08 PROSECUTIONS PENDING NOT
AFFECTED. No prosecution for any
offense, nor the levy of any penalty or
forfeiture, pending at the time when any of
the ordinances aforesaid shall be repealed
shall be affected by repeal; but the right of
action shall continue, and the offender shall
be subject to the penalty as provided in such
ordinances, and such prosecution shall
proceed in all respects as if such ordinances
had not been repealed; provided all such
proceedings had after the time these general
ordinances shall take effect shall be
conducted according to the provisions of
these general ordinances and shall be in all
respects subject to such provisions.
25.09 TITLE; EFFECTIVE DATE;
CITATION. These ordinances shall be
known as the "Code of Ordinances of the
Village" and shall take effect from and after
passage and publication as provided in Wis.
Stats. §66.0103 and §61.50. All references
thereto shall be cited by section number.
Violations of non-traffic ordinances of the
Village shall be enforced by the issuance of
a municipal citation.
25.10 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
The municipal citation shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name and address of the alleged
violator.
(2) Factual allegations describing the
alleged violations.
(3) The time and place of the offense.
(4) The section of the code violated.
(5) A designation of the offense in such
manner as can readily be understood by a
person making a reasonable effort to do so.
(6) The date/time at which the alleged
violator may appear in court.
(7) A statement which in essence
informs the alleged violator:
(a) That a cash deposit, certified check,
or money order based on a bond schedule
may be made which shall be delivered or
mailed to the Clerk of Municipal Court,
prior to the time of the scheduled court
appearance along with the citation.
(b) That if a deposit is made, no
appearance in court is necessary.
(c) That if a cash deposit is made and
the alleged violator does not appear in court,
he or she will be deemed to have entered a
plea of guilty.
(d) That if no cash deposit is made and
the alleged violator does not appear in court
at the time specified, an action may be
Village of Suamico
25-General Provisions Page 5 of 7 Adopted 1-21-08
commenced which may result in a
SUSPENSION of the violator's driver's
license for up to two (2) years and/or a
warrant may be issued by the court for his or
her arrest.
(e) That the alleged violator may
contact the Court Clerk by mail if he or she
wishes to enter a plea of NOT GUILTY.
The letter must be received by the Court
Clerk’s office before the court date shown
on the citation. The alleged violator will be
notified by mail of the date and time of a
pre-trial conference. If the alleged violator
mails in a NOT GUILTY plea, a copy of the
citation must be included.
(f) A direction that if the alleged
violator elects to make a cash deposit,
hereby admits the violation, hereby waives
any further notice of trial required by law,
hereby waives their appearance at any trial
by court or jury, and authorizes the Sheriff,
Deputy Sheriff, and/or Police Department to
enter their appearance, and enter a plea of
GUILTY and forfeit the enclosed amount to
the court, the waiver and stipulation
statement which accompanies the citation
shall be signed to indicate that the waiver
and stipulation statement has been read.
Such statement shall be sent or brought with
the cash deposit.
(g) Such other information as the
Village deems necessary in accordance with
Wis. Stats. §66.0113.
25.11 SCHEDULE OF DEPOSITS. The
schedule of deposits for use with citations
issued under this section shall be as adopted
by the Board from time to time and such
schedule shall be on file in the office of the
Clerk.
25.12 FORM OF DEPOSITS. Deposits
shall be in cash, checks, money order, or
certified check to the Village or to the Clerk
of Courts who shall provide a receipt
therefore.
25.13 ISSUANCE OF CITATION.
(1) The Police Department may issue
citations authorized under this section. The
Board can designate specific persons to
issue citations of a specific ordinance in the
Enforcement section of the specific
ordinance.
(2) The following Village officials may
issue citations with respect to those specified
sections of this code which are directly
related to their official responsibility:
(a) Building, Electrical, and Plumbing
Inspectors.
(b) Parks Director.
(c) Fire Chief.
(d) Fire Inspector.
(e) Zoning Administrator.
(f) Humane Officer.
(g) Director of Public Works.
(h) Engineer.
(i) Administrator.
(j) Other officials as specifically
designated within the code.
25.14 PROCEDURE. Wis. Stats.
§66.0114 relating to violator's options and
procedure on default is adopted and
incorporated herein by reference.
25.15 NON-EXCLUSIVITY.
(1) Other Ordinance. This section
does not preclude the Board from adopting
any other ordinance or providing for the
enforcement of any law or ordinance
relating to the same or other matter.
(2) Other Remedies. The issuance of a
citation hereunder shall not preclude the
Village or any authorized officer from
proceeding under any other ordinance or law
or by any other enforcement method to
enforce any ordinance, regulation, or order.
25.16 KEEPING CODE CURRENT;
REVISER’S AMENDMENTS.
Village of Suamico
25-General Provisions Page 6 of 7 Adopted 1-21-08
(1) The Clerk shall certify one (1) copy
of the Code as the Original General Code of
the Village and shall file the same as part of
the Village Ordinance Book. Such copy
shall be retained in its original form. In
addition, the Clerk shall retain in his or her
office at least one (1) copy of the general
code in current form in which shall be
inserted all supplemental sheets as provided
in Sub. (2).
(2) Whenever any ordinance amending,
repealing, revising, or creating any section
of this code is adopted by the Board, the
Clerk, after recording such ordinance in the
ordinance book, shall incorporate them into
the general code. The Clerk shall make no
substantive changes to such ordinances and
resolutions but may renumber, rearrange,
and edit them without first submitting them
to the Board, and such renumbering,
rearranging, and editing shall not affect the
validity of such ordinances and resolutions
or the provisions of this general code
affected thereby.
25.17 INTERPRETATION. The wording
of this ordinance has been chosen because of
brevity and to promote clarity. As to all
references in this chapter, and as may be
applicable:
(a) The masculine gender shall be
deemed to include the feminine gender, and
vice versa;
(b) The singular shall be deemed to
include the plural, and vice versa;
(c) The term Village, used either as a
noun or as an adjective, means the Village;
(d) Designation by title of any elected or
appointed official, or employee, means such
official or employee of the Village;
(e) The terms State and Wisconsin mean
the State of Wisconsin; and
(f) The term County means Brown
County, Wisconsin.
25.18 CONFLICT. If the provisions of
different chapters of these ordinances
conflict with or contravene each other, the
provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to
all matters and questions growing out of the
subject matter of each chapter. If conflicting
provisions be found in different sections of
the same chapter, the provisions of the
section which is last in numerical order shall
prevail unless such construction be
inconsistent with the meaning of such
chapter.
25.19 CONSTITUTIONALITY. If any
section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of these ordinances is declared
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason,
then, to the extent of meaningful
severability, the remainder of such
ordinances shall not be affected.
Village of Suamico
25-General Provisions Page 7 of 7 Adopted 1-21-08
Chapter 25
Ordinance 2009-05 Amending 25.13 Issuance of Citations
Adopted 3-16-09
Residential, Commercial and Industrial Impact Fees - April 1, 2019 through March 31, 2020
April 2019 ENR 2.30% Increased by Construction Cost Index per Ordinance
Meter size
Volume
factor
Velp
Interceptor
Belmont
Interceptor
Water - All
areas
TOTAL
VELP
TOTAL
BELMONT
3/4" 1 $4,432.71 $1,323.80 $2,726.28 $7,158.99 $4,050.08
1" 1.67 $7,402.64 $2,210.75 $4,552.88 $11,955.52 $6,763.63
1 1/2" 3.33 $14,760.93 $4,408.26 $9,078.51 $23,839.44 $13,486.77
2" 5.33 $23,626.32 $7,055.86 $14,531.03 $38,157.35 $21,586.89
3" 10.67 $47,296.93 $14,124.95 $29,089.32 $76,386.25 $43,214.27
4" 22.41 $99,336.84 $29,666.37 $61,095.76 $160,432.60 $90,762.13
6" 61.88 $274,295.58 $81,916.73 $168,701.72 $442,997.30 $250,618.45
Exhibit A
IMPACT FEES FOR ALL NEW WATER/SEWER CUSTOMERS
RESIDENTIAL HOME = METER SIZE 3/4"
COMMERCIAL = FEE FOR CORRESPONDING METER SIZE INSTALLED
C:\Users\Melissa\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\Content.Outlook\X9FT45ET\Impact
Fees 2019
Village of Suamico
Appendix B
Appendix B Page 1 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
SPEED LIMITS
ANCESTOR WAY: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ANSTON ROAD: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
ATTERBERRY LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
AUSTRIAN LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
AUTUMN RIDGE TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
AUTUMN WOOD TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BAY BREEZE COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BAYSIDE ROAD: Forty-five miles per
hour (45 mph) in its entirety.
BIG TIMBER CIRCLE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BIRCH ROAD: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BLACKBERRY LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BLACK POWDER ROAD: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BRACTON ROAD: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BRANDY WINE DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BREEZEWOOD LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BRIDAL PATH: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BRIDGE ROAD: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
BROOK HILLS COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BROOK HILLS DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BROOK HILLS DRIVE, NORTH:
Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph) in its
entirety.
BROOK HILLS PLACE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
BROWN ROAD:
A. Forty-five miles per hour (45 mph) from
its intersection with Veterans Avenue
easterly to its intersection with Bayside
Road.
B. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph) from
its intersection with Veterans Avenue
westerly to a point a quarter (1/4) of a mile
west of its intersection with Cross Road.
C. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph) from
its intersection with Bayside Road easterly
eight-tenths (.8) of a mile to the end of
Brown Road.
BURTON’S RIVERSIDE TRAIL:
Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph) in its
entirety.
CARDINAL LANE: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 2 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
CARLEEN COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CAROLINA CHERRY DRIVE: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CARRIAGE DRIVE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CATHEDRAL FOREST DRIVE:
Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph) in its
entirety.
CEDAR COURT: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CEDAR LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CEDAR SPRINGS COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CELESTIAL LANE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CHANNEL ROAD: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CHEERY LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CHURCH HILL DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CINNAMON RIDGE TRAIL: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CLEARWATER DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
COACH LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CONIFER COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CORMORANT LANE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
COTTAGE ROW: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
COTTON DRIVE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
COUNTRY MEADOW COURT:
Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph) in its
entirety.
CRESCENT SQUARE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
CROWN POINTE BOULEVARD:
Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph) in its
entirety.
CRYSTAL CREEK COURT: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
DEERFIELD AVENUE, EAST: Fortyfive
miles per hour (45 mph) in its entirety.
DEERFIELD AVENUE, WEST:
A. Forty-five miles per hour (45 mph) from
its intersection with Lineville Road
northerly to its intersection with Harbor
Lights Road.
B. Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph)
from its intersection with Riverside Drive
northerly to its intersection with Sunset
Beach Road.
C. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph) from
its intersection with Harbor Lights Road
northerly to its intersection with Riverside
Drive.
DEER RUN COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
DEER RUN ROAD: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 3 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
DESCENDANT LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ELDERBERRY COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ELMTREE ROAD: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
ELMWOOD ROAD:
A. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph)
from its intersection with CTH IR/
Reforestation Road easterly to a point twotenths
(.2) of a mile east of St. Francis Park
Drive.
B. Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph)
from its intersection with CTH IR/
Reforestation Road westerly fifteen
hundredths (.15) of a mile to the end of
Elmwood Road.
ELVIRA WAY: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
FAIRVIEW ROAD: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
FALCON RIDGE TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
FAMILY DRIVE: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
FENMORE LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
FESCUE WAY: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
FIELD COURT: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
FLINTLOCK ROAD: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
FLOWERING PEACH DRIVE: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
FOREST LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
FOREST EDGE DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
FOREST MEADOWS COURT: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
FOREST RIDGE DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GANDER COURT: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GARDEN LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GINGERWOOD WAY: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GLIDING HAWK WAY: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GLORYSU COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GOLDEN BELL DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GOLDEN EYE LANE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GOLDEN HOURS COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GRASSY PLAINS DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GRAY HAWK TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
GREY WOLF COURT: Twenty-five
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 4 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HALLERS CREEK LANE: Thirty-five
miles per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
HALLERS CREEK ROAD: Thirty-five
miles per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
HARBOR COVE LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HARBOR LIGHTS LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HARBOR LIGHTS ROAD:
A. Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph)
from its intersection with CTH HS/Velp
Avenue easterly to its intersection with
Canadian National Railroad tracks.
B. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph) from
its intersection with the Canadian National
Railroad tracks easterly to its intersection
with Harbor Lights Lane.
HARBOR WINDS DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HAWK RIDGE TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HAWKS LANDING WAY: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HAWKS NEST TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HIDDEN FOREST COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HIDDEN LAKE LANE: Thirty-five miles
per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
HIDDEN POND ROAD: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HIGH COUNTRY COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HILLTOP DRIVE: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
HOLLOW VALLEY TRAIL: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HOOK ROAD: Thirty-five miles per hour
(35 mph) in its entirety.
HONEY CLOVER COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HUNTINGTON WAY: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
HUNTINGTON WAY, NORTH:
Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph) in its
entirety.
HUNTINGTON WAY, SOUTH: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
IDLEWILD ROAD: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
INLET DRIVE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
IVES LANE: Twenty-five miles per hour
(25 mph) in its entirety.
J. EDWARD COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
JESSE LANE: Twenty-five miles per hour
(25 mph) in its entirety.
KATHLEEN COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
KENLAR CIRCLE: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
KEN RIDGE LANE: Twenty-five miles
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 5 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
KINGFISHER LANE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
KNIGHTRIDERS LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
LARK ROAD: Thirty-five miles per hour
(35 mph) in its entirety.
LIBBY LANE: Twenty-five miles per hour
(25 mph) in its entirety.
LILLIAN LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
LINEVILLE ROAD:
A. Forty miles per hour (40 mph) from its
intersection at Westline Road easterly to its
intersection with CTH M/Northwood Road.
B. Forty miles per hour (40 mph) from its
intersection with CTH J/Lakeview Drive
easterly to its intersection with Bayshore
Drive.
LONG BRANCH TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
LONGTAIL BEACH LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
LONGTAIL BEACH ROAD: Thirty-five
miles per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
LONGVIEW LANE: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
LOST TRAIL: Forty-five miles per hour
(45 mph) in its entirety.
LOST CREEK LANE: Thirty-five miles
per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
LOXLEY COURT: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
LUXURY DRIVE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MAGY LANE: Twenty-five miles per hour
(25 mph) in its entirety.
MALLARD COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MAPLE GROVE ROAD: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MAPLECREST DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MARDON COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MARDON LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MEADOW WAY: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MEADOW FLOWER LANE: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MEADOW HEIGHTS COURT: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MEADOW HEIGHTS TRAIL: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MERGANSER LANE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MICHELLE DRIVE: Thirty-five miles
per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
MINNIE LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MONTE CARLO COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 6 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
MOONLIGHT DRIVE: Thirty-five miles
per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
MOOSE CREEK TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MOUNT OLIVE DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MUSKET DRIVE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
MYSTIC HILLS TERRACE: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
NANDINA WAY: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
NORFIELD ROAD:
A. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph)
from a point five hundredths (.05) of a mile
west of its intersection with Wildwood
Drive easterly to the intersection of CTH J/
Lakeview Drive.
B. Forty-five miles per hour (45 mph) from
the intersection of CTH J/Lakeview Drive
easterly to Bayside Road.
NORTH LAKE RIDGE LANE: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
NORTHWOOD ROAD:
A. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph)
from its intersection with CTH M/Fairview
Road northerly to its intersection with
Whippoorwill Road.
B. Forty-five miles per hour (45 mph) from
its intersection with Whippoorwill Road
northerly to its intersection with CTH M/
Flintville Road.
NORTH GATE ROAD: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
OAK ROAD: Thirty-five miles per hour
(35 mph) in its entirety.
OAKDALE DRIVE: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
OAK FOREST DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
OAK RIDGE LANE: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
OVERLOOK COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
PARKFIELD COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
PARKLAND WAY: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
PARTRIDGE LANE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
PINE LANE: Forty-five miles per hour (45
mph) in its entirety.
PINECREST ROAD: Forty-five miles per
hour (45 mph) in its entirety.
PINE FOREST DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
PINEWOOD TRAIL: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
PINK DOGWOOD WAY: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
PIRATES COVE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
PITTCO ROAD: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
PLEASANT LANE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 7 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
POPPLEWOOD COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
POWDERHORN LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
PRIDE TERRACE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
PRISTINE LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
QUAIL LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
QUIETWOODS TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
RAINBOW DRIVE: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
RANCHU ROAD: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
RED PEPPER TRAIL: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
RED PINE COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
RENARD COURT: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
RESORT ROAD: Forty-five miles per
hour (45 mph) in its entirety.
RIDGE WOOD COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
RIVER HILL COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
RIVER MEADOW DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
RIVERSIDE DRIVE:
A. Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph)
from its intersection with CTH J/N.
Lakeview Drive easterly to a point eighttenths
(.8) of a mile east of the intersection
of Harbor Winds Drive.
B. Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph)
from its intersection with CTH J/Lakeview
Drive westerly to its intersection with CTH
HS/Velp Avenue.
C. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph) from
its intersection with CTH HS/Velp Avenue
westerly and northerly to its intersection
with CTH B/School Lane.
ROBIN LANE: Thirty-five miles per hour
(35 mph) in its entirety.
ROCK BOTTOM COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ROCKWELL ROAD: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ROCKY WAY: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ROSE HAVEN COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ROSE HAVEN TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ROSE MEADOW DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ROUNDABOUT COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ROYAL OAKS COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
RUBY RIDGE COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
RUSTIC HAVEN LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 8 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
SAGEWOOD WAY: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ST. FRANCIS PARK CIRCLE: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
ST. FRANCIS PARK DRIVE: Thirty-five
miles per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
ST. PAT'S DRIVE: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
ST. PAT'S ROAD: Forty-five miles per
hour (45 mph) in its entirety.
SALEM LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SAND DOLLAR COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SANDBURR TRAIL: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SANDY LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SANDY ACRE COURT: Thirty-five
miles per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
SARAH COURT: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SCOTCH PINE TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SEAFARER WAY: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SHADY LANE:
A. Forty-five miles per hour (45 mph) from
its intersection with Pine Lane westerly to a
point twenty-five hundredths (.25) of a mile
west of its intersection with Oakdale Drive.
B. Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph)
from its intersection with Pine Lane easterly
and southerly three-tenths (.3) of a mile to
the end of Shady Lane.
SHILOH ROAD: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SHORT STREET: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SIDE STREET: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SIESTA LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SKYLINE PINES DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SNOWSHOE TRAIL: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SPUR LANE: Twenty-five miles per hour
(25 mph) in its entirety.
STONEGATE DRIVE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
STREAM ROAD:
A. Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph)
from its intersection with CTH B/School
Lane northerly fifteen hundredths (.15) of a
mile to the end of Stream Road.
B. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph) from
its intersection with CTH B/School Lane
southerly five-tenths (.5) of a mile to the end
of Stream Road.
SUAMICO LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SUMMERSET CIRCLE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SUNDEW COURT: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 9 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
SUNNY LANE:
A. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph)
from its intersection with CTH HS/Velp
Avenue easterly to its intersection with
Rainbow Drive.
B. Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph)
from its intersection with Cardinal Lane
easterly two-tenths (.2) of a mile to the end
of Sunny Lane.
SUNRISE ROAD: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
SUNSET BEACH LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SUNSET BEACH ROAD:
A. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph)
from its intersection with CTH J/N.
Lakeview Drive easterly to a point threetenths
(.3) of a mile west of its intersection
with Sunset Beach Lane.
B. Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph)
from its intersection with Sunset Beach Lane
westerly to a point three-tenths (.3) of a mile
west of this intersection.
SUSIE COURT: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
SUSIE DRIVE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
TANAGER LANE, SOUTH: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
TANAGER LANE, WEST: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
TANGLEWOOD LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
THORN HILL DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
TIMBER TRAIL, NORTH: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
TIMBER TRAIL, SOUTH: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
TIMBERWOOD DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
TINA LANE: Twenty-five miles per hour
(25 mph) in its entirety.
TRANSFER TRAIL: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
TRENTON LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
TUMBLEWEED TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
VAN HOOF ROAD: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
VELP AVENUE:
A. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph)
from its intersection with School Lane
northerly to its intersection with Coach
Lane.
B. Forty-five miles per hour (45 mph) from
its intersection with Coach Lane northerly to
its intersection with Brown Road.
VETERANS AVENUE: Forty-five miles
per hour (45 mph) in its entirety.
VINCE LANE: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
VULCAN COURT: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WALLENFANG LANE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WANDERING COURT: Thirty-five miles
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 10 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
WATERWAY COURT: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WEEDY STREET: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WELLINGTON DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WESTLINE ROAD:
A. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph)
from its intersection with Lineville Road
northerly to its intersection with White Pine
Drive.
B. Forty-five miles per hour (45 mph) from
its intersection with White Pine Drive
northerly to its intersection with Robin
Lane.
WESTMORE LANE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WESTON WAY: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WESTPOINT ROAD: Forty-five miles
per hour (45 mph) in its entirety.
WESTVIEW ROAD: Thirty-five miles
per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
WHEATFIELD DRIVE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WHIPOORWILL ROAD: Forty-five
miles per hour (45 mph) in its entirety.
WHITE PINE ROAD: Thirty-five miles
per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
WILD BRIM COURT: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WILDERNESS TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WILDING WAY: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WILDWOOD DRIVE: Thirty-five miles
per hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
WILLOW WAY: Thirty-five miles per
hour (35 mph) in its entirety.
WINDHAVEN TRAIL: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WOOD LANE:
A. Forty-five miles per hour (45 mph) from
its intersection with CTH HS/Velp Avenue
westerly to its intersection with St. Pat’s
Drive.
B. Thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph) from
its intersection with St. Pat’s Drive westerly
to its intersection with Northwood Road.
WOODINGTON WAY: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WINDING RIDGE WAY: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WOODLAND RESERVE LANE:
Twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph) in its
entirety.
WOODSDALE AVENUE: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WYNDING RIDGE WAY: Twenty-five
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WYNDRUSH DRIVE: Twenty-five miles
per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
WYNDRUSH DRIVE, SOUTH: Twentyfive
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
YELLOW JASMINE WAY: Twenty-five
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 11 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
miles per hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
YONDER COURT: Twenty-five miles per
hour (25 mph) in its entirety.
Village of Suamico
Appendix B Page 12 of 12 Adopted 1-21-08
Ordinance 2009-24 Amending Appendix B of the Municipal Code Regarding Speed Limits on
Salem Lane and Ken Ridge Lane
Adopted 10-19-09
Ordinance 2012-12 Amending Appendix B of the Municipal Code Regarding Speed Limits on
Anston Road and St Pat’s Drive
Adopted 10-1-12
Ordinance 2013-05 Amending Appendix B of the Municipal Code Regarding Speed Limits on
Hidden Pond Road
Adopted 6-3-13
Resolution 14005 Setting the Speed Limit on a Certain Public Street in the Village of Suamico
Adopted 2-17-14
1
SUAMICO ORDINANCE BOND SCHEDULE 2020
Updated 8/24/20
Forfeiture State
Chapter 2 General Government Bond Range Statue
S2.09 Ethics Code Violations $691.00 $100-$1,000 §19.59
Chapter 3 Finance & Taxation
S3.01 Room Tax Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500 §66.0615
S3.02 Special Assessment Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500 §66.0701
Chapter 4 Public Safety
S4.08 Fire Prevention Code Violation $212.20 $25-$2,500 §101.14
S4.10 Controlled Receptacles $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.11 Ashes $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.12 Smoking $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.13 Negligent Handling of Burning Materials $187.00 $0-$10,000 §941.10
S4.14 Interfering with Fire Fighting $149.20 $0-$10,000 §941.12
S4.15 Intentional False Alarms $439.00 $0-$10,000 §941.13
S4.16 Lock Boxes $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.17 Portable Fire Extinguishers $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.18(1) Fireworks General Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500 §167.10
S4.18(2) Fireworks Users Permit Violations $187.00 $0-$1,000 §167.10
S4.18(3) Fireworks Sellers Permit Violations $691.00 $0-$1,000 §167.10
S4.19 General Open Burning Violations $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(2)(b) Use of Accelerants $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(2)(c) Illegal Container/Burn Barrel $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(2)(e) Illegal Size of Fire Pit $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(2)(d) Burning Illegal Material $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(2)(f) Illegal Size of Pile $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(3) No Burning Permit $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(4)(a) Burning with Winds in Excess 8mph $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(4)(b) Burn Time Violations $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(4)(c) Nuisance Smoke or Odors $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(5) Unauthorized Location of Fire $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(6) Unattended Fire $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(7) Illegal Use of Portable Cooking Devices $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.19(10) Burn Ban Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S4.19(11) Careless Smoking $691.00 $25-$2,500
S4.19(12) Failure to Post No Smoking Signs $691.00 $25-$2,500
S4.20 Occupancy Before Fire Inspection/Approval $691.00 $25-$2,500
S4.20(1)(a)-(b)Failure to Post Capacity/Sign Violations $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.21 Failure to Obtain Installation Permit $691.00 $25-$2,500
S4.25 Nuisance Smoke/Fires $212.20 $25-$2,500
S4.93 Excessive False Alarms $187.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 5 Licenses & Permits
S5.02 General Provisions of Licenses Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S5.03 Direct Sellers/Solicitors Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S5.04 Alcohol Beverages Licenses Violations (Bond/Forfeiture per State Bond
Schedule/Attached Village Schedule)
2
S5.05 Block Party Permit Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S5.06 Parade Permit Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S5.07 Weights & Measures Violations $691.00 $0-$10,000 §98.26
S5.08 Special Events Permits Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S5.09 Dog License Permit Violations $124.00 $0-$500 §174.05
S5.09(1) Animal Fanciers License Violations $124.00 $25-$100
S5.10 Sexually Orientated Business Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S5.11 Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Article, Jewelry $691.00 $25-$2,500
S5.12 Cigarette & Tobacco License Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S5.13 Escort Service License Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S5.14 General Massage Establishment Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 6 Public Works
S6.01 Newspaper Box/Mailbox Violations $124.00 $25-$2,500
S6.02 Driveway Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S6.03 Road Construction Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S6.04 Storm Drainage & Grading Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S6.07(1) Noxious Weeds Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500 §66.0407
S6.07(2) Lawn Maintenance Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S6.08 Sidewalk Snow & Ice Removal Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S6.09 Illegal Deposit Snow/Other Subst. on Road $691.00 $25-$2,500
S6.20 Solid Waste Disposal Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 7 Natural Resources
Park and Recreational Facilities:
S7.01(2) General Park Violations $124.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(3) After Hours in Closed Park $124.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(4) Unlawful Fires in a Park $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(5) Littering/Unlawful Dumping $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(6) Firearms/Bow/Trapping Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(7) Pets in Park $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(8) Horses in Park $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(9) Vehicle on Grass/Exceed 15mph $124.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(10) Snowmobile in Park $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(11) ATV/Off Road Vehicles in Park $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(12) Illegal Hunting or Fishing $691.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(13) Molesting Animals $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(14) Food/Beverage Violations $124.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(15) Group Activity Violations $124.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(16) Other Activity Violations $124.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(17) Illegal Sales $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(18) Illegal Signs $124.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(19) Illegal Camping $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(20) Illegal Use of Metal Detectors $124.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(21) Excessive Noise $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(23) Trespassing $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.01(24) Trespassing/Parental Violation $187.00 $25-$2,500
Suamico Harbor Regulations:
S7.02 Suamico Harbor Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
3
S7.02(3) State Boating & Safety Law Violations (Bond/Forfeiture per State Bond Schedule)
S7.03 40 Foot Zone Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S7.04(1) Dragging Anchors $124.00 $25-$2,500
S7.04(2) Anchoring in Traffic Lanes $691.00 $25-$2,500
S7.05 Mooring Permit Violations $124.00 $50-$100
S7.06 Pier head Line Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S7.07 Damage to Installations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S7.08 Duty to Render Aid $691.00 $25-$2,500
S7.09 Littering on Water $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.10 No Muffler/Defective Muffler $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.11 Power Launching Violations $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.12 Speed/No Wake Violations $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.14 Water Quality Violations $187.00 $25-$2,500
S7.16 Urban Forest Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 8 Water Utility
S8.01-S8.06 General Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 9 Sewer Utility
S9.01-S9.08 General Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 11 Pubic Nuisances/Peace & Order
Subsection 1 Animal Control
S11.02 Mistreating Animals $187.00 $0-$10,000
S11.03 Animals Running at Large $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.04 Dangerous or Wild Animals $691.00 $25-$2,500 §173.23
S11.05 Noisy Animals $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.06 Unlicensed Dogs $124.00 $0-$500 §174.05
S11.07 Nuisance Animals $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.08 Animals Causing Injury/Damage $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.09 Beekeeping $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.10 Keeping Nuisance Animals $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.11 Prohibited Animals $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.13 Dognapping/Catnapping $691.00 $0-$10,000
S11.14 Decompression Prohibited $691.00 $0-$10,000
S11.15 Leading Animal From a Vehicle $691.00 $0-$10,000
S11.16 Cruel Transportation of Animals $691.00 $0-$10,000
S11.17 Use of Poisonous or Controlled Substances $691.00 $0-$10,000
S11.18 Shooting at Caged or Staked Animals $691.00 $0-$10,000
S11.19 Illegal Selling of Animals $691.00 $0-$10,000
S11.19.5 Keeping Of Chickens $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.20 Selling Artificially-colored animals $691.00 $0-$10,000
S11.21 Fail to Provide Proper Food/Drink $187.00 $0-$500 §951.13
S11.22 Failure to Provide Proper Shelter $187.00 $0-$500 §951.14
S11.23 Keeping of Vicious Dog $691.00 $50-$2,500 §174.02
Subsection 2 General Nuisances
S11.30 General Nuisance Violations $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.32(1) Adulterated Food $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.32(2) Carcasses Unburied $212.20 $25-$2,500
4
S11.32(3) Insects/Vermin Breeding Places $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.32(4) Water, Stagnant $212.20 $25-$2,500
S11.32(5) Privy Vaults/Garbage Can Violations $136.60 $25-$2,500
S11.32(7) Pollution, Water $187.00 $25-$2,500
S11.32(8) Odors, Noxious $136.60 $25-$2,500
S11.32(9) Pollution, Street $187.00 $25-$2,500
S11.32(10) Pollution, Air $212.20 $25-$2,500
S11.32(11) Abandoned Wells $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.32(12) Obstruction of Watercourse $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.32(13) Deposit of Garbage/Refuse $136.60 $25-$2,500
S11.32(14) Smoke, Nuisance $212.20 $25-$2,500
S11.32(15) Air Contaminants $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.33(1) Disorderly Houses $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.33(2) Illegal Gambling Devices $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.33(3) Unlicensed Sale of Liquor/Beer $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.33(4) Continuous Violation of Ordinances $136.60 $25-$2,500
S11.33(5) Illegal Drinking $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(1) Dangerous Signs/Billboards, etc… $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(2) Illegal Buildings $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(3) Unauthorized Traffic Signs $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(4) Obstructing Intersections $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(5) Low-hanging Tree Limbs $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(6) Dangerous Trees $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(8) Dilapidated Buildings $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(9) Low-hanging Wires or Cables $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(10) Noisy Animals or Fowl $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(11) Obstructions of Streets; Excavations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(12) Unlawful Assemblies $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(13) Illegal Noise or Vibrations $212.20 $25-$2,500
S11.34(14) Open & Unguarded Pits, Wells, Etc… $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(15) Abandoned Refrigerators or Ice Boxes $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(16) Storage of Flammable Liquids, Repeated $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(17) Fire Hazard $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(18) Nuisances; State Law $124.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(19) Sound Amplifiers $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(20) Lot Line Noise Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.34(21) Vibrations $212.20 $25-$2,500
S11.35 Storage of Junk $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.35.5 Chronic Nuisance Property $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.38 Littering $187.00 $25-$2,500
Subsection 3 Peace & Order
S11.39 Illegal Discharge of Firearms $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.39(2) Prohibited Use of Firearms (See Map) $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.39(3) Uncased Firearms $376.00 $25-$2,500
S11.39(9) Possession of Dangerous or Deadly Weapon $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.40 Endangering Safety/Dangerous Weapon $691.00 $0-$10,000 §941.20
S11.41 Carrying Concealed Weapon $691.00 $0-$10,000 §941.23
S11.42 Carrying Firearm in Public Building $691.00 $0-$10,000 §941.235
S11.43 Carrying Handgun/Alcohol Establishment $691.00 $0-$10,000 §941.237
5
S11.44 Carrying A Concealed Knife $691.00 $0-$10,000 §941.231
S11.45 Possession of Dangerous Weapon by Child Must Appear $0-$10,000 §948.60
S11.46 Facsimile Firearms $691.00 $0-$500 §941.2965
S11.47 Discharge Gun at Phone/Power Lines $187.00 $0-$100 §167.31
S11.48 Leaving Loaded Firearm near Children $691.00 $0-$10,000 §948.55
S11.49 School; Dangerous Weapon (non-firearm) $691.00 $0-$10,000 §948.61
S11.50 Shooting or Throwing of Missiles, etc… $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.51 Possession of OC by a Felon $691.00 $0-$10,000 §941.26
S11.52 Possession of Nitrous Oxide $376.00 $0-$10,000 §941.315
S11.53 Laser Pointer Violations $262.60 $0-$1,000 §941.299
S11.54 Obstructing Emergency Personnel $262.60 $0-$10,000 §941.37
S11.55 Resisting/Obstructing an Officer $691.00 $0-$10,000 §941.41
S11.56 Disorderly Conduct $691.00 $0-$1,000 §947.01
S11.57 Disrupting Funeral/Memorial Service $691.00 $0-$10,000 §947.011
S11.58 Damaging or Destroying US Flag $691.00 $0-$10,000 §947.07
S11.59 Hazing $691.00 $0-$10,000 §948.51
S11.60 False Complaints of Police Misconduct $691.00 $0-$10,000 §946.66
S11.61 Intimidation of Witnesses $691.00 $0-$10,000 §940.42
S11.62 Intimidation of Victims $691.00 $0-$10,000 §940.44
S11.63 Fail to Aid Victim or Report Crime $691.00 $0-$500 §940.34
S11.64 Battery $691.00 $0-$10,000 §940.19
S11.65 Battery; Attempted $691.00 $0-$10,000 §939.32
S11.66 Refusing to Aid Officer $691.00 $0-$500 §946.40
S11.67 Escape $691.00 $0-$10,000 §946.42
S11.68 Impersonating Peace Officer $691.00 $0-$10,000 §946.70
S11.69 Loud & Unnecessary Noise $376.00 $25-$2,500
S11.70 Loitering/Prowling $187.00 $25-$2,500
S11.71 Loitering in School/Playground $187.00 $25-$2,500
S11.72 Consumption/Possession Alcohol Public $187.00 $25-$2,500
S11.73 Illegal Solicitation of Drinks $187.00 $0-$1,000 §944.36
S11.74 Illegal Drinking in Common Carriers $187.00 $0-$500 §947.04
S11.75 Abandoned Refrigerators, etc… $124.00 $0-$50 §167.25
S11.76 Drug Paraphernalia; Possession
§961.573(1) 17 & Older Must Appear $0-$500 §961.573(1)
§961.573(2) 14-16 yrs old Must Appear $0-$500 §961.573(2)
S11.77 Marijuana; Possession 25g or less Must Appear $0-$1,000 §961.01(14)
S11.78 Tobacco & Vape Products; Possession
17 yrs & Under Must Appear $10-$50 §254.92
S11.78(3)(a)4.(b) On School Grounds Must Appear $25-$100 §254.92
S11.78(3)(a)4.(b) 18 & Over on school grounds $187.00 $25-$100 §254.92
S11.79 Tobacco/Vape; Illegal Sales, Vending, etc… $212.20 $0-$500
S11.80 Truancy Must Appear $0-$100 §118.16
S11.80(3) Truancy; Contributing to $212.20 $25-$2,500 §948.45
S11.81 Juvenile Nighttime Curfew Must Appear $0-$500
S11.82 Juvenile Daytime Curfew Must Appear $0-$500
S11.83 Contributing to Delinquency of a Child $691.00 $0-$10,000 §948.40
S11.84 Neglecting a Child $691.00 $0-$10,000 §948.21
S11.85 Harboring Minors w/o Parent Consent $212.20 $25-$2,500
S11.86 Tattooing of Children $313.00 $0-$200 §948.70
S11.87 Issuance of Worthless Check $691.00 $0-$10,000 §943.24
6
S11.88 Petty Theft See Scale $0-$10,000 §943.20
Value of Property $.01-$100.00 $187.00
$100.01-$250.00 $376.00
$250.01-$500.00 $691.00
$500.01-$1,000.00 $1,321.00
$1,000.01-$2,000.00 $2,591.00
$2,000.01-$2,499.99 $3,226.00
S11.89 Attempted Petty Theft $376.00 $0-$5,000 §939.32
S11.90 Retail Theft See Scale $0-$10,000 §943.50
Value of Property $.01-$100.00 $187.00
$100.01-$250.00 $376.00
$250.01-$500.00 $691.00
Over $500.00 is a Felony
S11.91 Theft of Cellular Phone Service $691.00 $0-$500 §943.455
S11.92 Theft of Television Service $691.00 $0-$500 §943.46
S11.93 Theft of Satellite Cable $691.00 $0-$500 §943.47
S11.94 Illegal Tapping; Electric, gas, or water $691.00 $0-$500 §941.36
S11.95 Removal of Shopping Cart $124.00 $0-$500 §943.55
S11.96 Receiving Property from Child $691.00 $0-$10,000 §948.63
S11.97 Receiving Stolen Property <$2,500 $691.00 $0-$10,000 §943.34
S11.98 Fraud; Restaurant, Hotel, Taxi, Gas Station See Scale $0-$10,000 §943.21
Value: $.01-$100.00 $187.00
$100.01-$250.00 $376.00
$250.01-$500.00 $691.00
$500.01-$1,000.00 $1,321.00
$1,000.01-$2,000.00 $2,591.00
$2,000.01-$2,499.99 $3,226.00
S11.99 Fraudulent Return of Merchandise $187.00 $25-$2,500
S11.100 Trespass to Land $376.00 $0-$1,000 §943.13
S11.101 Trespass to Dwellings $691.00 $0-$10,000 §943.14
S11.102 Trespass to a Medical Facility $691.00 $0-$1,000 §943.145
S11.103 Entry Construction Site, Locked Building $691.00 $0-$10,000 §943.15
S11.104 Entry Into Locked Vehicle $691.00 $0-$10,000 §943.11
S11.105 Entry Into Locked Coin Box $691.00 $0-$10,000 §943.125
S11.106 Criminal Damage to Railroads:
Throws/shoots stone/brick/missile $691.00 $0-$1,000 §943.07(3)
Deposits Debris/Waste on/near Track $376.00 $0-$1,000 §943.07(4)
S11.107 Damage to Property $691.00 $0-$10,000 §943.01
On State Owned Land -DNR $376.00 $0-$1,000 §943.01(2m)
S11.108 Graffiti $691.00 $0-$10,000 §943.017
S11.109 Unlawful Use of a Telephone $691.00 $0-$1,000 §947.012
S11.110 Unlawful Use of Computers $691.00 $0-$1,000 §947.0125
S11.111 Sending Obscene Electronic Messages $691.00 $0-$10,000 §944.25
S11.112 Tampering with Public/Records/Notices $691.00 $0-$1,000 §946.72(2)
S11.113 Fornication $691.00 $0-$10,000 §944.15
S11.114 Sexual Gratification $691.00 $0-$10,000 §944.17
S11.115 Lewd & Lascivious Behavior $691.00 $0-$10,000 §944.20
S11.116 Obscene Material or Performance $691.00 $0-$10,000 §944.21
S11.117 Lewd, Indecent, or Obscene Drawings $691.00 $0-$500 §944.23
7
S11.118 Prostitution $691.00 $0-$10,000 §944.30
S11.119 Patronizing Prostitutes $691.00 $0-$10,000 §944.31
S11.120 Pandering $691.00 $0-$10,000 §944.33
S11.121 Harassment:
Physical Contact or Threat of Same $376.00 $0-$1,000 §947.013(1m)
Fear of Death or Great Bodily Harm $691.00 $0-$10,000 §947.013(1r)
S11.122 Vagrancy $187.00 $0-$500 §947.02
S11.123 Exposing Child to Harmful Material $691.00 $0-$10,000 §948.11
S11.124 Sexual Assault (4th Degree) Must Appear $0-$10,000 §940.225
S11.125 Invasion of Privacy $691.00 $0-$10,000 §942.08
S11.126 Child Protection Restrictions $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.127(2) Smoking where Prohibited $187.00 $25-$2,500
S11.127(4)(a) Posting of smoking signage $187.00 $25-$2,500
S11.127(6)(c) Allowing Smoking where Prohibited $187.00 $25-$2,500
S11.128 Synthetic Cannabinoid Prohibited Must Appear $25-$2,500
S11.129 Misuse of 911 $691.00 $25-$2,500
S11.130 Defamation $691.00 $0-$10,000 §942.01
S11.131 Giving False Information for Publication $691.00 $0-$10,000 §942.03
S11.132 Opening letters $691.00 $0-$10,000 §942.05
S11.133 Representations Depicting Nudity $691.00 $0-$10,000 §942.09
S11.134 Use of a Drone $691.00 $0-$10,000 §942.10
Chapter 12 Traffic Control
Subsection 1 Traffic
S12.01 State Traffic Statutes Adopted (Bond/Forfeiture per State Bond Schedule)
S12.03(1) Advertising in Highways Prohibited $187.00 $25-$100 §86.191
S12.03(2) Illegally Placed Signs $187.00 $25-$2,500
S12.04 Disorderly Conduct w/Motor Vehicle $212.20 $25-$2,500
S12.05 Negligent Operation of Motor Vehicle $250.00 $0-$10,000 §941.01
S12.06 Compression Braking Violations $212.20 $25-$2,500
S12.08 Heavy Truck Route Violations $212.20 $25-$2,500 §349.17
Parking Violations:
S12.09(1)(a) Overnight Winter Restrictions $86.20 $25-$2,500
S12.09(1)(b) Vehicle over 10,000 lbs on Street $86.20 $25-$2,500
S12.09(1)(c) Illegal Boats, Motor Homes, Trailers, etc… $86.20 $25-$2,500
S12.09(1)(d) Snow Emergency Parking Violations $199.60 $25-$2,500
S12.10 Neighborhood Electric Vehicle Violations $212.20 $0-$1,000
Subsection 2 Golf Carts
S12.11(4) Golf Cart: Operate w/o Valid DL $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(5) Golf Cart: Operate w/o Insurance $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(6) Golf Cart: Hours of Operation $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(7)(a) Golf Cart: Impeding Traffic $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(7)(b) Golf Cart: Right Side Operation $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(7)(c) Golf Cart: Yielding $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(7)(d) Golf Cart: Operation on Sidewalk Prohib $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(7)(e) Golf Cart: Unattended Golf Cart Prohibited $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(7)(f) Golf Cart: Speed $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(7)(g) Golf Cart: Allow Unauthorized to Operate $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(8) Golf Cart: Equipment Requirements $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(9)(a) Golf Cart: Riders to be Seated $124.00 $25-$1,000
8
S12.11(9)(b) Golf Cart: Seating Capacity $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(9)(c) Golf Cart: Oper in Inclement Weather Proh $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(9)(d) Golf Cart: Towing Prohibited $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(10) Golf Cart: Registration Required $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(11)(a) Golf Cart: Oper on Unapproved Roadways $124.00 $25-$1,000
S12.11(11)(b) Golf Cart: Operation in Prohibited Areas $124.00 $25-$1,000
Subsection 3 Snowmobiles
S12.20 State Snowmobile Laws Adopted (Bond/Forfeiture per State Bond Schedule)
S12.22 Snowmobile Operation in Prohibited Areas $199.60 $25-$2,500
S12.24 Written Consent of Owner Required $262.60 $0-$250 §350.10
S12.25 Curfew Violations; Snowmobile $73.60 $25-$2,500
Subsection 4 Abandoned, Unlicensed, & Junk Vehicles
S12.31 Unlicensed Vehicles $691.00 $25-$2,500
S12.32 Abandoned Motor Vehicles $187.00 $25-$2,500
S12.33 Junked Vehicles $691.00 $25-$2,500
S12.34 Permit Violations $691.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 16 Building Code $691.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 17 Subdivision Code $691.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 18 Zoning Code $691.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 19 Floodplain District $691.00 $25-$2,500
Chapter 20 Shoreland/Wetlands $691.00 $50-$500
Village of Suamico
Appendix D
Appendix D Page 1 of 9 5-7-08
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO STORMWATER REFERENCE GUIDE FOR THE
CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL ORDINANCE
DATE: May 7, 2008
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................... 1
Authority ................................................................................................................................ 2
Findings of Fact ...................................................................................................................... 2
Purpose ................................................................................................................................... 2
Applicability and Jurisdiction ............................................................................................... 2
Definitions............................................................................................................................... 2
Technical Standards ............................................................................................................... 2
Performance Standards ......................................................................................................... 3
Permitting Requirements, Procedures, and Fees .................................................................. 6
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Statement, and Amendments .................................... 7
Fee Schedule ........................................................................................................................... 9
Inspection ............................................................................................................................... 9
Enforcement ........................................................................................................................... 9
Appeals ................................................................................................................................... 9
Severability ............................................................................................................................. 9
Effective Date ......................................................................................................................... 9
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Village of Suamico Stormwater
Reference Guide (Reference Guide) has
been created to act as a companion to the
Village of Suamico Model Construction Site
Erosion Control Ordinance (Ordinance).
The Ordinance cites the Reference Guide as
the resource for details that were omitted
from the model Ordinance due to the
potential for variations in each
municipality’s permitting process and level
of expertise in regard to the Ordinance.
Items in the Reference Guide can be
changed without the public hearing process
as the changes are typically administrative
and/or technical and do not affect the
Ordinance’s intent and requirements. The
Reference Guide is organized similar to the
Construction Site Erosion Control
Ordinance for ease of relating the comments
in the Reference Guide to the appropriate
sections in the Ordinance.
Construction Site Erosion Control Ordinance
Site
Requirements A
Sediment
(TSS)
Prevent
Tracking
Perform
De-Watering
Protect
Storm Drain Inlets
Manage
Building
Materials
Less than 1 Acre
No Numeric
Standard B
Yes Yes Yes Yes
1 Acre or More
<5
Tons/Acre/Year
Yes Yes Yes Yes
Village of Suamico
Appendix D
Appendix D Page 2 of 9 5-7-08
(1) Summary of Section 1.07
Performance Standards of the Construction
Site Erosion Control Zoning Ordinance. See
Ordinance and this Reference Guide for
specific requirements, exemptions and
prohibitions.
(2) Construction sites regulated by the
Wisconsin Department of Commerce are
required to achieve a forty percent (40%)
sediment reduction for sites with less than
one (1) acre of land disturbance. See
COMM 60.20(3)(c) and COMM
21.125(3)(c) for specific requirements. The
local municipality may also be acting as an
agent of the Department of Commerce.
1.01 AUTHORITY.
1.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
1.03 PURPOSE.
1.04 APPLICABILITY AND
JURISDICTION.
(1) Applicability.
(2) Jurisdiction.
(3) Exclusions. The Wisconsin
Department of Transportation (WisDOT)
has entered into a memorandum of
understanding with the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources that
satisfies Wis. Stats. §281.33 (2), such that
activities directed and supervised by
WisDOT are exempt from this Ordinance.
Activities directed and supervised by the
local municipality are covered by this
Ordinance.
1.05 DEFINITIONS.
1.06 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
(1) Design Criteria, Standards, and
Specifications. Below is a list of technical
standards and guidance documents that shall
be used to satisfy performance standards
contained in the ordinance. Technical
standards specify the minimum criteria for a
best management practice (BMP). Guidance
documents contain recommendations and
additional “how to” guidance. Performance
standards take precedence over technical
standards and technical standards take
precedence over guidance documents.
(a) Technical Standards. The following
are applicable Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) conservation
practice standards or technical standards:
1050 Land Application of Anionic
Polyacrylamide
1051 Interim Sediment Controls: Water
Application of Polymers
1052 Non-Channel Erosion Mat
1053 Channel Erosion Mat
1054 Vegetative Buffer for Construction
Sites
1055 Sediment Bale Barrier (Non-Channel)
1056 Silt Fence
1057 Stone Tracking Pad and Tire Washing
1058 Mulching for Construction Sites
1059 Seeding for Construction Site Erosion
Control
1060 Storm Drain Inlet Protection for
Construction Sites
1061 De-Watering
1062 Ditch Check (Channel)
1063 Sediment Trap
1064 Sediment Basin
1065 Riprap/Stabilized Outlet (pending
completion)
1066 Construction Site Diversion
1067 Temporary Grading Practices for
Erosion Control
1068 Dust Control on Construction Sites
1069 Turbidity Barrier
1070 Silt Curtain
Village of Suamico
Appendix D Page 3 of 9 5-7-08
These standards may be found on the DNR
website at
http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/nps/stormwa
ter/techstds.htm
(b) Local Modifications to Technical
Standards. The following are local
requirements which are intended to
supplement, clarify, or supersede DNR
technical standards.
(c) Guidance Documents. The
following are the applicable guidance
documents:
? Guidance for the Establishment of
Protective Areas for Wetlands
? “Construction Site” Definition –
“Common Plan of Development”
? Applicability of NR216 Subchapter
III to Mill and Crush Operations
? Meeting New State Standards:
Construction Erosion Control
Workshops
http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/nps/s
tormwater/constr_workshops
? Estimating Residue Using the Line
Transect Method (UW-Extension
A3533).
? Wisconsin Department of
Transportation - Erosion Control
Product Acceptability Lists (PAL)
for Multi-Modal Applications
? Wisconsin Department of
Transportation - Facilities
Development Manual
? Wisconsin DOT Standard
Specifications for Highway and
Structure Construction
? Other National Publications
(2) Other Standards.
1.07 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(1) Responsible Party.
(2) Plan.
(3) Requirements.
(a) Total Suspended Solids.
Construction sites with one (1) acre or more
of land disturbance are required to meet the
ordinance’s numeric performance standards.
Construction sites with less than one (1) acre
of land disturbance are required to achieve a
forty percent (40%) sediment reduction if
the construction site is regulated by the
Wisconsin Department of Commerce. See
COMM 60.20(3)(c) and COMM
21.125(3)(c) for specific requirements. All
other construction sites with less than one
(1) acre of land disturbance are not required
to meet the ordinance’s numeric
performance standards. BMP design
guidance is provided below in Section (b)
for sites with less than one (1) acre of land
disturbance.
Computer Models:
The Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) is working with the EPA,
NRCS, and several other states to develop a
Windows version of RUSLE2 for
construction site erosion control. Until this
software is available for statewide use,
BMPs shall be designed using the technical
standards listed in S.06. The Wisconsin
Department of Commerce (COMM) is using
the RUSLE2 spreadsheet developed by
Dane County until the new RUSLE2
software is available. Use of the spreadsheet
is not required by COMM but is encouraged
(http://commerce.wi.gov/sb/SBSoilErosionControlProgram.
html).
Design Clarifications:
Erosion Control Practices – Erosion control
practices are used to prevent sediment
particles from becoming dislodged and
suspended in runoff. Erosion control
practices include land application of
polyacrylamide, mulching, seeding, and
erosion mats. Grading practices can be used
to supplement these practices.
Village of Suamico
Appendix D Page 4 of 9 5-7-08
Sediment Control Practices – Sediment
control practices are used to remove
sediment particles that are suspended in
runoff and being transported. Sediment
control practices used for sheet flow
conditions include vegetative buffers,
sediment bale barriers (non-channel), and
silt fence. Sediment control practices used
for concentrated flow conditions include
storm drain inlet protection (< one (1) acre),
ditch checks (< one (1) acre), sediment traps
(< five (5) acres), sediment basins (< one
hundred (100) acres), and polymers.
Sediment control practices used for lakes,
rivers, and streams include turbidity barriers
and silt curtains.
Construction Site Diversions – Construction
site diversions are used to divert clear water
runoff away from disturbed areas.
Construction site diversions are also
designed to convey sediment-laden runoff
from disturbed areas to sediment control
practices such as ditch checks, sediment
traps, and sediment basins.
Dust Control Practices – Dust control
practices are used to prevent wind erosion.
De-Watering – De-watering practices are
used to remove sediment from ponding
surface water or groundwater. A DNR
permit is required for pumping seventy (70)
gpm or more
(http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/dwg/hicap.html
). The discharge must be sampled in
accordance with DNR requirements.
Non-Erosive Flows – Velocity dissipation
devices shall be placed at outfall locations
and along the length of any channel, as
necessary, to provide a non-erosive flow so
that the natural, physical, and biological
characteristics and functions are maintained
and protected. Velocity dissipation devices
could include erosion mat (channel), riprap,
drop structures, stilling basins, and other
energy dissipation devices.
Maximum Permissible Velocities for Channels
Channel Cover Slope Range % Erosion-Resistant Soils Easily Eroded Soils
Bare Soil 0-5 3-6 fps* 1.5-2 fps*
Do not use on slopes steeper than 5%, except for side slopes in a combination channel.
Bermuda Grass 0-5 8 fps 6 fps
5-10 7 fps 5 fps
>10 6 fps 4 fps
Buffalo grass, Kentucky
bluegrass, Smooth brome,
blue grama
0-5 7 fps 5 fps
5-10 6 fps 4 fps
>10 5 fps 3 fps
Grass mixture 0-5 5 fps 4 fps
5-10 4 fps 3 fps
Do not use on slopes steeper than 10%, except for side slopes in a combination
channel.
Lespedeza sericea,
weeping love grass
Ischaemum (yellow
bluestem), kudzu, alfalfa,
crabgrass
0-5 3.5 fps 2.5 fps
Do not use on slopes steeper than 5%, except for side slopes in a combination channel.
Annuals used on mild
slopes or as temporary
protection until permanent
covers are established,
common lespedeza, Sudan
grass
0-5 3.5 fps 2.5 fps
Use on slopes steeper than 5% is not recommended.
*Maximum permissible velocities depend on specific soil properties and shear stress. Typically, the maximum velocity for sand = 1.5 fps, silt
and loam = 1.7 to 2.5 fps, fine gravel = 2.5 fps, clay = 3.7 fps, coarse gravel = 4.0 fps, cobbles = 3.7 to 5.0 fps, and shale/hard pan = 6.0 fps.
Source – Chow Open Channel Hydraulics & Civil Engineering Reference manual for the PE
Village of Suamico
Appendix D Page 5 of 9 5-7-08
Exam, Ninth Edition
Materials – No sediment or solid materials,
including building materials, may be
discharged in violation of the following
federal, state, and local regulations:
? Navigation, Dams, & Bridges
(Chapter 30 and 31, Stats.)
? Wetland Water Quality Standards
(NR 103)
? Wetlands (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers Section 404 regulations)
? Shoreland Management (NR 115,
NR 117, & local regulations)
? Floodplain Management (NR 116 &
local regulations).
Wetland Delineations – Wetland
delineations shall be performed by a
professional soil scientist, professional
hydrologist, or other qualified individual
approved by the administering authority.
The individual performing the delineation
shall classify the wetland as a less
susceptible wetland, highly susceptible
wetland, exceptional resource water, or
outstanding resource water.
Protective Areas – Protective areas may be
disturbed as part of a construction project, if
necessary. Disturbed areas must be
stabilized from erosion and restored with
self-sustaining vegetation. Best
management practices (ponds, swales, etc.)
may be located in protective areas.
Type of Vegetation – It is recommended that
seeding of non-invasive vegetative cover be
used in the protective areas. Vegetation that
is flood and drought tolerant and can
provide long-term bank stability because of
an extensive root system is preferable.
Vegetative cover can be measured using the
line transect method described in the
University of Wisconsin Extension
publication number A3533, titled
“Estimating Residue Using the Line
Transect Method”.
Adjacent Property Owners – If a stream or
channel is permanently placed or relocated
along a property line, an easement or letter
of permission is required from any property
owners impacted by the protective area’s
new location. Also, if a stormwater facility
or structure is proposed within an onsite
stream or channel, one hundred (100) year
flood elevations shall be evaluated to
determine if offsite property owners are
impacted by backwater or a flood elevation
increase. An easement or letter of
permission is required from any property
owners impacted by backwater. Changes to
a stream, wetland, or channel should be
discussed during the pre-design meeting.
Changes to a navigable stream, wetland or
other waters of the state will require permits
from the DNR, Army Corps of Engineers,
and local municipality.
Agricultural Activity Areas – Agricultural
activity areas (i.e. farm fields and other
cropland areas) are exempt from the
ordinance.
Agricultural Production Areas –
Agricultural production areas (i.e. farm
buildings, structures, and other impervious
surfaces) are exempt if the disturbed area is
less than one (1) acre. Sites where the land
disturbance is one (1) acre or more shall
meet the requirements of this ordinance.
Sites where the disturbance is less than one
(1) acre shall have a drainage plan prepared
that is appropriate for the site. The County
Land Conservation Department (LCD) may
be available to prepare erosion and sediment
control plans for farm structures and
disturbances in the non-cropland areas.
Construction of farm structures and
disturbances in non-cropland areas one (1)
acre or greater must also be covered by an
NR 216 permit.
(b) Sites with less than One (1) Acre of
Land Disturbance. Pursuant to 1.07(5) of
Village of Suamico
Appendix D Page 6 of 9 5-7-08
the ordinance, the municipality may
establish erosion control requirements more
stringent than those set forth in this section
if the municipality determines that an added
level of protection is needed.
Design Clarifications:
For a construction site with less than one (1)
acre of land disturbance, the applicant shall
install best management practices to prevent
or reduce all of the following:
1. Tracking of sediment onto streets by
vehicles.
2. Discharge of sediment into stormwater
inlets.
3. Discharge of sediment into abutting
waters of the state.
4. Discharge of sediment from drainage
ways that flow off the site.
5. Discharge of sediment by de-watering
activities.
6. Discharge of sediment from soil
stockpiles existing for more than seven (7)
days.
7. Properly use, store and dispose of
building materials, chemicals, cement,
concrete truck washout, litter, sanitary
waste, and other compounds and materials
used on the construction site.
8. Construction sites also regulated by the
Wisconsin Department of Commerce are
required to achieve a forty percent (40%)
sediment reduction for sites with less than
one (1) acre of land disturbance. See
COMM 60.20(3)(c) and COMM
21.125(3)(c) for specific requirements.
(4) Location. A regional wet detention
pond (post-construction site) may be used as
a sediment basin (construction site) until
final stabilization of the wet detention pond
and expiration of the erosion control permit
associated with construction of the regional
wet detention pond. While regional
stormwater management facilities are
appropriate for control of post-construction
pollutants, they should not be used for
construction site sediment removal at other
construction sites located within the wet
detention pond’s watershed.
(5) Alternate Requirements.
1.08 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS,
PROCEDURES, AND FEES.
(1) Permit Required.
(2) Permit Application and Fees.
(3) Review and Approval of Permit
Application. Meetings between the permit
applicant, designer, and plan reviewer are
encouraged during the pre-design, design,
and plan review process. The meetings are
used to educate each other about regulatory
requirements, environmentally sensitive
areas, and design challenges. The number
of meetings held is typically commensurate
with the size and complexity of the project.
Meetings can be face-to-face or via
telephone.
A pre-construction conference is encouraged
before the start of all construction projects.
For sites with one (1) acre or more of land
disturbance, a pre-construction conference is
required. The permit applicant, designer,
plan reviewer, contractor, and inspector are
encouraged to attend. The purpose of the
meeting is to exchange contact information,
review the erosion and sediment control
plan, and identify individuals responsible for
permit compliance, plan amendments, and
weekly inspection reports.
(4) Surety Bond. Construction sites
with one (1) acre or more of land
disturbance are required to have a financial
guarantee. The financial guarantee includes
the cost associated with erosion and
sediment control BMPs, site inspections,
project administration, and contingencies.
Construction sites with less than one (1) acre
of land disturbance are not typically required
to have a financial guarantee.
Portions of the financial guarantee may be
released as the construction project
Village of Suamico
Appendix D Page 7 of 9 5-7-08
progresses. The last portion of the financial
guarantee is not released until the municipal
inspector performs a final inspection and the
permit applicant pays final inspection fees.
(5) Permit Requirements. The permit
applicant is required to post the “Certificate
of Permit Coverage” in a conspicuous place
at the construction site.
(6) Permit Conditions.
(7) Permit Duration.
(8) Maintenance.
(9) Alternate Requirements.
1.09 EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL PLAN, STATEMENT AND
AMENDMENTS.
(1) Plan Requirements. The erosion
and sediment control plan for construction
sites with one (1) acre or more of land
disturbance shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
(a) The name, contact person, title,
mailing address, email address, telephone
number, and fax number of the following
individuals or organizations: permit
applicant, landowner, consultant or plan
preparer, and contractor (if known).
(b) Anticipated project start date and
projected project end date.
(c) Description of the construction site
and the nature of the land disturbing
construction activity, including
representation of the limits of land
disturbance on a USGS 7.5-minute series
topographical map.
(d) Description of the intended sequence
of major land disturbing construction
activities for major portions of the
construction site, including clearing;
stripping topsoil; rough grading; installation
of erosion and sediment controls;
construction of utilities, streets, and
buildings; finish grading; and permanent
stabilization.
(e) Estimates of the total area of the
construction site and the total area of the
construction site that is expected to be
disturbed by land disturbing activities.
(f) Available data describing the surface
soil as well as sub-soils, including
representation of the limits of land
disturbance on a NRCS soils map.
(g) Wherever permanent infiltration
devices will be employed or were evaluated,
the depth to the nearest seasonal high
groundwater elevation or top of bedrock
shall be identified.
(h) Name of the immediate named
receiving water from the United States
Geological Service 7.5 minute series
topographic maps.
(i) Calculations to show the expected
percent reduction in the average annual
sediment load carried in runoff as compared
to no sediment or erosion controls
(calculations may not be feasible until
RUSLE2 is completed).
The erosion and sediment control plan for
construction sites with one (1) acre or more
of land disturbance shall include a site map.
The site map shall include the following
items and shall be at a scale not greater than
one hundred feet (100’) per inch and at a
contour interval not to exceed two feet (2’):
(a) Existing topography, vegetative
cover, impervious surfaces, natural and
engineered drainage systems, roads, surface
waters, and one hundred (100) year
floodplains.
(b) Boundaries of the construction site.
(c) Drainage patterns and approximate
slopes anticipated after grading activities.
(d) Areas of soil disturbance, including
soil stockpile locations.
(e) Location of major structural and
non-structural controls identified in the
erosion and sediment control plan, including
standard detail drawings and specifications
where appropriate.
(f) Location of areas where stabilization
practices will be employed.
Village of Suamico
Appendix D Page 8 of 9 5-7-08
(g) Areas that will be vegetated
following land disturbing construction
activities.
(h) Area and location of wetland
acreage on the construction site and
locations where stormwater is discharged to
a surface water or wetland within onequarter
(1/4) mile downstream of the
construction site.
(i) Areas used for infiltration of postconstruction
stormwater runoff.
(j) An alphanumeric or equivalent grid
overlying the entire construction site.
The erosion and sediment control plan for
construction sites with one (1) acre or more
of land disturbance shall include a
description of appropriate erosion and
sediment control best management practices
that will be installed and maintained at the
construction site to prevent pollutants from
reaching waters of the state. The erosion
and sediment control plan shall clearly
describe the appropriate erosion and
sediment control best management practices
for each major land disturbing construction
activity and the timing during the period of
land disturbing construction activity that the
erosion and sediment control best
management practices will be implemented.
The description of erosion controls shall
include, when appropriate, the following
minimum requirements:
(a) Description of any interim and
permanent stabilization practices, including
a schedule for implementing the practices.
The erosion and sediment control plan shall
ensure that existing vegetation is preserved
where attainable and that disturbed portions
of the construction site are stabilized.
(b) Description of any structural
practices to divert flow away from exposed
soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff
and the discharge of pollutants from the
construction site. Unless otherwise
specifically approved in writing by the local
municipality, structural measures shall be
installed on upland soils.
(c) Management of overland flow at all
areas of the construction site, unless
otherwise controlled by outfall controls.
(d) Trapping of sediment in channelized
flow.
(e) Staging land disturbing activities to
limit exposed soil areas subject to erosion.
Soil stockpiles exposed for more than seven
(7) days shall be stabilized.
(f) Protection of downslope drainage
inlets where they occur.
(g) Minimization of tracking at all
vehicle and equipment entry and exit
locations of the construction site.
(h) Clean up of offsite sediment
deposits by the end of each work day.
(i) Proper disposal of building and
waste material.
(j) Stabilization of drainage ways.
(k) Installation of permanent
stabilization as soon as possible after final
grading.
(l) Minimization of dust to the
maximum extent practicable.
(2) Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan Statement. For construction sites with
one (1) acre or more of land disturbance,
prepare a narrative describing the following:
site location, total site area and disturbed
area, purpose of project, drainage system
and outfalls, drainage area for each outfall,
stream and wetland locations, topsoil and
sub-soils, depth to groundwater and
bedrock, erosion and sediment controls,
sequence of construction, BMP inspection
and maintenance responsibilities, weekly
inspection reports, and plan amendments.
The erosion and sediment control plan
statement shall require the following: (a)
erosion and sediment control practices be
repaired or replaced within twenty-four (24)
hours of an inspection; and (b) when the
failure of erosion or sediment control
Village of Suamico
Appendix D Page 9 of 9 5-7-08
practices results in an immediate threat of
sediment entering waters of the state or an
offsite drainage system, procedures shall be
implemented immediately to repair or
replace the practices.
(3) Amendments.
(4) Alternate Requirements.
1.10 FEE SCHEDULE.
1.11 INSPECTION.
1.12 ENFORCEMENT.
1.13 APPEALS.
(1) Board of Appeals or Adjustment.
(2) Who May Appeal.
1.14 SEVERABILITY.
1.15 EFFECTIVE DATE.
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO STORMWATER REFERENCE GUIDE
FOR THE
POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
DATE: May 7, 2008
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.................................................................................................................................................... 2
S.01 AUTHORITY ............................................................................................................................................................... 3
S.02 FINDINGS OF FACT ................................................................................................................................................. 3
S.03 PURPOSE AND INTENT .......................................................................................................................................... 3
(1) PURPOSE............................................................................................................................................................ 3
(2) INTENT ................................................................................................................................................................. 3
S.04 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION .................................................................................................................. 3
(1) APPLICABILITY .................................................................................................................................................. 3
(2) JURISDICTION ................................................................................................................................................... 3
(3) EXCLUSIONS ..................................................................................................................................................... 3
S.05 DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................................................................. 3
S.06 TECHNICAL STANDARDS ..................................................................................................................................... 3
S.07 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ........................................................................................................................... 10
(1) RESPONSIBLE PARTY ................................................................................................................................... 10
(2) PLAN................................................................................................................................................................... 10
(3) REQUIREMENTS ............................................................................................................................................. 10
(4) CONSIDERATIONS FOR ONSITE/OFFSITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES ............. 29
(5) LOCATION AND REGIONAL TREATMENT OPTION ................................................................................. 30
(6) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................................................................... 30
S.08 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES AND FEES ........................................................................ 30
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED ........................................................................................................................................ 30
(2) PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES .............................................................................................................. 30
(3) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PERMIT APPLICATION ............................................................................. 30
(4) PERMIT REQUIREMENTS ............................................................................................................................. 30
(5) PERMIT CONDITIONS .................................................................................................................................... 30
(6) PERMIT DURATION ........................................................................................................................................ 30
(7) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................................................................... 30
S.09 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN .............................................................................................................. 30
(1) PLAN REQUIREMENTS .................................................................................................................................. 30
(2) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................................................................... 32
S.10 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT ............................................................................................................................. 32
(1) MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT REQUIRED ................................................................................................ 32
(2) AGREEMENT PROVISIONS .......................................................................................................................... 32
(3) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................................................................... 32
S.11 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE ..................................................................................................................................... 32
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 2 of 33
(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF GUARANTEE ............................................................................................................ 32
(2) CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE ........................................................................................................................ 33
(3) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................................................................... 33
S.12 FEE SCHEDULE ...................................................................................................................................................... 33
S.13 ENFORCEMENT ...................................................................................................................................................... 33
S.14 APPEALS .................................................................................................................................................................. 33
(1) BOARD OF APPEALS OR ADJUSTMENT ................................................................................................... 33
(2) WHO MAY APPEAL ......................................................................................................................................... 33
S.15 SEVERABILITY ....................................................................................................................................................... 33
S.16 EFFECTIVE DATE ................................................................................................................................................... 33
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The VILLAGEOF SUAMICO Stormwater Reference Guide (Reference Guide) has been created to act as
a companion to the VILLAGE OF SUAMICO Model Post-Construction Stormwater Management
Ordinance (Ordinance). The Ordinance cites the Reference Guide as the resource for details that were
omitted from the model Ordinance due to the potential for variations in each municipality’s permitting
process and level of expertise in regard to the Ordinance. Items in the Reference Guide can be changed
without the public hearing process as the changes are typically administrative and/or technical and do not
affect the Ordinance’s intent and requirements. The Reference Guide is organized similar to the Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance for ease of relating the comments in the Reference
Guide to the appropriate sections in the ordinance.
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
Site
Requirements a
Sediment
(TSS)
Peak
Discharge
Infiltration
Protective
Area
Fueling &
Vehicle
Maintenance
Areas
Residential
Non-
Residential
< 20,000 ft2
Impervious Surface b
No Numeric
Standard
No Numeric
Standard
No Numeric
Standard
No Numeric
Standard
Width
Varies
No Visible
Petroleum
Sheen
> 20,000 ft2
Impervious Surface
New
Development
80% 2/10/100
90% of predevelopment
infiltration
volume
60% of predevelopment
infiltration
volume
Width
Varies
No Visible
Petroleum
Sheen
Redevelopment 40% 2/10/100 Exempt Exempt
Potentially
Exempt
No Visible
Petroleum
Sheen
Routine
Maintenance
Area
None, unless
discharging
into a BMP
None, unless
discharging
into a BMP
Exempt Exempt
Potentially
Exempt
No Visible
Petroleum
Sheen
Transportation
Facilities c
-Carry runoff through a grass swale a minimum of 200 feet long.
-Velocity in grass swale < 1.5 ft/s for the 2-yr, 24-hour storm peak discharge.
a Summary of Section S.07 Performance Standards of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Zoning
Ordinance. See Ordinance and this Reference Guide for specific requirements, exemptions and prohibitions.
b The impervious surface areas created after the adoption date of the Ordinance are cumulative. For example, if a
site first adds 18,000 ft2 of parking and then adds a 2,001 ft2 building the following year, the site is held to the
>20,000 ft2 requirements at that time.
c Provides alternative criteria for transportation facilities with grass swale drainage systems. The alternative
criteria may be used by the applicant to satisfy Section S.07 Performance Standards. The alternative criteria
may not be used for transportation facilities that are part of a larger common plan of development.
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 3 of 33
S.01 AUTHORITY
S.02 FINDINGS OF FACT
S.03 PURPOSE AND INTENT
(1) PURPOSE
(2) INTENT
S.04 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION
(1) APPLICABILITY
(2) JURISDICTION
(3) EXCLUSIONS
The Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT) has entered into a memorandum
of understanding with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that satisfies s.
281.33 (2), Wis. Stats., such that activities directed and supervised by WisDOT are
exempt from this Ordinance.
Activities directed and supervised by the local municipality are covered by this Ordinance.
S.05 DEFINITIONS
“Biofiltration system” means a bioretention system which does not qualify for any infiltration credit
pursuant to S.07(3)(c) of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance.
“Structural height” means the difference in elevation in feet between the point of lowest elevation of
the top of the embankment before overtopping and the lowest elevation of the downstream toe of
embankment.
S.06 TECHNICAL STANDARDS
Below is a list of technical standards and guidance documents that shall be used to satisfy
performance standards contained in the ordinance. Technical standards specify the minimum criteria
for a best management practice (BMP). Guidance documents contain recommendations and
additional “how to” guidance. Performance standards take precedence over technical standards and
technical standards take precedence over guidance documents.
(a) Technical Standards: The following are applicable Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) Conservation Practice Standards or Technical Standards:
? 1001 Wet Detention Basin
? 1002 Site Evaluation for Stormwater Infiltration
? 1003 Infiltration Basin
? 1004 Bioretention for Infiltration
? 1005 Vegetated Infiltration Swale
? 1006 Method for Predicting the Efficiency of Proprietary Stormwater
Sedimentation Devices
? 1100 Interim Turf Nutrient Management
These standards may be found on the DNR website at
http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/nps/stormwater/techstds.htm
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 4 of 33
(b) Local Modifications to Technical Standards: The following are local requirements which
are intended to supplement, clarify, or supersede DNR technical standards.
1001 - Wet Detention Basin
Dry Detention Basin-
Dry detention ponds shall be designed to meet requirements in Technical
Standard 1001, except criteria contained in Sections V.A.2, V.B., and V.C.
Dry detention ponds shall be designed to meet the local modifications provided
below for Technical Standard 1001, except permanent pool and extended
detention volume criteria.
Dry detention ponds shall not receive any water quality or TSS credit, unless
written approval is obtained from the DNR. The approval letter must specifically
indicate the amount of TSS credit provided by the dry pond.
Dry detention pond shall have a minimum bottom slope to the principal outlet of
one percent (1%). The applicant may request a waiver if site characteristics
create a hardship.
As part of the operation & maintenance plan, sediment accumulation in the dry
pond shall be monitored. Accumulated sediment shall be removed when five
percent (5%) to ten percent (10%) of the storage volume is lost for the two (2)
year, twenty-four (24) hour design storm.
Pond Watershed-
Wet ponds are not recommended for small watersheds (< fifteen (15) acres in
clay soil). A wet pond located in a small watershed may develop stagnation
problems and become a public nuisance. Public acceptance of stormwater
BMPs is important to the success of a local stormwater program. Dry ponds,
biofiltration, proprietary devices, and other BMPs are recommended for small
watersheds.
One Hundred (100) Year Floodplain-
Wet and dry detention ponds shall not be located in a one hundred (100) year
floodway or one hundred (100) year flood storage area unless a hydrologic and
hydraulic study is conducted in accordance with NR 116. Easements will be
required if the flood study indicates the one hundred (100) year floodway or flood
storage area is impacted by the pond or its embankment. Ponds shall not
impede one hundred (100) year flood conveyance along navigable streams and
non-navigable channels.
Permanent Pool-
Pool Shape – A minimum length to width ratio of three to one (3:1) is required
between the principal inlet and principal outlet. The applicant may request a
waiver if site characteristics create a hardship. Redevelopment and pond retrofit
projects may be eligible for a waiver. Typically, new development is not eligible
for a waiver.
Liner – If soils are more permeable than a saturated hydraulic conductivity of
1x10-5 cm/sec, a liner is needed to maintain permanent pool levels. If soils are
tighter than a saturated hydraulic conductivity of 1x10-7 cm/sec, no liner is
needed (e.g. sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or
clay). A risk analysis shall be conducted if soils are between a saturated
hydraulic conductivity of 1x10-5 cm/sec and 1x10-7 cm/sec. The risk analysis
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 5 of 33
shall include proximity to public wells (four hundred feet (400’)) and private wells
(one hundred feet (100’), depth to groundwater and bedrock, and source
pollutants (Tier 1 & Tier 2 Industries, fueling and maintenance areas). Liner
materials can be soil, bentonite or synthetic.
Aerators – Generally, aerators are not allowed unless written approval is
obtained from the Wisconsin DNR. The approval letter must specifically state the
proposed aerators are acceptable.
Extended Detention Volume-
Disregard Section V.A.2.b(2) of Technical Standard 1001. If the wet pond’s
pollutant removal is not determined with SLAMM or P8, the one (1) year, twentyfour
(24) hour design storm shall be released from the wet pond using the
following formula:
Qoutflow = Vs * SA
Qoutflow = maximum allowable one (1) year discharge rate (cfs)
Vs = 5.12 x 10-5 ft/sec settling velocity
SA = surface area of permanent pool (square feet)
Peak Flow Control-
Do not use Table 2 in Technical Standard 1001. Use the maximum predevelopment
runoff curve numbers contained in the Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Ordinance.
It is recommended that the developer and designer contact the local municipality
to discuss peak discharge requirements for the site early in the design process.
The local municipality may have adopted alternative peak discharge
requirements for the site which are different than the Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Ordinance. At a minimum, the peak discharge
requirements contained in NR 151 shall be met.
Inflows-
Pipe inlets shall be protected from soil washouts due to seepage along the pipe’s
granular bedding and backfill. Riprap or other protection shall be placed around
the entire pipe perimeter.
Other inflow points shall be protected from scour and erosion.
Principal Outlet-
All flows shall pass through the principal outlet during the two (2) year and ten
(10) year, twenty-four (24) hour design storms. The principal outlet shall consist
of one (1) or more flow control structures and discharge pipes.
Pipes – Generally concrete, PVC, or CMP are the preferred pipe materials.
Corrugated PE will tend to jack-up due to frost heave and flotation. The
minimum recommended pipe diameter is twelve inches (12”).
Orifices – Orifices smaller than four inches (4”) are not recommended due to the
potential for clogging. Consider using a six-inch (6”) perforated drain pipe and
restrictor plate (refer to Section V.B.8 of Technical Standard 1004 for guidance).
The total opening area of all perforation holes combined shall be sufficient to
allow the drain pipe to discharge at full capacity, as would occur if there were no
orifice restriction. Backfilling the drain pipe with one-inch (1”) washed stone
provides protection from clogging.
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 6 of 33
Trash racks or other equivalent litter control devices are required for all outlet
openings that control the two (2) year, twenty-four (24) hour design storm. The
maximum bar spacing shall be less than two inches (2”) and less than one-half
(½) the smallest opening dimension, whichever is more restrictive. The minimum
surface area for the trash rack shall be five (5) to ten (10) times the outlet’s cross
sectional area to prevent clogging. Trash racks keep litter and debris in the pond
and prevent it from discharging into streams, rivers, and lakes.
Trash racks are also required for other outlet openings that have a width, height,
or diameter less than twelve inches (12”). The maximum bar spacing shall be
less than one-half (½) the smallest opening dimension. The minimum surface
area for the trash rack shall be at five (5) to ten (10) times the outlet’s cross
sectional area to prevent clogging.
Reverse-sloped pipes and other underwater outlets may impact a wet pond’s
TSS removal efficiency. Outlets that draw water from below the permanent
pool’s surface elevation reduce the effective surface area and depth of the
permanent pool. If reverse-sloped pipes and other underwater outlets are used,
special consideration is required for SLAMM & P8 modeling to ensure accurate
water quality results. Also, underwater outlets may freeze during winter.
Flap Gates-
Flap gates are required if the two (2) year or ten (10) year, twenty-four (24) hour
design storm flows backward through the principal outlet. Backwater from a
down slope conveyance system may impact a pond’s water quality and/or flood
control performance.
Flap gates are not required if the permanent pool’s water surface elevation is
higher than the ten (10) year water elevation at the pond outlet (i.e. tailwater).
Flap gates may be required if the permanent pool’s water surface elevation is
lower than the ten (10) year water elevation at the pond outlet (i.e. tailwater). If
hydrographs are available for the tailwater condition, an evaluation can be
performed to determine if flap gates are required due to backwater. If
hydrographs are not available, flap gates are required.
Flap gates shall not impede flow in down slope channels or streams.
Ice accumulation within the down slope conveyance system shall be considered
during flap gate and principal outlet design.
Tailwater-
Tailwater conditions shall be evaluated at the pond outlet.
Tailwater conditions along lakes, rivers, and streams may be obtained from
available one hundred (100) year floodplain studies.
Tailwater conditions may require that two (2), ten (10), and/or one hundred (100)
year, twenty-four (24) hour runoff volumes be held in the pond, without release,
until the down slope hydrograph allows the pond and flap gate to discharge flow.
It is recommended that the designer contact the local municipality to discuss
tailwater conditions early in the design process. The local municipality may have
information available to assist with the tailwater evaluation.
Emergency Spillway-
The routed two (2) year and ten (10) year, twenty-four (24) hour design storm
may not pass through the emergency spillway. The routed one hundred (100)
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 7 of 33
year, twenty-four (24) hour design storm may not pass through the emergency
spillway if the pond is designed to have a:
? Structural height > six feet (6’) and flood storage capacity > fifty (50)
acre-feet, or
? Structural height > twenty-five feet (25’) and flood storage capacity >
fifteen (15) acre-feet.
Backwater from a down slope conveyance system may not pass through the
emergency spillway during the two (2) year or ten (10) year, twenty-four (24) hour
design storm. Also, backwater may not pass through the emergency spillway
during the one hundred (100) year, twenty-four (24) hour design storm, unless a
hydrologic and hydraulic evaluation indicates the site’s peak discharge
requirements are still satisfied, despite the backwater.
When feasible, the emergency spillway should not be constructed on an
embankment or over fill material. Spillways constructed on an embankment or
over fill material are more prone to failure.
The emergency spillway shall be constructed of permanent materials (i.e. poured
concrete, grouted riprap, articulated concrete block, etc.) if the spillway is
constructed on an embankment. The permanent material shall extend from the
top of embankment to the down slope toe of embankment. The permanent
material shall be shaped to contain flows and reduce potential for erosion and
embankment failure.
Topsoil & Seeding-
Topsoil is required in the safety shelf to encourage wetland plant growth (twelveinch
(12”) minimum thickness).
When feasible, install a wetland seed mix or mature plants in the safety shelf to
improve pond safety, reduce wave erosion along the shoreline, improve pollutant
removal, and discourage geese residence. Use non-invasive species.
When feasible, maintain a high grass buffer around the permanent pool’s
perimeter. The high grass buffer will further improve pond safety and geese
control. Also, the perimeter of the permanent pool is typically the most difficult
area to mow due to saturated soil conditions.
Record Drawings-
Surveyed record drawings certified by a Professional Engineer shall be submitted
upon completion of construction of all wet and dry ponds. As part of the record
drawings, the Professional Engineer may need to verify BMP performance using
computer modeling. Refer to record drawing checklist for requirements.
1002 - Site Evaluation for Stormwater Infiltration
A site layout should not be developed until Step B is complete. Information
obtained from Step B is used to:
? Identify soil textures within the site.
? Identify infiltration exclusions and exemptions.
? Develop a site layout and identify potential infiltration device locations.
For Step B, the minimum number of initial test pits or soil borings required for a
new development area are as follows:
? Two (2) for the initial ten (10) acres, plus one (1) per ten (10) acres
thereafter.
? One (1) per soil unit. Soil units are depicted on NRCS Soil Survey Maps.
? Example calculations:
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 8 of 33
o Four (4) acres with one (1) soil unit = min. of two (2) test pits or
soil borings
o Twenty (20) acres with two (2) soil units = min. of three (3) test
pits or soil borings.
o Twenty (20) acres with five (5) soil units = min. of five (5) test pits
or soil borings.
o Thirty-four (34) acres with three (3) soil units = min. of four (4)
test pits or soil borings.
Upon completion of Step B, it is recommended that the developer and designer
meet with the municipality to discuss infiltration requirements for the development
to avoid redesign during permit submittal.
Information obtained from Step C is used to design each infiltration device. As
part of Step C, a second (2nd) set of test pits or soil borings are required. Refer
to Table 1, Technical Standard 1002 for test pit or soil boring requirements.
1003 - Infiltration Basin
Record Drawings – Surveyed record drawings certified by a Professional
Engineer shall be submitted upon completion of construction of all infiltration
basins. As part of the record drawings, the Professional Engineer may need to
verify BMP performance using computer modeling. Refer to record drawing
checklist for requirements.
1004 - Bioretention for Infiltration
Biofiltration systems shall be designed to meet requirements in Technical
Standard 1004, except for the storage layer and sand/native soil interface layer.
Also, the engineered soil planting bed may be reduced to a thirty-inch (30”)
thickness.
Rain gardens shall be designed to meet requirements in Technical Standard
1004, except for the engineered soil planting bed, storage layer, underdrain, and
sand/native soil interface layer. Rain gardens are typically used in residential
areas. Rain gardens are primarily intended for roof runoff, but may also be used
for lawn, sidewalk and driveway runoff.
SLAMM, P8 or an equivalent methodology shall be used to evaluate the TSS
reduction associated with a bioretention, biofiltration, or rain garden BMP.
Record Drawings – Surveyed record drawings certified by a Professional
Engineer shall be submitted upon completion of construction of all bioretention
and biofiltration facilities. As part of the record drawings, the Professional
Engineer may need to verify BMP performance using computer modeling. Also,
as part of the record drawings, the contractor shall certify the bioretention or
biofiltration device was constructed in accordance with the approved construction
plans and that the installed engineered soil complies with the material
specifications. Refer to record drawing checklist for requirements.
1005 – Vegetated Infiltration Swale
Grass swales shall meet the following design criteria if the applicant plans to take
credit for TSS reductions calculated by SLAMM or P8.
Bottom Width Trapezoid or parabolic shape with max. 6 ft. width
Side Slopes 4:1 or flatter for triangular shaped swales (waiver
is needed if steeper)
3:1 or flatter for trapezoidal channels (waiver is
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 9 of 33
needed if steeper)
Longitudinal Slope 4% maximum (waiver is needed if steeper)
Flow Velocity 1.5 fps or less for 2-year storm. The vegetation
type, mowing height, depth of flow, and O&M Plan
must be consistent with the selected Manning’s ‘n’
value.
? The grass swale infiltration rate used in SLAMM or P8 shall be obtained
from Table 2, Technical Standard 1002. The design infiltration rate shall
be based on the most confining soil layer within five feet (5’) of the grass
swale’s bottom elevation.
? Minimum longitudinal slope for a grass swale is one percent (1%). The
applicant may request a waiver if site characteristics create a hardship.
? Grass swales shall be designed for a two-inch (2”) lawn height. If an
alternative height is desired, it is recommended that the developer and
designer contact the local municipality early in the design process to
obtain approval. The local municipality may have ordinances or other
design criteria which dictate the allowable mowing height.
? Driveway culverts shall be considered when the swale length (density) is
determined for purposes of SLAMM or P8 modeling. The maximum
allowable culvert length for each lot shall be specified on the plans.
? Minimize or mitigate soil compaction during grading activities.
? Grassed swales shall be designed for the proper drainage area.
Generally, it will be best to have one (1) or two (2) sizes to be used
wherever needed throughout the development. The design shall be
based on the largest drainage area served.
? Grassed swales shall be designed according to the planned vegetation
type and maintenance that will be provided. Generally, grassed
channels will be designed to have stable velocities when the vegetation
is shortest and adequate capacity when the vegetation is longest.
1006 - Method for Predicting the Efficiency of Proprietary Stormwater
Sedimentation Devices
The DNR is currently developing Technical Standard 1006 for proprietary
devices. Until this technical standard is complete, proprietary devices shall
comply with DNR guidance developed as part of the “Meeting New State
Regulations: Post-Construction Stormwater Management Workshops”.
(c) Guidance Documents: The following are the applicable guidance documents:
S100 Compost
Guidance for the Establishment of Protective Areas for Wetlands
“Construction Site” Definition – “Common Plan of Development”
Technical Note for Sizing Infiltration Basins and Bioretention Devices
Rain Gardens: A How-To Manual for Homeowners (see above local modifications to
Technical Standard 1004). http://clean-water.uwex.edu/pubs/home.htm#rain
Meeting New State Regulations: Post-Construction Stormwater Management Workshops
http://www.dnr.state.wi.us/org/water/wm/nps/stormwater/post-constr/index.htm
Estimating Residue Using the Line Transect Method (UW-Extension A3533).
The Wisconsin Stormwater Manual
Wisconsin Department of Transportation (DOT) - Facilities Development Manual
Wisconsin DOT Standard Specifications for Highway and Structure Construction
Other National Publications
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 10 of 33
(d) Local Easement Requirements:
Easements are typically required for BMPs and conveyance systems that serve more
than one (1) property owner or lot. Conveyance systems include storm sewers, grass
swales, channels, streams, and overland relief paths. Easement widths will vary.
An ingress/egress easement or direct access to a public street is typically required for
BMPs that serve more than one (1) property owner or lot.
It is recommended that the developer and designer contact the local municipality early in
the design process to discuss easements and width requirements.
S.07 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
(1) RESPONSIBLE PARTY
(2) PLAN
(3) REQUIREMENTS
(a) TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS
Post-construction sites with twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. or more of
impervious surface disturbance and post-construction sites with one (1) acre or
more of land disturbance are required to meet the ordinance’s numeric
performance standards. All other post-construction sites are not required to meet
these numeric performance standards. BMP design guidance is provided below
in Section (h) for sites with less than twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. of
impervious surface disturbance.
Computer Models:
Pollutant loading models such as SLAMM, DETPOND, P8 or an approved
equivalent methodology may be used to evaluate the efficiency of the design in
reducing total suspended solids. Information on how to access SLAMM and P8
is available at http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/nps/models/SLAMM.htm or contact
the stormwater coordinator in the runoff management section of the bureau of
watershed management at (608) 267-7694.
Use the most recent version of SLAMM, DETPOND and P8. The applicant may
request a waiver of this requirement.
Design Clarifications:
No Controls – “No Controls” is the baseline condition for each site. No TSS
credit is provided for meeting the baseline condition. The baseline condition is
defined as follows:
Assume site is stabilized (no erosion).
Assume proposed impervious surfaces are in place. Impervious surface
reductions (e.g. reduced street width) cannot be used to claim TSS
credit; however, impervious surface reductions will lower runoff volumes
which will reduce the required size for stormwater management BMPs.
Assume no stormwater management BMPs.
Assume curb and gutter/storm sewer drainage system in fair condition.
If the applicant intends to claim TSS credit for disconnecting an
impervious surface, the “No Controls” condition shall be based on the
“typical” percent connected impervious values established by the DNR:
LAND USE % CONNECTED
Open space/undeveloped 5
Suburban Residential 7
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 11 of 33
Park 10
Cemetery 12
Low Density Residential 14
Medium Density Residential – With Alley 25
Medium Density Residential – No Alley 28
Schools - Institutional 39
High Density Residential – With Alley 42
High Density Residential – No Alley 42
Mobile Home Residential 47
Freeway 51
Multi-Family Residential 51
Miscellaneous Institutional 59
Medium Industrial 64
High Rise Residential 65
Light Industrial 71
Office Park – Commercial 74
Hospital – Institutional 76
Commercial Strip Mall 91
Shopping Center – Commercial 91
Commercial Downtown 96
Disconnection – TSS credit is provided for runoff volume reductions associated
with disconnecting impervious surfaces beyond the “typical” percent connected
impervious values established by the DNR. In order to consider an impervious
surface as “disconnected”, the following criteria shall be met:
Residential Roofs: Discharge runoff over a minimum twenty-foot (20’)
long pervious surface that is in good condition and graded for sheet flow.
Other Impervious Surfaces:
? Source area flow length may not exceed seventy-five feet (75’).
? Source area and pervious area must be graded for sheet flow.
? Pervious area must be in good condition, have a slope less than
eight percent (8%), and have a flow length at least as long as the
contributing impervious area’s length (but never less than twenty
feet (20’)).
Source: DNR Post-Construction Stormwater Management Workshops
Street Sweeping & Catch Basin Cleaning – No TSS credit is provided for street
sweeping, catch basin cleaning, or other management type BMPs in new
development areas.
If Parking Lot: 50 feet long (must have sheet flow)
Conveyance
Then grass: At least 50 feet long, sheet flow
good condition, slope not to exceed 8%
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 12 of 33
Infiltration Rate – The design infiltration rate for a BMP shall be based on the
most confining soil layer within five feet (5’) of the BMP’s bottom elevation.
Infiltration rates shall be obtained from Table 2, Technical Standard 1002.
Grass Swale – The grass swale infiltration rate used in SLAMM or P8 shall be
obtained from Table 2, Technical Standard 1002. For SLAMM, the typical swale
geometry shall be entered in lieu of using the “Wetted Width” option. SLAMM will
calculate the “Wetted Width” for each rain event based on the typical swale
geometry.
Uncontrolled Areas – The performance standard for TSS is a site standard, not a
BMP standard. Often, a site contains uncontrolled areas that do not flow through
a BMP (e.g. wet pond, grass swale). Typically, it is necessary to increase the
TSS reduction provided by other onsite BMPs in order to offset or over
compensate for these uncontrolled areas.
Routine Maintenance Areas – No performance standard or TSS reduction is
required for routine maintenance areas. However, the applicant is responsible
for proper performance of onsite BMPs. In order to ensure proper BMP
performance, the applicant has two (2) options:
Divert the routine maintenance area around onsite BMPs, or
Include runoff volumes from the routine maintenance area in onsite BMP
calculations. However, no TSS credit is provided for the routine
maintenance area unless it is reclassified as redevelopment.
Offsite Drainage Areas – The applicant is not responsible for satisfying TSS
performance standards for offsite areas that drain into the project site. However,
the applicant is responsible for proper performance of onsite BMPs. In order to
ensure proper onsite BMP performance, the applicant has two (2) options:
Divert offsite runoff around onsite BMPs, or
Include offsite runoff volumes in onsite BMP calculations. The amount of
onsite TSS credit is determined by multiplying the BMP’s percent TSS
reduction by the base TSS load for the onsite area.
Example Calculations:
The development site currently contains thirty (30) acres of institutional land uses
and seventy (70) acres of agricultural land uses. The entire one hundred (100)
acre site will be disturbed as part of the proposed project. Within the one
hundred (100) acre site, the developer plans to:
Redevelop twenty (20) acres (existing institutional) into a new
commercial area.
Conduct routine maintenance on ten (10) acres of existing asphalt
parking lot (existing institutional). Parking lot will be part of new
commercial area.
Develop seventy (70) acres (existing agriculture) into a new residential
area.
The “No Controls” or base TSS load is computed as follows:
Commercial area = twenty (20) acres x six hundred (600) lbs./acre =
twelve thousand (12,000) lbs.
Residential area = seventy (70) acres x four hundred (400) lbs./acre =
twenty-eight thousand (28,000) lbs.
“No Controls” TSS Load = forty thousand (40,000) lbs.
The “TSS Reduction Required” is computed as follows:
Commercial area = twelve thousand (12,000) lbs. x forty percent (40%)
(redevelopment) = four thousand eight hundred (4,800) lbs.
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 13 of 33
Residential area = twenty-eight thousand (28,000) lbs. x eighty percent
(80%) (new development) = twenty-two thousand four hundred (22,400)
lbs.
“TSS Reduction Required” = four thousand eight hundred (4,800) +
twenty-two thousand four hundred (22,400) / forty thousand (40,000)
= sixty-eight hundredths (0.68) or sixty-eight
percent (68%)
A wet pond is proposed for the site. The pond achieves an eighty percent (80%)
TSS reduction for its one hundred thirty (130) acre watershed. The one hundred
thirty (130) acre watershed includes twenty (20) acres of commercial area, ten
(10) acres of commercial parking lot, sixty (60) acres of residential area, and forty
(40) acres of offsite residential area.
Commercial area = twelve thousand (12,000) lbs. x eighty percent (80%)
(wet pond) = nine thousand six hundred (9,600) lbs.
Commercial parking lot = eight thousand (8,000) lbs. x eighty percent
(80%) (wet pond) = six thousand four hundred (6,400) lbs.
Residential area (sixty (60) acres) = twenty-four thousand (24,000) lbs. x
eighty percent (80%) (wet pond) = nineteen thousand two hundred
(19,200) lbs.
Offsite residential area = sixteen thousand (16,000) lbs. x eighty percent
(80%) (wet pond) = twelve thousand eight hundred (12,800) lbs.
Pond TSS Reduction = (nine thousand six hundred (9,600) + six
thousand four hundred (6,400) + nineteen thousand two hundred
(19,200) + twelve thousand eight hundred (12,800) / sixty thousand
(60,000)
= eight-tenths (0.8) or eighty percent (80%)
The “TSS Reduction Provided” is computed as follows:
Commercial area = twelve thousand (12,000) lbs. x eighty percent (80%)
(wet pond) = nine thousand six hundred (9,600) lbs.
Residential area (sixty (60) acres) = twenty-four thousand (24,000) lbs. x
eighty percent (80%) (wet pond) = nineteen thousand two hundred
(19,200) lbs.
Residential area (ten (10) acres) = four thousand (4,000) lbs. x zero
percent (0%) (uncontrolled) = zero (0) lbs.
“TSS Reduction Provided” = (nine thousand six hundred (9,600) +
nineteen thousand two hundred (19,200) + zero (0)) / forty thousand
(40,000) = seventy-two hundredths (0.72) or seventytwo
percent (72%)
Seventy-two percent (72%) > sixty-eight percent (68%), therefore the
TSS requirement is satisfied.
In the example, the ten (10) acre commercial parking lot could have been
included in the “TSS Reduction Required” and “TSS Reduction Provided”
calculations if it was reclassified as redevelopment, as opposed to routine
maintenance. The reclassification would have allowed the applicant to plan for
future reconstruction of the ten (10) acre commercial parking lot.
In the example, the forty (40) acre offsite residential area could have been
included in the “TSS Reduction Required” and “TSS Reduction Provided”
calculations if it was a regional pond, as opposed to an onsite pond. A regional
pond would have allowed the owner of the forty (40) acre offsite residential area
to take credit for the TSS reduction provided by the wet pond.
(b) PEAK DISCHARGE
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 14 of 33
Post-construction sites with twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. or more of
impervious surface disturbance and post-construction sites with one (1) acre or
more of land disturbance are required to meet the ordinance’s numeric
performance standards. All other post-construction sites are not required to meet
these numeric performance standards. BMP design guidance is provided below
in Section (h) for sites with less than twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. of
impervious surface disturbance.
Computer Models:
Peak discharge rates shall be evaluated using TR-55 methodology and a
computer model. NRCS recently released a new Windows version of TR-55
referred to as WinTR-55. Unfortunately, WinTR-55 has some unacceptable
restrictions in computing Tc and the computations for outlet structures are too
approximate to be useable. Therefore, WinTR-55 is not acceptable software.
Other software packages are acceptable if they match the results and
methodology of TR-55 (DOS version). There are multiple hydrology/pond routing
computer programs available. They must be approved by the administering
authority. Examples of common computer programs are HEC-HMS, XPSWMM,
HydroCAD, HydraFlow, PondPack, etc.
Each pre-development watershed shall be evaluated for peak discharge. It is not
accurate or necessary to “link” all of the pre-development watersheds to
determine the ultimate allowable discharge for the site. The allowable discharge
for each outfall shall be determined based on the individual pre-development
watershed as discussed more in depth below in “TR-55 Methodology
Clarifications”.
TR-55 Methodology Clarifications:
Time of Concentration (Tc)-
Pre-Development Requirements
The Tc route shall be the route that takes the longest time to reach
the outfall and not necessarily the furthest point in the watershed.
The Tc route shall be shown to scale on the pre-development
contours with each flow segment labeled.
The pre-development Tc should typically be at least thirty (30)
minutes in NE Wisconsin. This may not apply to small sites.
A Manning’s “n” value of twenty-four hundredths (0.24) shall be used
for sheet flow “meadow” conditions. For redevelopment areas,
assume impervious surfaces do not exist.
The sheet flow length before development in NE Wisconsin is usually
two hundred fifty feet (250’) to three hundred feet (300’). This may
not apply to small sites.
For shallow concentrated flow, “unpaved” or “paved” shall be used to
represent vegetated swales and paved swales, respectively.
Post-Development Requirements
The Tc route shall incorporate and represent the development. If the
development is large, consider dividing the development into multiple
watersheds.
Tc will almost always be shorter after development.
The Tc route shall be shown to scale on the post-development
drainage plan with each flow segment labeled.
The sheet flow length after development will seldom be greater than
fifty feet (50’) to one hundred feet (100’) due to the grading around
homes and buildings. A sheet flow length of greater than one
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 15 of 33
hundred feet (100’) requires approval from the reviewing authority
(except for large paved parking areas).
A Manning’s “n” value of twenty-four hundredths (0.24) is appropriate
for sheet flow “lawn” conditions.
The minimum sheet flow slope shall be two percent (2%) for
residential lawns.
For shallow concentrated flow, “unpaved” or “paved” shall be used to
represent vegetated swales and paved swales, respectively.
The Tc flow path stops when it reaches the inflow of a wet or dry
detention basin.
The post-development Tc is important for determining the correct
storage volume required. See the Storage Volume for Detention
Basins section below.
Runoff Curve Numbers (CN)-
Pre-Development Requirements
The following curve numbers shall be used for “meadow” conditions:
Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers (meadow)
Hydrologic Soil Group A B C D
Curve Number 30 58 71 78
Existing concentrated wooded areas shall be modeled as “Woods,
Good Hydrologic Condition” with curve numbers of thirty (30), fiftyfive
(55), seventy (70), and seventy-seven (77) for hydrologic soil
groups A, B, C, and D, respectively.
Soil units can be found in the applicable County Soil Survey (or, if
provided, on the Municipality’s website.)
The appropriate hydrologic soil groups are located at the following
website: http://soildatamart.nrcs.usda.gov/County.aspx?State=WI
To get an online soils report, do the following:
1. Select the appropriate county.
2. Select the “Generate Reports” button.
3. Select the appropriate soils for the site (hold the ctrl key for
multiple).
4. Select the report type (RUSLE2 Related Attributes or Water
Features) below to get the Hydrologic Group(s) for the site.
5. Select the “Generate Report” button.
**Notice that a number of soils have different hydrologic soil
groups than those shown in the original County USDA Soils
book. The Internet groups are the ones to use.
Post-Development Requirements
The runoff curve number for lawns shall be used for developed areas
that will be vegetated. Woods, wetland, or prairie areas preserved
with a recorded document may be modeled as such.
Pre/Post-Development Curve Number Determination for Permeable Soils
Refer to the Site Evaluation for Infiltration Report to verify that soils
mapped in hydrologic groups A or B are well drained. If not well
drained use the County USDA Soils Books hydrologic group
explanation to determine the appropriate hydrologic group.
If the existing site consists of multiple hydrologic groups, especially a
combination of highly permeable and non-permeable, consideration
shall be given to the proposed site balance cut/fill. See Appendix A
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 16 of 33
of TR-55 for discussion on disturbed soil profiles as a result of
urbanization.
Example: The site consists of thirty percent (30%) Hydrologic Group
A soils and seventy percent (70%) Hydrologic Group C soils. The
following scenarios shall be handled as noted:
1. If the site earthwork does not balance within the respective
Hydrologic Group and it is anticipated that the “C” soils will
be filled on the “A” soils, the “C” soil RCN shall be used.
2. If the site earthwork balances within each respective
Hydrologic Group and it is anticipated that offsite fill will be
required to achieve the desired dwelling elevations, the “C”
soil RCN shall be used.
3. If the site balances within each respective Hydrologic Group
and no or minimal fill is anticipated on the “A” soils,
compaction mitigation shall be provided.
Drainage Area-
Pre-Development Requirements
Determine the total contributing drainage area to the development,
including offsite properties.
If the pre-developed site consists of multiple drainage basins, each
outfall shall be evaluated for peak discharge.
Example:
The pre-development site shown below is forty (40) acres and consists of
two (2) drainage basins, each twenty (20) acres. Each outfall has a peak
discharge of four (4), eight (8), and twelve (12) cfs for the two (2), ten
(10), and one hundred (100) year design storms, respectively.
The post-development site shown below is the same forty (40) acres;
however, Outfall 1 now has thirty (30) acres draining to it and Outfall 2,
ten (10) acres.
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 17 of 33
The post-development discharges for Outfall 2 are three (3), six (6), and
nine (9) cfs for the two (2), ten (10), and one hundred (100) year design
storms, respectively. Outfall 2 meets the peak discharge requirements of
the Ordinance because the post-development peak discharges are
below the pre-development discharges for Outfall 2.
The post-development discharges for Outfall 1 are twelve (12), twentyfour
(24), and thirty-six (36) cfs for the two (2), ten (10), and one hundred
(100) year design storms, respectively. Outfall 1 does not meet the peak
discharge requirements of the Ordinance. Stormwater facilities have to
be installed to lower the post-development peak discharges to the predevelopment
discharges of four (4), eight (8), and twelve (12) cfs for the
two (2), ten (10), and one hundred (100) year design storms,
respectively.
Below is an example of appropriate Stormwater Management Plan
summary tables as required:
Pre-Development Peak Discharges
Design Storm 2-year 10-year 100-year
Outfall 1 4 cfs 8 cfs 12 cfs
Outfall 2 4 cfs 8 cfs 12 cfs
Post-Development Peak Discharges
Design Storm 2-year 10-year 100-year
Outfall 1
(undetained)
3.6 cfs
(12 cfs)
7.5 cfs
(24 cfs)
10.9 cfs
(36 cfs)
Outfall 2 3 cfs 6 cfs 9 cfs
Post-Development Requirements
The design of stormwater runoff control facilities shall be based on
the total contributing drainage area, not just the area being
developed. Any offsite drainage area must be included in the plan
facilities or safely diverted around the planned facilities.
Offsite contributing areas that are not diverted must use the meadow
condition runoff curve number for pre-development flow
computations whether the offsite area is presently developed or not.
Offsite contributing areas that are diverted shall use the highest
anticipated runoff curve number for the offsite area for a safe design.
Also, the diversion shall provide three-tenths (0.3) of a foot of
freeboard and assume ten percent (10%) settlement for the one
hundred (100) year flow. The conveyance shall be contained within
an easement. The discharge location for the diversion shall be at the
pre-developed outfall or at a stable location.
If more than thirty percent (30%) of the drainage area will be
impervious, it will often be necessary to divide the drainage area into
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 18 of 33
a pervious sub-area and impervious sub-area for correct
computation of peak flow.
Peak Discharge Method-
For Wisconsin, use the Type II, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall
distribution for design storms.
Natural depressions shall be evaluated or considered when
determining peak discharge rates for the predevelopment condition.
Storage Volume for Detention Basins (TR-55)-
The approximate storage-routing curves should not be used if the
adjustment for ponding (discussed above in the peak discharge
section) is used.
This manual method is good for determining quick estimates of the
effects of temporary detention on peak discharges. Computer
programs that utilize TR-20 provide more accurate methods of
analysis and routing.
The procedure should not be used to perform final design if an error
in storage of twenty-five percent (25%) cannot be tolerated. Figure
6-1 may significantly overestimate the required storage capacity.
When the peak outflow discharge is too close to post-development
peak inflow discharge, parameters that affect the rate of rise of a
hydrograph become especially significant.
Design Clarifications:
It is recommended that the developer and designer contact the local municipality
to discuss peak discharge requirements for the site early in the design process.
The local municipality may have adopted alternative peak discharge
requirements for the site which are different than the Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Ordinance. At a minimum, the peak discharge
requirements contained in NR 151 shall be met.
Outfalls – Performance standards for peak discharge shall be satisfied at each
outfall associated with the site. Written approval is required from down slope
property owners if post-development peak discharge rates are not less than or
equal to pre-development peak discharge rates at each outfall.
Disconnection – Disconnecting impervious surfaces can help achieve the peak
discharge requirement. Disconnecting impervious surfaces not only reduces
runoff volumes, but also increases time of concentrations. In order to consider
an impervious surface as “disconnected”, the following criteria shall be met:
Residential Roofs: Discharge runoff over a minimum twenty foot (20’)
long pervious surface that is in good condition and graded for sheet flow.
Other Impervious Surfaces:
? Source area flow length may not exceed seventy-five feet (75’).
? Source area and pervious area must be graded for sheet flow.
? Pervious area must be in good condition, have a slope less than
eight percent (8%), and have a flow length at least as long as the
contributing impervious area’s length (but never less than twenty
feet (20’)).
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 19 of 33
Source: DNR Post-Construction Stormwater Management Workshops
Uncontrolled Areas – The performance standard for peak discharge is an outfall
standard. Often, a site contains an uncontrolled area for each outfall that does
not flow through a BMP (e.g. wet pond). Typically, it is necessary to increase the
peak discharge control provided by the onsite BMP in order to offset or over
compensate for the uncontrolled area.
Routine Maintenance Areas – No performance standard or peak discharge
reduction is required for routine maintenance areas. However, the applicant is
responsible for proper performance of onsite BMPs. In order to ensure proper
BMP performance, the applicant has two (2) options:
Divert the routine maintenance area around onsite BMPs, or
Include runoff volumes from the routine maintenance area in onsite BMP
calculations. For the predevelopment condition, routine maintenance
areas shall be modeled as a meadow land use. For the postdevelopment
condition, routine maintenance areas shall be modeled
using the actual site conditions.
(c) INFILTRATION
Post-construction sites with twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. or more of
impervious surface disturbance and post-construction sites with one (1) acre or
more of land disturbance are required to meet the ordinance’s numeric
performance standards. All other post-construction sites are not required to meet
these numeric performance standards. BMP design guidance is provided below
in Section (h) for sites with less than twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. of
impervious surface disturbance.
Computer Models:
A model that calculates runoff volume, such as RECARGA, SLAMM, P8, TR-55,
or an approved equivalent methodology may be used to evaluate the efficiency of
the infiltration design. Information on how to access RECARGA, SLAMM, or P8
is available at http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/nps/models/index.htm or contact
the stormwater coordinator in the runoff management section of the bureau of
watershed management at (608) 267-7694.
Use the most recent version of RECARGA, SLAMM, and P8. The applicant may
request a waiver of this requirement.
Depending on the type of infiltration device, groundwater mounding may need to
be evaluated. Refer to Table 1, Technical Standard 1002 for groundwater
If Parking Lot: 50 feet long (must have sheet flow)
Conveyance
Then grass: At least 50 feet long, sheet flow
good condition, slope not to exceed 8%
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 20 of 33
mounding requirements. A model that calculates groundwater mounding is
available at http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/nps/models/guidance/index.htm or
contact the stormwater coordinator in the runoff management section of the
bureau of watershed management at (608) 267-7694.
Design Clarifications:
Maximum required Effective Infiltration Area (EIA) is calculated as follows:
For residential land uses, the EIA cap is one percent (1%) of the project
site. For residential, the project site is defined as the area of land
disturbance.
For non-residential land uses, the EIA cap is two percent (2%) of the
project site. For non-residential, the project site is defined as the portion
of land disturbance dedicated to rooftops and parking lots.
Excluded and exempted areas are included in the EIA cap calculation.
The maximum required EIA cap may be voluntarily exceeded.
Exclusions – Infiltration from source areas or at locations identified in section
S.07(3)(c)8 of the ordinance is not prohibited. Rather, credit will not be given
toward achieving the infiltration requirement. Runoff from excluded areas does
not have to be included in calculating the infiltration goal. However, if runoff from
an excluded area flows through an infiltration BMP, the following is required:
Use caution. These source areas and locations are excluded from the
ordinance’s infiltration requirement due to groundwater contamination
concerns. The municipality is not responsible for the applicant’s decision
to infiltrate this runoff. The applicant is solely responsible for NR 140
compliance and groundwater protection.
The BMP design must take runoff from excluded areas into account to
assure the device can safely handle the additional flow and volume.
Exemptions – Infiltration from source areas or at locations identified in section
S.07(3)(c)9 of the ordinance is not required. Despite the ordinance, the applicant
may choose to infiltrate exempted runoff. If exempted runoff is infiltrated, credit
will be given toward achieving the infiltration requirement. Runoff from exempted
areas does not have to be included in calculating the infiltration goal. However, if
runoff from an exempted area flows through an infiltration BMP, the BMP design
must take it into account to assure the device can safely handle the additional
flow and volume.
Groundwater Protection – It is the applicant’s sole responsibility to protect
groundwater. Compliance with Preventative Action Limits (PAL) contained in NR
140 must be maintained. Also, infiltration system discharges must remain below
Enforcement Standards (ES) contain in NR 140. DNR Technical Standards
should meet these groundwater protection requirements.
Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP):
Definition takes into consideration best available technology, costeffectiveness,
natural resource protection, historic preservation, human
safety and welfare, and site conditions (see ordinance).
Topography – To achieve the infiltration requirement, maximum extent
practicable should not be interpreted to require significant topography
changes that create an excessive financial burden. Two feet (2’) or less
of elevation change is considered reasonable and to the MEP.
Pumping – To achieve the infiltration requirement, maximum extent
practicable should not be interpreted to require stormwater pumping.
Roof Runoff – To minimize potential groundwater impacts, it is desirable to
infiltrate the cleanest runoff. To achieve this, a design may propose greater
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 21 of 33
infiltration of runoff from low pollutant sources such as roofs, and less from higher
pollutant source areas such as parking lots.
Disconnection – Disconnection of impervious surfaces can be used to help
achieve the infiltration requirement. However, disconnection is not considered to
be part of an infiltration system. Therefore, disconnected areas do not count
toward the maximum effective infiltration area calculation. In order to consider an
impervious surface as “disconnected”, the following criteria shall be met:
Residential Roofs: Discharge runoff over a minimum twenty foot (20’)
long pervious surface that is in good condition and graded for sheet flow.
Other Impervious Surfaces:
? Source area flow length may not exceed seventy-five feet (75’).
? Source area and pervious area must be graded for sheet flow.
? Pervious area must be in good condition, have a slope less than
eight percent (8%), and have a flow length at least as long as the
contributing impervious area’s length (but never less than twenty
fee (20’)).
Source: DNR Post-Construction Stormwater Management Workshops
Routine Maintenance Areas – No performance standard or infiltration
requirement is provided for routine maintenance areas. However, the applicant
is responsible for proper performance of onsite BMPs. In order to ensure proper
BMP performance, the applicant has two (2) options:
Divert the routine maintenance area around onsite BMPs, or
Include runoff volumes from the routine maintenance area in onsite BMP
calculations. The applicant will receive credit for infiltrating runoff from
the routine maintenance area provided it is not an excluded area.
Offsite Drainage Areas – The applicant is not responsible for satisfying infiltration
performance standards for offsite areas that drain into the project site. However,
the applicant is responsible for proper performance of onsite BMPs. In order to
ensure proper onsite BMP performance, the applicant has two (2) options:
Divert offsite runoff around onsite BMPs, or
Include offsite runoff volumes in the onsite BMP calculations. The
amount of onsite credit is determined by prorating the infiltration volume.
The applicant will not receive credit for infiltrating offsite runoff, unless
the BMP is a regional facility.
Alternative Uses – The volume of runoff used for alternative uses will be credited
towards the infiltration requirement. Alternative uses may include toilet flushing,
laundry, and irrigation (e.g. cisterns, rain barrels, green roofs). In addition to the
stormwater benefits, these alternative uses may also reduce municipal invoices
for drinking water.
If Parking Lot: 50 feet long (must have sheet flow)
Conveyance
Then grass: At least 50 feet long, sheet flow
good condition, slope not to exceed 8%
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 22 of 33
Example Calculations:
The site is currently one hundred (100) acres of cropland. Following
development, the site will be thirty (30) acres medium residential, twenty (20)
acres commercial, and fifty (50) acres cropland. Native soils in the area to be
developed are sandy loams, silt loams and silty clay loams. Hydrologic soil
groups are B and C with an average pre-development curve number of seventyfive
(75). A site investigation using Step B of the DNR Technical Standard 1002,
Site Evaluation for Stormwater Infiltration, determined that ten (10) of the acres to
be developed into medium residential have an infiltration rate of one-tenth (0.10)
in/hr and are therefore exempt from the infiltration requirements. The site
investigation also determined that ten (10) acres to be developed into
commercial are excluded from the infiltration requirements. The postdevelopment
curve number for the pervious portions of the residential and
commercial components will be eighty (80), based on TR-55. The residential
component will be forty percent (40%) impervious. The commercial component
will be eighty percent (80%) impervious.
The residential and commercial components will meet the infiltration
requirements using two (2) infiltration basins. Upon completion of a preliminary
site layout, two (2) locations were chosen for investigation using Step C of
Technical Standard 1002. The first location investigated was in the residential
area that is not exempt from the infiltration requirements. The soil texture at the
residential infiltration basin site is a sandy loam with a design infiltration rate of
five-tenths (0.5) in/hr. The second location investigated was in the commercial
area that is not excluded from the infiltration requirements. The soil texture at the
commercial infiltration basin site is a loamy sand with a design infiltration rate of
one and sixty-three hundredths (1.63) in/hr.
Step 1: Determine Infiltration Basin Size - Residential Component
Step 1A: Determine Target Stay-on Depth – Residential
Using Chart 1, the target stay-on depth is twenty-four inches (24”)/year.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Pre-Development Curve Number
Stay-on (Annual Infiltration) Requirement (inches/yr)
NR 151 Residential Req. NR 151 Commercial Req. 100% Predevelopment
CHART 1 - TARGET STAY-ON (ANNUAL INFILTRATION) REQUIREMENT
Based on the annual 1981 Rainfall for Madison, WI
Note: 100% Predevelopment represents infiltration under predevelopment conditions
Step 1B: Determine Preliminary Effective Infiltration Area – Residential
Using Chart 4, the preliminary effective infiltration area needed for the
infiltration basin is twelve thousand one hundred ninety-seven (12,197)
square feet (forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) * twenty
(20) acres * one and four-tenths percent (1.4%)).
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 23 of 33
Chart 4: Infiltration Basin Design Curve
Sandy Loam Soil: Kd=0.50 in/hr and 12-inch Ponding Depth
40%
60%
0%
20%
80%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Infiltration Basin Area (% of Drainage Basin)
Cumulative Stay-on Depth (inches)
CNp = 60
% Impervious
CNp = 80
% Impervious
100% Impervious
Rainfall
##%
##%
Rainfall File: Madison, WI
1981
Step 1C: Maximum Required Effective Infiltration Area – Residential
Residential Land Disturbance (thirty (30) acres total)
? Building roof five (5) acres
? Driveway & sidewalk two (2) acres
? Street five (5) acres
? Lawn/landscaping eighteen (18) acres
Maximum Required EIA = thirteen thousand sixty-eight (13,068)
sq. ft. (forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) * thirty
(30) acres * one percent (1%))
Step 1D: Determine Final Effective Infiltration Area – Residential
Using Technical Standard 1003, the preliminary effective infiltration area
of twelve thousand one hundred ninety-seven (12,197) sq. ft. needs to
be adjusted (depth, slope, cell configuration) to determine the final
effective infiltration area. Groundwater mounding also needs to be
checked. The maximum EIA cap does not appear to impact the
infiltration basin’s size (twelve thousand one hundred ninety-seven
(12,197) sq. ft. < thirteen thousand sixty-eight (13,068) sq. ft.).
Step 2: Determine Infiltration Basin Size – Commercial Component
Step 2A: Determine Target Stay-on Depth – Commercial
Using Chart 1, the target stay-on depth is sixteen inches(16”)/year.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Pre-Development Curve Number
Stay-on (Annual Infiltration) Requirement (inches/yr)
NR 151 Residential Req. NR 151 Commercial Req. 100% Predevelopment
CHART 1 - TARGET STAY-ON (ANNUAL INFILTRATION) REQUIREMENT
Based on the annual 1981 Rainfall for Madison, WI
Note: 100% Predevelopment represents infiltration under predevelopment conditions
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 24 of 33
Step 2B: Determine Preliminary Effective Infiltration Area – Commercial
Using Chart 6, the preliminary effective infiltration area needed for the
infiltration basin is two thousand six hundred fourteen (2,614) square feet
(forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) * ten (10) acres * sixtenths
percent (0.6%)).
Chart 6: Infiltration Basin Design Curve
Loamy Sand Soil: Kd=1.63 in/hr and 12-inch Ponding Depth
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
5
10
15
20
25
30
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
Infiltration Basin Area (% of Drainage Basin)
Cumulative Stay-on Depth (inches)
CNp = 60
% Impervious
CNp = 80
% Impervious
100% Impervious
Rainfall
##%
##%
Rainfall File: Madison, WI
1981
Step 2C: Maximum Required Effective Infiltration Area – Commercial
Non-Residential Land Disturbance (twenty (20) acres total)
? Building roof six (6) acres
? Parking lot seven (7) acres
? Street three (3) acres
? Lawn/landscaping four (4) acres
Maximum Required EIA = eleven thousand three hundred
twenty-six (11,326) sq. ft. (forty-three thousand five hundred sixty
(43,560) * thirteen (13) acres * two percent (2%))
Step 2D: Determine Final Effective Infiltration Area – Commercial
Using Technical Standard 1003, the preliminary effective infiltration area
of two thousand six hundred fourteen (2,614) sq. ft. needs to be adjusted
(depth, slope, cell configuration) to determine the final effective infiltration
area. Groundwater mounding also needs to be checked. The maximum
EIA cap does not appear to impact the infiltration basin’s size (two
thousand six hundred fourteen (2,614) sq. ft. < eleven thousand three
hundred twenty-six (11,326) sq. ft.).
(d) PROTECTIVE AREAS
All post-construction sites are required to meet the ordinance’s protective area
performance standards.
Design Clarifications:
Adjacent Property Owners – If a stream or channel is placed or relocated along a
property line, an easement or letter of permission is required from any property
owners impacted by the protective area’s new location. Also, if a stormwater
facility or structure is proposed within an onsite stream or channel, one hundred
(100) year flood elevations shall be evaluated to determine if offsite property
owners are impacted by backwater or a flood elevation increase. An easement
or letter of permission is required from any property owners impacted by
backwater.
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 25 of 33
Wetland Delineations – Wetland delineations shall be performed by a
professional soil scientist, professional hydrologist, or other qualified individual
approved by the administering authority. The individual performing the
delineation shall classify the wetland as a less susceptible wetland, highly
susceptible wetland, exceptional resource water, or outstanding resource water.
Disturbances – Protective areas may be disturbed as part of a project, if
necessary. Disturbed areas must be stabilized from erosion and restored with
self-sustaining vegetation.
Type of Vegetation – It is recommended that seeding of non-invasive vegetative
cover be used in the protective areas. Vegetation that is flood and drought
tolerant and can provide long-term bank stability because of an extensive root
system is preferable. Vegetative cover can be measured using the line transect
method described in the University of Wisconsin Extension publication number
A3533, titled “Estimating Residue Using the Line Transect Method”.
Best Management Practices-
BMPs may be located in protective areas (ponds, swales, etc.)
Other state and local regulations may apply to BMPs located in
protective areas and waters of the state, including the following:
? Navigation, Dams, & Bridges (Chapter 30 and 31, Stats.)
? Wetland Water Quality Standards (NR 103)
? Wetlands (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Section 404
regulations)
? Shoreland Management (NR 115, NR 117, & local regulations)
? Floodplain Management (NR 116 & local regulations).
For purposes of section S.07(3)(d)6.d of the ordinance, a vegetated
protective area to filter runoff pollutants from post-construction sites is
not necessary since runoff is not entering the surface water at that
location. Other practices, necessary to meet the requirements of this
section, such as a swale or basin, will need to be designed and
implemented to reduce runoff pollutants before the runoff enters a
surface water of the state.
(e) FUELING AND VEHICLE MAINTENANCE AREAS:
All post-construction sites are required to meet the ordinance’s no visible
petroleum sheen performance standard.
Design Clarifications:
The following BMPs are recommended to meet the performance standards
contained within section S.07(3)(e) of the ordinance:
Enclose vehicle maintenance areas in a building or under a roof.
Install a roof or canopy over fueling areas.
Divert runoff away from fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
Keep adsorbent spill cleanup materials onsite at all times.
Install an oil/water separator and/or biofiltration device.
Post the spill response phone numbers in conspicuous onsite locations.
The municipality’s Illicit Discharge Ordinance requires reporting of
hazardous spills. The local municipality’s spill response phone number
is 911 and the DNR’s twenty-four (24) hour spill response phone number
is 1-800-943-0003.
(f) SWALE TREATMENT FOR TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES
Post-construction sites with twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. or more of
impervious surface disturbance and post-construction sites with one (1) acre or
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 26 of 33
more of land disturbance are required to meet the ordinance’s numeric
performance standards. All other post-construction sites are not required to meet
these numeric performance standards. BMP design guidance is provided below
in Section (h) for sites with less than twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. of
impervious surface disturbance.
Design Clarifications:
For purposes of section S.07(3)(f)1.a of the ordinance, it is preferred that tall and
dense vegetation be maintained within the swale due to its greater effectiveness
at enhancing runoff pollutant removal. However, the local municipality may have
ordinances or other design criteria which dictate the allowable mowing height for
grass swales.
For purposes of section S.07(3)(f)1.b of the ordinance, check dams may be
included in the swale design to slow runoff flows and improve pollutant removal.
Transportation facilities with continuous features such as curb and gutter,
sidewalks or parking lanes do not comply with the design requirements of section
S.07(3)(f)1.b of the ordinance. However, a limited amount of structural measures
such as curb and gutter may be allowed as necessary to account for other
concerns such as human safety or resource protection.
For purposes of section S.07(3)(f)2 of the ordinance, the Department of Natural
Resource’s regional stormwater staff can determine if additional BMPs, beyond a
water quality swale, are needed.
(g) EXEMPTIONS FOR S.07(3) PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Projects that consist of only the construction of bicycle paths or pedestrian trails
generally meet the exception found under section S.07(3)(g)3.d of the ordinance,
as these facilities have minimal connected imperviousness.
(h) SITES WITH LESS THAN TWENTY THOUSAND (20,000) SQ. FT. OF
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE DISTURBANCE
Pursuant to S.07(6) of the ordinance, the municipality may establish stormwater
management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if
the municipality determines than an added level of protection is needed.
Design Clarifications:
For a post-construction site with less than twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. of
impervious surface disturbance, the applicant shall comply with the protective
area requirements in section S.07(3)(d) of the ordinance, petroleum sheen
requirements in section S.07(3)(e) of the ordinance, and one (1) of the two (2)
requirements provided below. It is recommended that the developer and
designer contact the local municipality early in the design process to discuss
which requirement must be complied with:
1. Disconnect impervious surfaces. Ninety percent (90%) or more of disturbed
impervious surfaces must be disconnected. In order to consider an
impervious surface as “disconnected”, the following criteria shall be met:
Roofs: Discharge runoff over a minimum twenty foot (20’) long pervious
surface that is in good condition and graded for sheet flow.
Other Impervious Surfaces:
? Source area flow length may not exceed seventy-five feet (75’).
? Source area and pervious area must be graded for sheet flow.
? Pervious area must be in good condition, have a slope less than
eight percent (8%), and have a flow length at least as long as the
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 27 of 33
contributing impervious area’s length (but never less than twenty
feet (20’)).
Source: DNR Post-Construction Stormwater Management Workshops
2. Use the following best management practices and good housekeeping
practices to reduce peak flow rates, improve water quality, and encourage
infiltration:
Vehicle and equipment maintenance shall be performed inside buildings
when feasible. Used fluids/batteries shall be stored and disposed of
properly. Repair any vehicle leaks as soon as possible.
Outdoor trash bins are required for fast food restaurants, convenience
stores, and gas stations. Litter shall be cleaned up daily and disposed of
properly.
Fertilizers shall be used sparingly for lawn areas. Fertilizers shall be
immediately swept off streets, parking lots, driveways, and sidewalks.
Soil testing and compliance with Technical Standard 1100 (Turf Nutrient
Management) is also encouraged.
Stream, shoreline, swale, and other erosion problems shall be repaired
as part of the development project when feasible.
Roof downspouts, parking lots, driveways, and sidewalks shall discharge
stormwater runoff to lawn or other pervious areas when feasible. Rain
barrels are also encouraged at roof downspouts to store water for
irrigation and watering landscaped areas (reduces municipal water
invoice).
Create depressions in lawn areas and other landscape areas to
temporarily store and treat stormwater runoff from roofs, parking lots,
driveways and sidewalks when feasible. Grass swales, biofiltration
devices, bioretention devices, and rain gardens are also encouraged
when feasible.
Filter baskets shall be installed in parking lot catch basins when feasible.
Preserve wooded areas, trees, shrubs, and other native vegetation that
are in good condition when feasible.
(i) OTHER DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Topographic surveys and plans shall be on 1929 NGVD vertical datum.
If Parking Lot: 50 feet long (must have sheet flow)
Conveyance
Then grass: At least 50 feet long, sheet flow
good condition, slope not to exceed 8%
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 28 of 33
Grass swales shall be designed with a minimum longitudinal slope of one
percent (1%).
Storm sewers shall be designed for a ten (10) year design storm. A copy of
storm sewer design calculations, time of concentration paths, tailwater
conditions, and watershed maps shall be submitted.
Culverts shall be designed for a twenty-five (25), fifty (50) or one hundred
(100) year design storm, depending on location. Contact the municipality for
more specific design guidance. A copy of culvert design calculations, time of
concentration paths, tailwater conditions, and watershed maps shall be
submitted.
Overland flow paths shall be designed for a one hundred (100) year design
storm. Flow paths shall be provided for street low points and other
depressions. The location of overland flow paths shall be shown on the
plans. The maximum depth of ponding in street low points shall be nine
inches (9”). The nine-inch (9”) depth is measured at the street centerline.
Minimum finished ground elevations shall be provided for buildings if deemed
necessary to provide reasonable flood protection. The minimum finished
ground elevation shall be > one foot (1’) above the one hundred (100) year
flood elevation and extend at least fifteen feet (15’) beyond the building.
Minimum elevations may need to be specified for lakes, rivers, streams,
ponds, and overland flow paths.
A letter of permission may be required from down slope property owners if a
post-development “point discharge” was “sheet flow” during the predevelopment
condition.
The applicant may request a waiver or lesser design standard if site
characteristics create a hardship.
Maximum Permissible Velocities for Channels
Channel Cover
Slope Range
%
Erosion-resistant
soils
Easily eroded
soils
Bermuda Grass
0-5 8 fps 6 fps
5-10 7 fps 5 fps
>10 6 fps 4 fps
Buffalo grass, Kentucky
bluegrass, Smooth
brome, blue grama
0-5 7 fps 5 fps
5-10 6 fps 4 fps
>10 5 fps 3 fps
Grass mixture
0-5 5 fps 4 fps
5-10 4 fps 3 fps
Do not use on slopes steeper than 10%, except for
side slopes in a combination channel.
Lespedeza sericea,
weeping love grass
Ischaemum (yellow
bluestem), kudzu,
alfalfa, crabgrass
0-5 3.5 fps 2.5 fps
Do not use on slopes steeper than 5%, except for
side slopes in a combination channel.
Annuals used on mild
slopes or as temporary
protection until
permanent covers are
established,
common lespedeza,
Sudan grass
0-5 3.5 fps 2.5 fps
Use on slopes steeper than 5% is not
recommended
Source – Chow Open Channel Hydraulics
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 29 of 33
(4) CONSIDERATIONS FOR ONSITE/OFFSITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
MEASURES
All proposed land development activities should be planned, designed, and implemented:
1. In a manner that best fits the terrain of the site, avoiding steep slopes and other
environmentally sensitive areas;
2. According to the unique resource conditions at, around, and downstream from a
given site;
3. According to the principles of Low Impact Development. Use source controls rather
than end-of-pipe treatment. Reduce, prevent and mitigate the adverse impacts of
development by maintaining infiltration, reducing frequency and volume of
discharges, reducing peak flows, and maintaining groundwater recharge. These
goals can be accomplished by using:
Reduced impervious surfaces
Functional grading to slow runoff and thereby lengthen the time of concentration
Vegetated channels rather than paving or pipes
Disconnection of impervious surfaces; drain to vegetated areas
Bioretention (rain gardens) and filtration (buffer) landscape areas
Any other techniques that reduce the runoff curve number (RCN) or increase the
time of concentration (Tc)
Use wet detention basins after all source area practices and techniques have
been employed
Overall, the goal is to design the site as an integral, living part of the environment
with careful use of principles and practices that are both low impact on runoff and
simple for people to maintain and live with.
4. To maintain groundwater recharge areas and the infiltration capacity of native soils
by avoiding the unnecessary filling of large natural depressions or compaction of
upper soil horizons by construction equipment;
5. To maintain soil infiltration by keeping all topsoil onsite;
6. To provide the protective area, shoreland, wetland, and environmentally sensitive
area setback along all water courses; and
7. According to the sequence in the “Treatment Train”:
a. First do source controls:
Reduce impervious areas to the maximum extent possible
Maintain undisturbed soil
Maintain existing trees, shrubs and vegetation
b. Next do lot controls
Grade lots to create long areas of overland flow rather than channels
Minimize directly connected impervious areas by such practices as directing
roof water to vegetated areas and draining driveways to grass rather than the
street
Include “rain gardens” (undrained areas that will pond water)
c. Then do site controls
Use grassed waterways and diversions rather than paved channels
Maintain wetlands
Use vegetated road ditches rather than curb and gutter
Use wet detention basins. They can have pools five (5) or more feet deep or
may be designed as wetlands, but existing wetlands cannot be incorporated
into stormwater facilities.
Use offline detention basins
d. Finally, do Regional controls such as regional detention basins.
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 30 of 33
(5) LOCATION AND REGIONAL TREATMENT OPTION
When using the regional treatment option, a letter is required from the owner of the
regional facility. At a minimum, the letter shall state the following:
Regional facility complies with ordinance requirements,
Site can use regional facility for ordinance compliance, and
Maintenance agreement for regional facility has been recorded at the County
Register of Deeds.
(6) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS
S.08 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES AND FEES
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED
(2) PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES
(3) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PERMIT APPLICATION
(4) PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
The permit applicant is required to post the permit in a conspicuous place at the
construction site.
Record Drawings-
Post-construction sites with twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. or more of
impervious surface disturbance and post-construction sites with one (1) acre or
more of land disturbance are required to have record drawings. Record drawings
shall be signed by a licensed Professional Engineer. Agricultural land uses,
unless they are exceptionally large or special in some other way, are not required
to have record drawings. Typically, agricultural land uses will not need anything
more than review and acceptance by the administering authority.
Post-construction sites with less than twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. of
impervious surface disturbance are not typically required to have record
drawings. Typically, sites with less than twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. of
impervious surface disturbance will not need anything more than review and
acceptance by the administering authority.
(5) PERMIT CONDITIONS
(6) PERMIT DURATION
(7) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS
S.09 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
(1) PLAN REQUIREMENTS
The stormwater management plan for post-construction sites with twenty thousand
(20,000) sq. ft. or more of impervious surface disturbance and post-construction sites
with one (1) acre or more of land disturbance shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information.
(a) Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their designees:
landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification;
person(s) responsible for installation of stormwater management practices; and
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 31 of 33
person(s) responsible for maintenance of stormwater management practices
prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party.
(b) A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed, referenced
to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to block and lot numbers within a
recorded land subdivision plat.
(c) Pre-development site conditions, including:
1. One (1) or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch (1”)
equals one hundred feet (100’). The site maps shall show the following:
site location and legal property description; predominant soil types and
hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition; one (1) or two
foot (2’) topographic contours of the site; topography and drainage
network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff
patterns onto, through, and from the site; watercourses that may affect or
be affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used in
hydrology determinations to show compliance with performance
standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the one
hundred (100) year floodplain; location of wells and wellhead protection
areas covering the project area and delineated pursuant to s. NR 811.16,
Wis. Adm. Code.
2. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show
compliance with performance standards. All major assumptions used in
developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The geographic
areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced
to the required map(s).
(d) Post-development site conditions, including:
1. Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography
and land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates
and volumes to surface waters and wetlands.
2. Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management measures in
the development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and
ordinances.
a. Stormwater infiltration systems and ponds shall be located at
least four hundred feet (400’) from a well serving a community
water system unless the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources and municipality concur that a lesser separation
distance would provide adequate protection of a well from
contamination.
b. Stormwater management practices shall be located with a
minimum separation distance from any well serving a noncommunity
or private water system as listed within s. NR 812.08.
3. One (1) or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch (1”)
equals one hundred feet (100’) showing the following: post-construction
pervious areas including vegetative cover type and condition; impervious
surfaces including all buildings, structures, and pavement; postconstruction
one or two foot topographic contours of the site; postconstruction
drainage network including enough of the contiguous
properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site;
locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of
maintenance easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow
path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; location and
type of all stormwater management conveyance and treatment practices,
including the onsite and offsite tributary drainage area; location and type
of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the drainage and
treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed
street, storm drain, or natural drainage way; watershed boundaries used
in hydrology and pollutant loading calculations and any changes to lakes,
streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site.
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 32 of 33
4. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show
compliance with performance standards. The computations shall be
made for each discharge point in the development, and the geographic
areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced
to the required map(s).
5. Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the
placement and design of stormwater management measures. When
permanent infiltration systems are used, appropriate onsite testing shall
be conducted to determine if seasonal groundwater elevation or top of
bedrock is within five feet (5’) of the proposed infiltration system.
Detailed drawings including cross-sections and profiles of all permanent
stormwater conveyance and treatment practices.
(e) A description and installation schedule for the stormwater management practices
needed to meet the performance standards in S.07.
(f) A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater management
practice including the required maintenance activities and maintenance activity
schedule.
(g) Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of each
stormwater management practice.
(h) Other information requested in writing by the administering authority to determine
compliance of the proposed stormwater management measures with the
provisions of this ordinance.
(i) All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be
certified by a [licensed professional engineer] to be prepared in accordance with
accepted engineering practice and requirements of this ordinance.
(2) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS
S.10 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
(1) MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT REQUIRED
Post-construction sites with twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. or more of impervious
surface disturbance and post-construction sites with one (1) acre or more of land
disturbance are required to have a maintenance agreement. The applicant shall use the
municipality’s standard forms for the maintenance agreement. The local municipality is
responsible for recording the signed maintenance agreement at the County Register of
Deeds.
Post-construction sites with less than twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. of impervious
surface disturbance are not typically required to have a maintenance agreement.
Sites utilizing the regional treatment option are not typically required to have a
maintenance agreement. However, a maintenance agreement is required for the
regional facility.
(2) AGREEMENT PROVISIONS
(3) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS
S.11 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF GUARANTEE
Post-construction sites with twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. or more of impervious
surface disturbance and post-construction sites with one (1) acre or more of land
disturbance are required to have a financial guarantee. The financial guarantee includes
the cost associated with stormwater BMPs, record drawings, project administration, and
contingencies.
VILLAGE OF SUAMICO POST-CONSTRUCTION REFERENCE GUIDE
Page 33 of 33
Post-construction sites with less than twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft. of impervious
surface disturbance are not typically required to have a financial guarantee.
Sites utilizing the regional treatment option are not typically required to have a financial
guarantee.
(2) CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE
The financial guarantee shall not be released until the applicant conducts a final
inspection with a municipal representative, submits “record drawings” certified by a
licensed Professional Engineer, completes punch list items, and pays fees.
(3) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS
S.12 FEE SCHEDULE
S.13 ENFORCEMENT
S.14 APPEALS
(1) BOARD OF APPEALS OR ADJUSTMENT
(2) WHO MAY APPEAL
S.15 SEVERABILITY
S.16 EFFECTIVE DATE