Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Construction and Penalties
[Adopted as Secs. 21.01 and 21.04 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 1-1. Rules of Construction.
In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
ordinance:
§ 1-2. Penalty provisions. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No
11-01-2018]
A. Wisconsin Statutes. All references to "Wisconsin Statutes" or "Wis.
Stats.," wherever used in this Code, shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Gender, singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any
ordinance imparting the masculine gender may extend and be applied
to females as well as males, and every word imparting the singular
number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as
well as to one person or thing; provided these rules of construction shall
not be applied to any provisions which shall contain any express
language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or
context of such provisions may be repugnant thereto.
C. Person. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons,
firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic
and all entities of any kind capable of being sued unless plainly
inapplicable.
D. Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may
by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirements shall be construed to include all such acts when done by
an authorized agent.
A. General penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of
this Code shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a
penalty, which shall be as follows:1
(1) First offense penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of
this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $5 nor
more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall
be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are
paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Second offense and subsequent offense penalty. Any person found
guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this
Code who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the
1. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
same ordinance within one year shall upon conviction thereof
forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $1,500 for each such
offense, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the
county jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid,
but not exceeding six months.
B. Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues
or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall
preclude the Village from maintaining any appropriate action to
prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code.
C. Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to
pay a forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court for
violation of any ordinance of the Village, the court may, in lieu of
ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has
been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of
the defendant for such forfeiture and costs.
§ 1-2 SLINGER CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
§ 1-3. Preamble.
Pursuant to § Wis. Stats. 66.0103, 62.23 and 236.45(4) the ordinances
of the Village of Slinger will be recodified following all state required
notice and hearing requirements. Following a Class 2 Notice, the Planning
Commission held a Public Hearing regarding all Zoning and Land Division
ordinance amendments on October 17, 2018 and the Village Board held
three readings to announce and notify to the public the Village's intent
to recodify the Village's Code of Ordinances, including Zoning and Land
Division ordinances, on November 5, 2018 and November 19, 2018 and
December 3, 2018. The proposed recodified form of the Village's
ordinances, including Schedule A (which notes specific revisions at time
of adoption of Code) was made available for viewing at Village Hall (300
Slinger Road, Slinger WI 53086) during all regular office hours as of
October 1, 2018 and made available online at www.vi.slinger.wi.gov as of
October 2, 2018.
§ 1-4. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the Village of Slinger
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Village Board of the
Village of Slinger, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 550, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Village
of Slinger," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-5. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-6. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public for at least two weeks,
in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., and until final action is taken on
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Village Clerk, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village Board
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Village of Slinger" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted
in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Village of Slinger, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required by law, a notice of the adoption of this
ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The publication of notice of the enactment of this ordinance, coupled
with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-10. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code required
to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code.
§ 1-11. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Village Board. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-12. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of
Slinger to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
§ 1-7 SLINGER CODE § 1-12
1:6
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a forfeiture of not
more than $500.
§ 1-13. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-14. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-15. Repealer.
§ 1-16. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-15 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Except as described in § 1-16, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this
ordinance are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the Village of Slinger which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and
effect.
B. The following sections in the prior Municipal Code are specifically
repealed:
(1) Sec. 30.52, electrical contractors' licenses.
(2) Sec. 16.06, public entertainment (show licenses).
(3) Secs. 7.01 to 7.05, health and sanitation regulations.
(4) Sec. 9.13, library.
(5) Sec. 9.065, junk and discarded property.
(6) Sec. 9.10, abandoned refrigerators.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to March 19, 2018.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending a zoning map or otherwise
rezoning property.
O. Any charter ordinances.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Village.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
deposit or bond schedule.
§ 1-16 SLINGER CODE § 1-16
1:8
§ 1-17. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending
impact fees, specifically Chapter 486, Impact Fees, (previously Chapter
23 "Impact Fees") and § 398-7 Sewers and Sewage Disposal: Annual
budget and sewer service charges, (previously Section 12.07 "Publicly
Owned Treatment Works and Collection System-Annual Budget and
Sewer Service Charges").
S. The Land Division Ordinance (Chapter 495, previously Chapter 32), No.
05-01-2015 as adopted June 15, 2015 and without amendment.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Village of Slinger, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B
hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the Village Board that all such changes be adopted as part
of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
B. The following outdated terms have been changed where they appeared
in the prior Code:
(1) "USDA Soil Conservation Service" to "USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service."
(2) "Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations" to
"Department of Safety and Professional Services."
(3) "Department of Commerce" to "Department of Safety and
Professional Services."
(4) "Department of Health and Family Services" to "Department of
Health Services."
(5) "Board of Appeals" to "Zoning Board of Appeals."
(6) "Plan Commission" to "Planning Commission."
(7) "Policemen" and "firemen" to "police officers" and "firefighters."
(8) "Chairman" to "Chairperson."
C. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
§ 1-18. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 1-18 SLINGER CODE § 1-18
1:10
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Review Appeals Board — See
Ch. 14, Art. VIII.
§ 5-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to afford a constitutionally sufficient, fair
and orderly administrative procedure and review in connection with
determinations by all Village officers, employees, agents, agencies,
committees, boards and commissions which may involve constitutionally
protected rights of specific persons which are entitled to due process
protections under the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Chapter 68,
Wis. Stats., relating to municipal administrative review procedure, shall be
in full force and effect in the Village, except as to those provisions otherwise
provided in this chapter.
§ 5-2. Review of initial determination.
Upon the filing of a written request by any person aggrieved to review
an initial determination filed pursuant to the provisions of § 68.08, Wis.
Stats., all Village officers, employees, agents, agencies, committees, boards
and commissions receiving such a request shall conduct administrative
reviews of their own determinations in accordance with § 68.09, Wis. Stats.
In addition, all such written requests shall be immediately referred to the
Village Attorney.
§ 5-3. Determinations reviewable.
The following determinations are reviewable under this chapter:
A. The grant or denial in whole or in part after application of an initial
permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except a fermented malt
beverage or intoxicating liquor license.
B. The suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing permit,
license, right, privilege or authority, except as provided in § 5-4 of this
chapter.2
C. The denial of a grant of money or other thing of substantial value under
a statute or ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such
grant.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:11
§ 5-4. Determinations not subject to review.
Except as provided in § 5-3 of this chapter, the following determinations are
not reviewable under this chapter:
§ 5-5. Administrative Review Appeals Board.
D. The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a
Village employee or officer, other than by a court.
A. A legislative enactment, which is an ordinance, resolution or adopted
motion of the Board.
B. Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures
under statutes other than Chapter 68, Wis. Stats.
C. The denial of a tort or contract claim for money, required to be filed
with the Village pursuant to statutory procedures of the filing of such
claims.
D. The suspension, removal or disciplining or nonrenewal of a contract of a
Village employee or officer.
E. The grant, denial, suspension or revocations of a fermented malt
beverage license or intoxicating liquor license under § 125.12(1), (2)
and (3), Wis. Stats.
F. Judgments and orders of a court.
G. Determinations made during Village labor negotiations.
H. Any action which is subject to administrative review procedures as
otherwise provided in this Code.
I. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any action or
determination of a Village authority which does not involve the
constitutionally protected right of a specific person or persons to due
process in connection with the actions or determinations.
A. Membership. See Chapter 14, Boards, Commissions and Committees,
Article VIII, Administrative Review Appeals Board, of this Code.
B. Powers and duties. The Board shall have the duty and responsibility of
hearing appeals from initial determinations of administrative
determinations or decisions of Village officers, employees, agents,
agencies, committees, boards and commissions filed in accordance with
§ 68.10, Wis. Stats. In conducting administrative review hearings and
making final decisions, the Board shall be governed by §§ 68.11 and
68.12, Wis. Stats.
§ 5-3 SLINGER CODE § 5-6
1:12
§ 5-6. Conflicting Code provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to repeal or supersede
the provisions of any other section of this Code in conflict herewith or
providing other procedures for review of administrative determinations
within the Village except when otherwise specifically provided in said
sections.
Chapter 14
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Village Administrator — See Ch. 128. Village Board — See Ch. 134.
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:13

ARTICLE I
Planning Commission
[Adopted as Sec. 2.08 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 14-1. Members.
Pursuant to §§ 62.23(1) and 61.35, Wis. Stats., a Planning Commission for
the Village of Slinger, Wisconsin, is hereby created and is to be comprised
as follows:
§ 14-2. Terms.
The above persons shall serve as Commission members for terms as follows:
§ 14-3. Powers and duties.
The function, duties and powers of the Planning Commission shall be as set
forth in § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
§ 14-4. Organization.
A. Village President, who is the presiding officer.
B. President of the Village Parks, Recreation and Forestry Board or his
substitute.
C. A Village Board Trustee.
D. Four adult residents of the Village of Slinger.
A. The Village President shall serve during his term of office as Village
President.
B. The President of the Village Parks, Recreation and Forestry Board shall
serve during his term of office.
C. The Trustee member of the Board shall be elected by 2/3 vote of the
Village Board and shall serve from the creation of the Commission until
the following April and shall be elected in the same manner each April
thereafter.
D. The four adult resident members of the Commission shall be appointed
by the Village President at the creation of the Commission, two of which
shall hold office for a period ending in one and two years, respectively,
and two of which shall hold office for a period ending in three years,
from the succeeding first day of May, and thereafter, annually during
April, such members shall be appointed for a term of three years.3
A. Officers. The Village President shall be the Chairperson.4
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4
1:15
§ 14-5. Powers.7
The Village Planning Commission shall have such powers as may be
necessary to enable it to perform its functions and duties and promote
Village planning, including but not limited to the following:
B. Self-government. The Village Planning Commission shall organize and
adopt rules for its own government in accordance with the provisions of
§ 62.23, Wis. Stats.5
C. Meetings. Meetings shall be held at least monthly and at the call of the
Village President or a majority of the full Commission.
D. Committees. Standing and special committees may be appointed by the
Chairperson.
E. Quorum. A quorum shall be four members.6
F. Record. A written record shall be kept showing all actions taken,
resolutions, findings, determinations, transactions and
recommendations made; and a copy shall be filed with the Village Clerk
as a public record.
A. To employ experts and staff and to pay for their services, supplies,
equipment and such other expenses as may be necessary and proper,
not to exceed the appropriations and regulations made by the Village
Board.
B. To make reports and recommendations relating to the planning and
development of the Village to public officials, agencies, utilities and
other organizations and to citizens.
C. To recommend public improvement programs and financing thereof to
the Village Board or Village President.
D. To request available information from any public official, such
information to be furnished within a reasonable time.
E. To enter upon any land. The Commission, its members and employees,
may enter upon any land in the performance of its functions, may make
examinations and surveys and may place and maintain necessary
monuments and marks thereon.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-4 SLINGER CODE § 14-6
1:16
§ 14-6. Duties.
The Village Planning Commission shall have the following functions and
duties:
§ 14-7. Additional powers and duties.
The Village Planning Commission shall have such additional powers and
duties granted or assigned by the Village Board or by Village ordinances. All
the powers and duties granted or assigned to a village plan commission by
§ 62.23, Wis. Stats., and any amendments thereto, are granted or assigned
to the Commission; and such statute is adopted by reference.
A. To make and recommend adoption of a Comprehensive Plan for the
physical development of the Village, including appropriate areas
outside of its boundaries, in accordance with § 62.23(2) and (3), Wis.
Stats., as amended.8
B. To make and recommend an Official Map to the Village Board in
accordance with § 62.23(6), Wis. Stats., as amended.
C. To prepare and recommend a zoning district plan and regulations to the
Village Board in accordance with § 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., as amended.
D. To prepare and recommend land division regulations to the Village
Board in accordance with § 236.45, Wis. Stats.9
E. All annexations, incorporations or consolidations affecting the Village.
F. All divisions of lands within the platting jurisdiction of the Village.
G. All proposed or requested changes and amendments to the Village's
Master Plan, Official Map, zoning and land division codes.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
9. Editor's Note: Original subsection 5, pertaining to lease or sale of public housing, slum
clearance and camps for children, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 14-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-7
1:17

ARTICLE II
Board of Review
[Adopted as Sec. 2.09 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 14-8. Appointments; membership; alternate members.
The Board of Review of the Village of Slinger shall consist of the Village
President, the Village Clerk and one Trustee to be appointed by the Village
President annually. Annually, the Village President shall appoint two
alternates to serve on the Board of Review in the event a standing Board
member of the Board of Review is removed or unable to serve for any reason
pursuant to Chapter 70 of Wis. Statutes. In the event that an insufficient
number of Board members is able or willing to serve on the Board for any
reason pursuant to Chapter 70 of Wis. Statutes, the Village President shall
appoint additional alternate members to serve as needed.
§ 14-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-8
1:19

ARTICLE III
Parks, Recreation and Forestry Board
[Adopted as Sec. 2.10 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 14-9. Members.
A Parks, Recreation and Forestry Board shall be composed of the following:
§ 14-10. Terms.
§ 14-11. Powers and duties.
A. Two trustees of the Village of Slinger.
B. Five adult residents of the Village of Slinger.
A. Citizen members. All of the citizen members of the Parks, Recreation
and Forestry Board shall be appointed by the Village President and
shall serve five-year terms, providing that of those first appointed, one
shall serve five years, one shall serve four years, one shall serve three
years, one shall serve two years, and one shall serve one year.
B. Trustee members. All Trustee members of the Parks, Recreation and
Forestry Board shall be annually appointed by the Village President.
A. The Parks, Recreation and Forestry Board shall have the power to
expend funds it receives from sources other than taxes or governmental
grants without the approval of the Village Board. All expenditures of
funds derived from taxes or governmental grants shall not be expended
without approval of the Village Board.
B. The Parks, Recreation and Forestry Board shall have all other powers as
set forth in § 27.08(2)(a) and (b), Wis. Stats., as amended.
§ 14-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-11
1:21

ARTICLE IV
Zoning Board of Appeals
[Adopted as Sec. 2.12 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 14-12. Appointments; membership; alternate members.10
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five citizens of the Village
appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by the Village
Board, for terms of three years. The Village President may appoint, for
terms of three years, two alternate members, who shall act with full power
only when a member of the Board refuses to vote because of conflict of
interest or where a member is absent.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-12
1:23

ARTICLE V
Election Officials
[Adopted as Sec. 2.13 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 14-13. Number.11
The election officials shall consist of a minimum of five inspectors. Members
shall be appointed as provided in § 7.30, Wis. Stats., as amended.
§ 14-14. Work hours.
Shifts may be split as determined by the Municipal Clerk.
§ 14-15. Appointments.
The Village President shall appoint election officials with confirmation by
the Village Board as pursuant to §§ 7.30, 7.31 and 7.32, Wis. Stats. Such
election officials shall have all of the power and perform all of the duties
prescribed for such officers by the statutes.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-15
1:25

ARTICLE VI
Library Board
[Adopted as Sec. 2.15 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 14-16. Appointments; membership; terms of office.
The Library Board shall consist of seven members. Members shall be
appointed by the Village President and approved by the Village Board. Upon
their first appointment, the members shall be divided as follows: the sevenmember
Board into three classes, three to serve for three years, two to
serve for two years and two to serve for one year, from the succeeding first
day in May, and thereafter annually during April. Thereafter, appointments
are to be for a three-year term.
§ 14-17. Power and duties.12
The Library Board shall have all power as set forth in § 43.58, Wis. Stats.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-17
1:27

ARTICLE VII
Police Commission
[Adopted as Sec. 2.18 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 14-18. Membership.
The Police Commission shall consist of five citizens, three of which shall
constitute a quorum. The Village President shall annually, between the last
Monday of April and the first Monday of May, appoint, in writing, one
member for a term of five years. Initial appointments shall be for a oneto
five-year term and five-year terms annually as said terms expire. No
Commissioner may serve more than three consecutive five-year terms of
office.
§ 14-19. Authority.
The Commission shall appoint the Chief of Police, who shall hold office
during good behavior, subject to suspension or removal by the Commission
for cause.
§ 14-20. Subordinates.
The Chief of Police shall appoint subordinates subject to approval by the
Commission. Appointments shall be from an eligible list as provided in
§ 62.13, Wis. Stats., as amended, provided by examination and filed with the
Commission.
§ 14-21. Discipline of subordinates.
The Commission shall discipline the Chief of Police and hold a discipline
hearing and impose discipline on subordinates in accordance with the
provisions of § 62.13, Wis. Stats., as amended.
§ 14-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-21
1:29

ARTICLE VIII
Administrative Review Appeals Board
[Adopted as Sec. 2.27 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 14-22. Membership.
The Village Board shall serve as the Administrative Review Appeals Board.
§ 14-23. Powers and duties.
The Administrative Review Appeals Board shall have all power as set forth
in § 5-5, Administrative Review Appeals Board.
§ 14-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-23
1:31
Chapter 23
CITATIONS
§ 23-1. Creation.
Pursuant to § 66.0113, Wis. Stats., the Village of Slinger hereby elects to
use the citation method of enforcement of ordinances other than those for
which a statutory counterpart exists.
§ 23-2. Citation.13
The citation shall provide for the information required in § 66.0113(1)(b),
Wis. Stats.
§ 23-3. Schedule of deposits.
§ 23-4. Issuance of citation.
A. The cash deposits for the various ordinances for which a citation may be
issued are as established on the deposit schedule adopted by the Village
Board, a copy of which is on file with the Village Clerk.14
B. Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or certified check to the
Clerk of Courts, who shall provide a receipt therefor.
C. In addition to the deposit amount listed, the deposit shall include the
costs, fees and surcharges imposed under Ch. 814, Wis. Stats.15
A. Any law enforcement officer may issue citations authorized under this
section.
B. Village officials.
(1) The following Village officials may issue citations with respect to
those specified ordinances which are directly related to their
official responsibilities:
(a) Zoning Inspector.
(b) Building Inspector.
(c) Electrical Inspector.
(d) Plumbing Inspector.
(e) Fire Inspector.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-23 SLINGER CODE § 23-4
1:32
§ 23-5. Procedure.
Section 66.0113(3), Wis. Stats., relating to violator's options and procedure
on default, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
§ 23-6. Nonexclusivity.
Chapter 29
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 29-1. Municipal Court created.
There is created and established a Municipal Court, to be designated as the
"Mid-Moraine Municipal Court," under the provisions of Chapter 755, Wis.
Stats., and pursuant to the agreement for the operation of the Municipal
Court for Washington County, as amended ("agreement"), a copy of which is
on file with the Village Clerk.
§ 29-2. Municipal Court Judge.16
Municipal Court shall be under the jurisdiction of and presided over by
a Municipal Judge, who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in
Wisconsin and who resides in any of the member municipalities as defined
in the Agreement. The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large in the
spring election for a term of four years commencing on May 1 of the year
of his or her election. Governing bodies of the member municipalities shall
provide for a primary election in the event that two or more candidates file
nomination papers for the position of Municipal Judge.
§ 29-3. Bond.
The amount of the bond required by the § 755.03(1), Wis. Stats., shall be
$2,500.
(2) Such Village officials may delegate their authority to issue citations
to their subordinates.
A. Other ordinances. Adoption of this chapter does not preclude the
Village Board from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the
enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other
matter.
B. Other remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude
the Village or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other
ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any
ordinance, regulation or order.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 23-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-4
1:33
§ 29-4. Hours.
The Municipal Court shall be open at such times as the Municipal Judge
determines, subject to the agreement.
§ 29-5. Contempt.
The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture for contempt of court and a jail
sentence for nonpayment of the forfeiture and any applicable assessments
under § 800.12(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 29-6. Jurisdiction.
This chapter shall be construed to limit neither the jurisdiction of the
Municipal Court, nor the authority of the Municipal Court to impose
penalties under the Wisconsin Statutes.
Chapter 36
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 36-1. Policy and purpose.
§ 36-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
A. "Emergency management" shall mean the preparation for carrying out
all emergency functions to minimize injury and repair damage resulting
from a disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile
action, or by fire, flood or other natural causes.
B. To insure that preparation will be adequate to cope with such disasters,
to provide for the common defense, to protect the public peace, and to
preserve the lives and property of the people of Slinger it is hereby
declared necessary:
(1) To establish a local emergency management committee.
(2) To provide for exercise of necessary powers during emergencies.
(3) To provide cooperation and mutual aid between the Village of
Slinger and other political subdivisions.
C. To the maximum extent possible, the Village of Slinger will effectively
prepare for civil defense through the use of human resources, existing
equipment and facilities, and cooperative mutual aid with comparable
political subdivisions and private agencies.
§ 29-4 SLINGER CODE § 36-2
1:34
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — Includes civil defense and means all
measures undertaken by and/or on behalf of the Village of Slinger within
the boundaries of the Village of Slinger.
CIVIL DEFENSE — All measures undertaken by or on behalf of the state,
county, and the Village to prepare for and minimize the effects of enemy
action upon the civilian population.
ENEMY ACTION — Hostile action by a foreign or domestic power which
threatens the security of the Village.
§ 36-3. Emergency Management Committee.
To prepare for and minimize the effect of natural or man-made disasters
upon the civilian population.
A.
To effectuate all possible emergency actions to restore vital public
services and public facilities destroyed or damaged by a man-made or
natural disaster.
B.
A. Membership. The Emergency Management Committee shall consist of
the Village President, Village Administrator, Chief of Police, Village
Clerk, and the Director of Public Works. The Village President shall
serve as Chairperson of the Committee, and a member of the
Committee shall serve as secretary.
B. Powers and duties. The Emergency Management Committee shall be an
advisory and planning group and shall advise the Village Board in all
matters pertaining to emergency management.
(1) Village President. The Village President shall be the Head of
Emergency Management for the Village of Slinger.
(2) Director of Emergency Management (DOEM). The Police Chief
shall serve in the position of Director of Emergency Management
for the Village of Slinger.
(a) Powers and duties.
[1] The DOEM shall be the executive head of the Emergency
Management Committee (EMC) and shall be directly
responsible for the organization, administration and
operation of the EMC subject to the direction and control
of the Village President. The DOEM shall coordinate all
activities for emergency management within the Village
and shall maintain liaison and cooperate with emergency
management agencies and organizations of other political
subdivisions and the state and federal governments, and
shall participate in county and state emergency
management activities upon request, and shall have such
additional authority, duties and responsibilities as are
authorized by this section and which may from time to
time be required by the Village President.17
§ 36-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-3
1:35
§ 36-4. Utilization of existing services and facilities.
In preparing and executing the Emergency Management Plan, the Village
President and/or the DOEM shall utilize the services, equipment, supplies
and facilities of the Village including the Villages employees, elected
officials, and appointees to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 36-5. Emergency regulations.
Whenever necessary to meet an emergency for which adequate regulations
have not been adopted by the Village Board, the Village President, or in his
absence, the Director of Emergency Management, may, by proclamation,
promulgate and enforce such orders, rules and regulations relating to the
conduct of persons and the use of property as shall be necessary to protect
the public peace, health and safety, and preserve lives and property and to
insure the cooperation necessary in carrying out emergency management
activities. Such proclamations shall be posted in three public places and
may be rescinded by the issuer at any time.
§ 36-6. Mutual aid agreements.
The DOEM may, subject to the approval of the Village Board, enter into
mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions. A copy of such
agreements shall be filed with the County Emergency Management
Manager.
§ 36-7. Declaration of emergencies.
Upon the declaration of any emergency by the Governor of the State of
Wisconsin, the Village President, the County Emergency Management
Manager, or the Director of Emergency Management, in the absence of the
Village President shall publicly announce that a state of emergency exists.
The Village President or, at the direction of the Village President, the DOEM
shall issue all necessary proclamations as to the existence of such state of
emergency and shall issue such disaster warning and/or alerts as shall be
required in the Emergency Management Plan. The Emergency Management
Committee shall take action in accordance with the Emergency
Management Plan, or Operations Plan, upon the declaration of any
[2] In accordance with the state plan format and the county
ordinance of compliance, the DOEM shall prepare and
present a comprehensive general plan to the Village Board
for its approval.
[3] When the Board has approved the plan by resolution, it
shall be the duty of all municipal employees to perform the
duties and functions assigned by said plan as approved.
The plan may be modified and updated as necessary.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 36-3 SLINGER CODE § 36-7
1:36
emergency and the issuance of official disaster warnings. Such state of
emergency shall continue until terminated by the issuing authority,
provided that any declaration not issued by the Governor or the County
Emergency Management Manager may be terminated at the discretion of
the Village President, or the DOEM, in the absence of the Village President.
§ 36-8. Violations and penalties.18
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-2 of the Village Code.
Chapter 45
FAIR AND OPEN HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 69.
§ 45-1. Fair and open housing.
The Village of Slinger recognizes its responsibilities under § 106.50, Wis.
Stats., as amended, and endorses the concepts of fair and open housing for
all persons and prohibition of discrimination therein.
Chapter 51
FINANCE AND TAXATION
§ 51-1. Village collection of taxes.
A. The Village of Slinger hereby adopts § 106.50, Wis. Stats., as amended,
and all subsequent amendments thereto.
B. The officials and employees of the Village shall assist in the orderly
prevention and removal of all discrimination in housing within the
Village of Slinger by implementing the authority and enforcement
procedures set forth in § 106.50, Wis. Stats., as amended.
C. The Municipal Clerk shall maintain forms for complaints to be filed
under § 106.50, Wis. Stats., as amended, and shall assist any person
alleging a violation thereof in the Village of Slinger to file a complaint
thereunder with the Wisconsin Department of Work Force
Development, Equal Rights Division, for enforcement of § 106.50, Wis.
Stats., as amended.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 36-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-1
1:37
§ 51-2. Assessor confidentiality.
Whenever the Assessor, in the performance of the Assessor's duties,
requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to
§ 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any successor statute thereto, such income
and expense information that is provided to the Assessor shall be held by
the Assessor on a confidential basis, except that the information may be
revealed to and used by persons: in the discharge of duties imposed by
law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office (including, but not limited
to, use by the Assessor in performance of official duties of the Assessor's
office and use by the Board of Review in performance of its official duties);
or pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided
to the Assessor under § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., unless a court determines
that it is inaccurate, is, per § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., not subject to the
right of inspection and copying under § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 51-3. Fiscal year.
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
§ 51-4. Annual budget.
A. The Village shall prepare its annual tax roll and implement all collection
and settlement in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes, generally
Chs. 70 to 79, and all other statutes, as applicable.19
B. Village collection of state and county taxes. The Village is required
under § 61.26(1), Wis. Stats., to hold appropriate insurance or bond
coverage for the Village Treasurer position. Further, § 70.67, Wis.
Stats., requires an additional bond specifically for the Treasurer's duty
of collecting taxes for the state and county. This second bond
requirement may be fulfilled through the adoption of an ordinance
obligating the Village to pay all taxes of any kind required by law to be
paid by the Treasurer to the County Treasurer. The Village of Slinger
elects not to provide an additional bond. Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wis.
Stats., the Village of Slinger shall be obligated to pay, in case the
Treasurer thereof shall fail to do so, all state and county taxes required
by law to be paid by such Treasurer to the County Treasurer. The
Village Clerk shall file a certified copy of this ordinance with the County
Treasurer. [Added 12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 12-01-2017]
A. Departmental budget drafts. Each year, department heads and any
other personnel responsible for the fiscal operation of a department,
committee or subsection shall file with the Treasurer an itemized
statement of revenues and disbursements deemed necessary to carry
out the powers and duties of the department, committee or subsection
during the ensuing fiscal year, and a detailed statement of the
anticipated receipts and disbursements on account of any special fund
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 51-1 SLINGER CODE § 51-4
1:38
§ 51-5. Changes to budget.
The amount of the tax to be levied or certified, the amounts of the various
appropriations, and the purposes thereof shall not be changed after
approval of the budget except by a 2/3 vote of the entire membership of the
Village Board. Notice of such transfer shall be given by postings in three
public locations.
under the supervision of such department head or other responsible
personnel. Such statements shall be designated as "Draft Budgets"
and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main division of all
departments.
B. Treasurer to prepare for Village Board review.
(1) Each year, the Village Treasurer shall prepare for the Village
Board's review a proposed budget presenting a financial plan for
the Village for the ensuing calendar year. The budget shall include
the following information:
(a) The expense of operation of each department and activity of
the Village for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items
for the current year and last preceding year, with reasons for
any increase and/or decrease recommended as compared with
appropriations for the current year.
(b) An itemization of all anticipated income of the Village from
sources other than general property taxes and bonds issued,
with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the
Village from each of the same or similar sources for the last
preceding and current fiscal year.
(c) An itemization of the amount of money to be raised from
general property taxes which, with income from other sources,
will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.
(d) Such other information as may be required by the Board and by
state law.
(2) The Village shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the
prepared budget for distribution to citizens.20
C. Public hearing. The Board shall hold a public hearing on the budget as
required by law. Following the public hearing, the proposed budget may
be changed or amended as deemed appropriate by the Board.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 51-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-6
1:39
§ 51-6. Village funds to be spent in accordance with
appropriations.21
No money shall be drawn from the Treasury of the Village, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance
of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as
authorized by § 51-5 of this chapter. At the close of each fiscal year, any
unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund,
unless otherwise designated.
§ 51-7. Capital improvement program budget.
In conjunction with the annual presentation of departmental budget drafts,
department heads with authorization and responsibility for capital assets
shall prepare a five-year capital improvement program with budgetary
information for the first year of the program at a minimum. Capital budgets
will include a current asset inventory, a list of ongoing and proposed
projects in order of priority and an operating budget impact for each
project. The operating budget impact statement will provide an estimate
of future operating costs that will result from the capital project under
consideration.
§ 51-8. Fund balances. [Amended 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 11-01-17]
A. General fund undesignated fund balance. The Village shall make every
effort to maintain an undesignated fund balance in the general fund
that will be the equivalent of no less than six to nine months of regular
general fund operating expenditures. Until such time that the
undesignated balance in the general fund has reached that level,
nonroutine expenditures will be kept to a minimum to allow the
accumulation of sufficient fund balance. Maintaining this level of
undesignated fund balance will provide the Village with sufficient
working capital, help mitigate current and future risks, and ensure
stable tax rates. Should the general fund undesignated fund balance
exceed the equivalent of nine months regular general fund operating
expenditures for two consecutive audit periods, the Village Board may
authorize the transfer of fund balance to the capital project fund to
support ongoing capital improvements to Village infrastructure.
B. Special revenue funds. The Village Treasurer shall create and maintain
special revenue funds as directed by the Village Board, state statute, or
debt service requirements. Reserve levels in these funds will be
determined by the criteria and restrictions established at the time of
fund creation.
C. Debt service fund. This fund monitors and facilitates the Village's debt
payments, in accordance with the terms and restrictions of any existing
general obligation notes and bonds.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 51-6 SLINGER CODE § 51-8
1:40
§ 51-9. Claims procedure.22
§ 51-10. Fiscal management procedures.
The Village Clerk and Treasurer shall be responsible for establishing,
maintaining and documenting the fiscal procedures to be used in the
Village's accounting, cash management and internal control activities.
These procedures will be made available to all employees as needed and
reviewed annually to ensure their relevance and accuracy.23
D. Capital project funds. Capital project funds shall be established to
provide for such activities as capital improvements, equipment and
vehicle purchases, Tax Incremental Financing District and
Redevelopment Authority projects. Reserves for these funds will be
maintained in accordance with the Capital Improvement Plan (CIP)
budgets established annually for each fund.
E. Enterprise funds. Each of the Village's utilities, electric, water, sewer
and stormwater, have enterprise funds established to account for the
utility's operations and capital improvements. The goal for each
enterprise fund reserves shall be to maintain a level of working capital
in the equivalent of three months' operating expenditures. Working
capital is defined as a fund's current assets less its current liabilities.
F. Internal service funds. Central equipment and central services funds
shall be established to account for the operations and capital purchases
for Village-owned vehicles, equipment, buildings and land. These funds
shall be supported through rent and administrative charges assessed to
the Village's departments and utility operations. Reserve funds shall be
accrued for the purpose of capital purchases and repayment of debt for
capital projects associated with municipal buildings.
A. No account or demand against the Village, except as provided in
Subsection C, shall be paid until it has been audited by the Village
Board and an order drawn on the Village Treasurer.
B. Claims to be verified. All accounts, demands, or claims against the
Village shall be verified by the proper official.
C. Payment of regular wages, salaries, contracts, and routine bills.
Regular wages, salaries, contracts, and routine bills of the Village shall
be paid by the Treasurer, after being verified by the proper Village
Official.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
23.Editor's Note: Original Section 4.12, Destruction of obsolete public records, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 51-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-11
1:41
§ 51-11. Letting of contracts.
Requirements established by §§ 61.54 and 61.55, Wis. Stats., shall be
applicable to Village contracts.
§ 51-12. Expenditure of funds on nonbudgeted and nonroutine
items.
No Village funds may be expended for nonbudgeted and nonroutine
purchases without approval of the Village Board. This limitation does not
apply to emergency expenditures.
§ 51-13. Storage of vehicles.
Any vehicle stored or impounded by the Village of Slinger or the Slinger
Police Department will be charged a storage fee. This fee will be set by the
Village Board and will be reviewed by the Village Board from time to time.
§ 51-14. Surplus property.24
The Village Clerk shall have charge and custody of all property of the Village
that is determined by the Village Board to be surplus property. The Clerk,
upon order of the Village Board, may sell such property at public sale or
dispose of the same in any manner approved by the Board.
§ 51-15. Collection.
Collection of amounts owed to the Village general funds and utilities that
are owing and are in arrears shall fall under the jurisdiction of the Village
Treasurer.
§ 51-16. Charge to benefitting owners for professional fees.
A. The provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and also all acts amendatory
thereof and supplementary thereto are adopted as a portion of this
chapter so far as applicable, except as otherwise provided by this
chapter.
A. Professional fees charged back. The Village Treasurer shall charge
property owners fees for services, pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats., in
the following circumstances:
(1) Whenever a property owner contacts the Village Attorney or other
professional staff whether such staff is employed by the Village or
independently contracted, if said contact and subsequent service
results in a charge to the Village of Slinger for that professional's
time and services and said service is not a service supplied to the
Village of Slinger as a whole, the Village Treasurer shall charge
property owners the total charge incurred by the Village of Slinger.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 51-11 SLINGER CODE § 51-16
1:42
(2) Whenever the Village Board, Village Administrator, Village Clerk or
other Village official contacts the Village Attorney or other
professional staff, whether such staff is employed by the Village or
independently contracted, regarding an application received from
a property owner, if said contact and subsequent service results in
a charge to the Village of Slinger for that professional's time and
services and said service is not a service supplied to the Village of
Slinger as a whole, the Village Treasurer shall charge the property
owners the total charge incurred by the Village of Slinger.
(3) Whenever the Village incurs professional fees in considering
certified survey maps, subdivision plats, rezoning petitions,
conditional use permit petitions, site development applications and
other petitions related to the development of land in the Village, the
Village Treasurer shall charge property owners the total charge to
the Village of Slinger. For purposes of this subsection, professional
fees shall include any charges incurred by the Village in relation to
such application from the Village Engineer, Village Attorney, or any
other of the Village's professional staff, whether such professional
staff is employed by the Village or independently contracted.
(4) Professional fees related to work performed by the Village
Engineer or any other staff employed by the Village may include the
costs for hours worked specific to an application received from a
property owner. These costs will be documented with the relevant
dates and times to be provided to the property owner.
(5) Before charging a property owner with professional fees in
accordance with this section, the Village Administrator or Village
Treasurer shall ensure that the work performed does not benefit
the Village of Slinger as a whole. Only those charges that are shown
to be of private benefit to the property owner shall be charged.
B. Property owner allowed time to pay or appeal. The Village Treasurer
shall give each property owner billed for current services as provided
for herein notice that they shall have a specified period of time not less
than 20 days to pay. Said notice shall also state that within 15 days of
the date of the notice, the property owner may request a hearing before
the Village Board regarding the charge against the property. Said
notice shall also include a statement of the professional services fees to
be charged. Thereafter, if the property owner requests a hearing within
the proper time period, the matter shall proceed as described in
Subsection C, Appeal to Village Board, below. If a hearing is not
requested within the required time period and the charge remains
unpaid, the Village Treasurer shall automatically charge that
delinquent bill against the property tax roll as provided by law. In the
event the statement rendered to the property owner becomes
delinquent too late in the year to be extended on that year's tax roll,
then the delinquent charge shall be extended to the following year's tax
roll.
§ 51-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-16
1:43
§ 51-17. Charge to benefitting developer's for professional fees.
C. Appeal to Village Board. Upon receipt of a timely request for hearing,
the Village Board shall hold a hearing regarding the property charges
at its next scheduled meeting or as soon as feasible. Such hearing shall
be preceded by posted public notice and reasonable notice, via first
class mail, to the property owner. In the event a hearing is requested,
no charges shall be placed on the tax roll unless and until such hearing
has been held and a decision has been rendered by the Village Board,
and the Village Board approves the charges against the tax roll in whole
or in part. If the charges are approved only in part, only that part of the
charges may be charged against the tax roll.
D. Permits for government organization. Whenever it is requested that the
Village of Slinger grant approvals to any other municipality, agency or
other governmental body and that permit process warrants the
assistance of contracted professional staff of the Village, those fees
shall be charged back to the municipality, agency or other
governmental body seeking the permit.
A. Professional fees charged back. The Village Treasurer shall charge
developers fees for services, in the following circumstances:
(1) Whenever a developer contacts the Village Attorney or other
professional staff, whether such staff is employed by the Village or
independently contracted, if said contact and subsequent service
results in a charge to the Village of Slinger for that professional's
time and services and said service is not a service supplied to the
Village of Slinger as a whole, the Village Treasurer shall charge the
developer the total charge incurred by the Village of Slinger.
(2) Whenever the Village Board, Village Administrator, Village Clerk or
other Village official contacts the Village Attorney or other
professional staff, whether such staff is employed by the Village or
independently contracted, regarding an application received from
a developer, if said contact and subsequent service results in a
charge to the Village of Slinger for that professional's time and
services and said service is not a service supplied to the Village of
Slinger as a whole, the Village Treasurer shall charge the
developer the total charge incurred by the Village of Slinger.
(3) Whenever the Village incurs professional fees in considering
certified survey maps, subdivision plats, rezoning petitions,
conditional use permit petitions, site development applications and
other petitions related to the development of land in the Village, the
Village Treasurer shall charge developers the total charge to the
Village of Slinger. For purposes of this subsection, professional fees
shall include any charges incurred by the Village in relation to such
application from the Village Engineer, Village Attorney, or any other
of the Village's professional staff, whether such professional staff is
employed by the Village or independently contracted.
§ 51-16 SLINGER CODE § 51-17
1:44
(4) Professional fees related to work performed by the Village
Engineer or any other staff employed by the Village may include the
costs for hours worked specific to an application received from a
developer. These costs will be documented with the relevant dates
and times to be provided to the developer.
(5) Before charging a developer with professional fees in accordance
with this section, the Village Administrator or Village Treasurer
shall ensure that the work performed does not benefit the Village of
Slinger as a whole. Only those charges that are shown to be of
private benefit to the property owner shall be charged.
B. Developer required to pay chargeback fees. The Village will not accept
applications or requests for review from a developer without first
receiving a deposit for payment of all fees to be incurred related to
work to be performed by the Village Engineer, Village Attorney, or any
other of the Village's professional staff, whether such staff is employed
by the Village or independently contracted, that is not a service
supplied to the Village of Slinger as a whole; and a signed notice and
acknowledgment form regarding the developer's responsibility to pay
fees incurred by the Village. The deposit shall be in the amount of $500
unless a different amount is required by the Village Administrator due
to the circumstances of the development project. In the event such fees
are not paid in a timely manner, the Village will discontinue the review
process for the subject application or request until such time as the fees
are paid in full. The Village may draw funds from the deposit for
payment of such fees, and shall provide a written notice to the
developer of any such use of the deposited funds. No permits, including
but not limited to building permits, occupancy permits, and conditional
use permits, will be issued until all fees are paid. Unused deposit funds
will be returned to the person or entity who made the deposit upon
request following payment of all outstanding fees after final acceptance
of the development as a whole has been granted by the Village.
C. Appeal to Village Board. Upon written request for hearing, the Village
Board shall hold a hearing regarding any contested chargeback fees at
its next scheduled meeting or as soon as feasible. Such hearing shall be
preceded by posted public notice and reasonable notice, via first-class
mail, to the developer. In the event a hearing is requested, no contested
charges shall be due unless and until such hearing has been held and a
decision has been rendered by the Village Board, and the Village Board
approves the charges in whole or in part. If the charges are approved
only in part, only that part of the charges may be charged.
§ 51-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-17
1:45
Chapter 56
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 99.
§ 56-1. Fire Department recognized.25
The Slinger Fire Department Inc. is hereby officially recognized as the Fire
Department of the Village of Slinger and the duty of firefighting and the
prevention of fires in the Village is delegated to such Department.
§ 56-2. Bylaws.
The Slinger Fire Department shall adopt bylaws for the control,
management and government and for regulating the business and
proceedings of the Department. Amendments shall be adopted in the same
manner.
§ 56-3. Negotiation of contract.
The Village Board shall have a contract with the Fire Department that shall
be negotiated from time to time.
§ 56-4. Police power of Department.
A. Police authority at fires. The Chief and Assistant or officers in command
at any fire are hereby vested with full and complete police authority at
fires. Any officer of the Department may cause the arrest of any person
failing to give the right-of-way to the Fire Department in responding to
a fire.
B. Control of fires. The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits in the
vicinity of any fire within which no persons except firemen and
policemen and those admitted by order of any officer of the Department
shall be permitted to come. The Chief may cause the removal of any
property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of
such property from fire, or to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect
the adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire he may order
the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all
electricity or other services where the same impedes the work of the
Department during a fire.
C. Entering premises. Any fireman while acting under the direction of the
Fire Chief or other officer in command may enter upon the premises
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 51-17 SLINGER CODE § 56-4
1:46
Chapter 69
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fair and open housing — See Ch. 45.
§ 69-1. Housing Authority.
There is hereby created a housing authority to be known as "The Housing
Authority of the Village of Slinger, Wisconsin." The Housing Authority shall
be selected and operated in strict compliance with all provisions of
§ 66.1201, Wis. Stats., as amended.
Chapter 93
adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then
on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire, and if any person
shall hinder, resist or obstruct any fireman in the discharge of his duty
as herein provided, the person so offending shall be deemed guilty of
resisting firemen in the discharge of said duties.
D. Correction of fire hazards. When any inspection by the Fire Chief or his
deputies reveals a fire hazard, the Chief or his deputies may serve a
notice in writing upon the owner of the property, giving such owner a
reasonable time in which to remove the hazard. If the fire hazard is not
removed within the time allowed, it shall be deemed a nuisance; and the
Fire Chief or his deputy may have the same removed in an action by the
Village against the owner of the property and the costs of such removal
may also be entered in the tax roll as a special charge against the
property.26
E. Entering the premises. No person except the occupants of single-family
dwelling units shall deny the Chief or his deputies free access to any
property within the Village at any reasonable time for the purpose of
making fire inspections. No person shall hinder or obstruct the Fire
Inspector in the performance of his duty or refuse to observe any lawful
direction given by him.27
F. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section or any order,
rule or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-2 of the Code.28
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 56-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-1
1:47
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 69-1 SLINGER CODE § 69-1
1:48
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Secs. 2.01 to 2.06 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 93-1. Elected officials.
§ 93-2. Appointed officials.
A. Enumerated. The elected officials of the Village shall be the Village
President and six Trustees.
B. Terms of office. The term of office of the Village President and six
Trustees shall be two years and shall commence on the third Tuesday of
April succeeding election. The Village President and three Trustees
shall be elected at the annual Spring Election in odd-numbered years.
Three Trustees shall be elected at the Annual Spring Election in the
even-numbered years.
A. Enumerated. The following officials shall be appointed by the Village
President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board:29
(1) Village Administrator.
(2) Village Clerk.
(3) Village Treasurer.
(4) Village Attorney.
(5) Director of Public Works/Engineer.
(6) Parks, Recreation and Forestry Director.
(7) Assessor.
(8) Building Inspector.
(9) Electrical Inspector.
(10) Plumbing Inspector.
(11)Weed Commissioner.
(12) President Pro Tem.
B. Terms. Assessor, Village Attorney, Building Inspector, Electrical
Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Weed Commissioner, and President Pro
Tem shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Board.30
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 93-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-2
1:49
§ 93-3. Wisconsin Administrative Code adopted.
The Wisconsin Administrative Code, as may be amended from time to time,
excluding any penalties provided therein, is adopted by reference and made
a part of the Code of the Village as though set forth in full, to the extent
such code may apply to Village government.
§ 93-4. Removals.
§ 93-5. Vacancies.31
Vacancies in elected or appointed positions shall be filled as provided in
§ 17.24, Wis. Stats., as amended.
§ 93-6. Salaries.
C. Unless otherwise provided by Village ordinance or state statute, all
other appointed officials shall serve until removed as provided by
Village ordinance, such terms to begin upon confirmation by the Village
Board.
A. Elected officers. Elected officers may be removed by the Village Board
as provided in § 17.13(2), Wis. Stats. as amended, or by the Judge of the
Circuit Court for cause pursuant to §§ 17.13(3) and 17.16, Wis. Stats.
B. Appointed officers. Appointed officers may be removed as provided in
§ 17.16, Wis. Stats., as amended.
A. Elected officials: [Amended 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 11-02-2018]
(1) Village President: $6,000.
(2) Trustee: $4,500.
B. Appointed officials. Salaries of all appointed officials, including
members of boards and commissions, shall be as determined by the
Village Board from time to time and in compliance with Wis. Stats., as
amended.
C. Per diem. All citizen members of Village boards, commissions and
committees shall receive compensation as listed in the pay scale for
each assigned meeting that they are in attendance. [Amended
11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 11-02-2018; 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
11-01-2018]
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 93-2 SLINGER CODE § 93-6
1:50
ARTICLE II
Village President, Treasurer, Clerk, President Pro Tem and Trustees
[Adopted as Sec. 2.07 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 93-7. Powers and duties.
The Village President shall have the powers and duties assigned by § 61.24,
Wis. Stats., as amended; the Village Treasurer shall have the powers and
duties assigned by § 61.26, Wis. Stats., as amended; the Village Clerk shall
have the powers and duties assigned by § 61.25, Wis. Stats., as amended;
the President Pro Tem will have the duties of the Village President in his/her
absence. The President Pro Tem will be a Village Trustee, and the Trustees,
along with the Village President, shall constitute the Village Board and
have such powers and duties as are enumerated in Ch. 61, Wis. Stats., and
elsewhere in the statutes.
§ 93-8. Authority.
The Village Board shall have all powers of the Village not specifically
given to some other body or officer. Except as otherwise provided by law,
the Village Board shall have the management and control of the Village
property, finances, highways, streets, utilities, and the public service and
may act for the government and good order of the Village, for its
commercial benefit and for the health, safety, welfare and convenience
of the public and may carry its powers into effect by license, regulation,
suppression, borrowing, taxation, special assessment, appropriation,
imposition of forfeitures and other necessary or convenient means. The
Village Board may appoint such officers from time to time as may be
deemed necessary for the benefit of the community. In addition, the Village
Board shall have the powers enumerated in § 61.34, Wis. Stats., as
amended. The powers hereby conferred shall be in addition to all other
grants and shall be limited only by express language.
§ 93-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-8
1:51

ARTICLE III
Residency Requirement
[Adopted as Sec. 2.28 of the former Municipal Code; amended in its
entirety 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
§ 93-9. Village Administrator; on-call personnel.32
No employee is required to have residency within the Village limits except
for the requirement of a labor agreement. Employees with on-call and
emergency response duties must respond to the appropriate Village facility
as described in the Employee Manual.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). This ordinance also repealed original subsections B, Time period to establish
residency, and C, Part-time employees, of Section 2.28, which immediately followed this
section.
§ 93-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-9
1:53
Chapter 99
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 56.
§ 99-1. Police Department.
§ 99-2. Police officers.
A. Personnel. The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police
and such police officers as the Village Board may prescribe by
ordinance or resolution.
B. Appointments. The Police Commission shall appoint the Chief of Police,
who shall hold office during good behavior. The Chief of Police shall
appoint and promote subordinates, subject to the approval of the Police
Commission. Such appointments and promotions shall be made from
lists of eligible persons prepared by the Commission in accordance with
state law.
C. Salary. The Chief of Police and the police officers shall receive a salary
as fixed by the Village Board and shall not be entitled to any other
compensation.
A. General powers and duties. Each officer of the Department shall
possess the powers conferred on marshals and constables by law; shall
preserve and protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the
Village; and shall enforce the laws and ordinances of the state and
Village subject to the orders, rules and regulations of the Chief, the
Village President and the Village Board.
B. Powers of arrest. The Chief of Police and any police officer shall arrest
all persons in the Village found in the act of violating any law or
ordinance of the Village or state or aiding or abetting in such violation,
and they shall arrest without warrant all persons whom they have
reasonable grounds to believe have violated any law or ordinance and
who will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested, shall take all
arrested persons before the court having jurisdiction thereof to be dealt
with according to law.
C. Assisting Fire Department. Whenever necessary, any police officer shall
assist the Fire Department in maintaining order at the scene of a fire.
D. Permits and licenses. The police officers shall ensure that the necessary
permits and license issued by the state or the Village are in the
possession of or are properly displayed by any person engaged in an
§ 93-9 SLINGER CODE § 99-2
1:54
§ 99-3. Department rules.
The Chief of Police shall prepare rules for the administration of the Police
Department, which rules shall be in full force upon approval of the Village
Board and shall outline the conditions of employment in the Department.
The Village Board and the Police Commission, where applicable, may revise
such rules.
§ 99-4. Personnel.
The Police Department of the Village shall consist of the Chief of Police and
such other officers as the Village Board may authorize from time to time.33
§ 99-5. Custody of lost and confiscated property.34
The Chief of Police shall have charge and custody of all lost, stolen,
abandoned and unclaimed property taken from prisoners or held as
evidence, and all other property coming into possession of the Police
Department, and he shall be responsible for the safekeeping, accurate
recording and proper disposition of the same.
§ 99-6. Establishing fee for service of warrants or commitment
orders.35
Pursuant to the provisions of §§ 814.65(4)(b), 814.70, 814.705 and 814.71,
Wis. Stats., the Village of Slinger Police Department shall charge a service
fee as set forth in the current fee schedule when the Village police serve a
warrant or commitment order upon a person. The person served with the
warrant or commitment order shall be responsible for the payment of the
warrant or commitment order service fee. The service fee may be collected
as a court cost through the court.
activity or business within the Village for which a permit or license is
required and that the terms of such license or permit are complied with.
E. Conditions of employment. The work week and uniform allowances,
vacations, sick leaves, holidays and other fringe benefits of police
officers shall be determined by the Village Board.
A. Multiple warrants. The Village of Slinger Police Department shall
charge a separate fee for each warrant or commitment order served on
a person.
33.Editor's Note: Original Sections 3.02, Appointment and removal, 3.03, General powers of
police officers and 3.04, Chief of Police, which immediately followed this section, were
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 99-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-6
1:55
Chapter 116
RECORDS
B. Disposition of fees. Upon collection by the court, all warrant or
commitment order service fees shall be forwarded by the court to the
Village Treasurer.
§ 99-6 SLINGER CODE § 99-6
1:56
ARTICLE I
Public Records Access
[Adopted as Sec. 1.11 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 116-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Any of the following Village entities having custody of
a Village record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission,
committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic
created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally
constituted subunit of the foregoing.
CUSTODIAN — That officer, department head, division head, or employee
of the Village designated under the definition of "employee" in this section
or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any Village records
or file, deposit or keep such records in his or her office, or is lawfully
in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is
required by this section to respond to requests for access to such records.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who is employed by the Village, other than
an individual holding local public office.[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
11-01-201836]
RECORD — Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual
or electromagnetic information or electronically generated or stored data
is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
that has been created or is being kept by an authority. "Record" includes,
but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts,
photographs, films, recordings, tapes, optical discs, and any other medium
on which electronically generated or stored data is recorded or preserved.
"Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations, and like
materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the
originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working;
materials that are purely the personal property of the custodian and have
no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by
copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of
an authority other than a public library that are available for sale, or that
are available for inspection at a public library.[Amended 12-3-2018 by
Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
§ 116-2. Duty to maintain records.
A. Except as provided under § 116-7, each officer and employee of the
Village shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or
her predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed,
deposited or kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "local public office,"
which immediately followed this definition.
§ 116-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-2
1:57
§ 116-3. Legal custodian(s).
§ 116-4. Public access to records.
possession or control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies,
or to the possession or control of the officer or employee or his
deputies, or to the possession or control of which he or she or they may
be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees.
B. Upon the expiration of an officer's term of employment, or whenever
the office or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer
or employee shall deliver to his or her successor all records then in his
or her custody and the successor shall receipt therefor to the officer or
employee, who shall file said receipt with the Village Clerk. If a vacancy
occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be
delivered to and receipted for by the Clerk, on behalf of the successor,
to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt.
A. Although all public records requests should be made to the Village
Clerk, each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records
and the records of his or her office, but the official may designate an
employee of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
B. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Village Clerk or the Clerk's
designee shall act as legal custodian for the Village Board and for any
committees, commission, boards, or other authorities created by
ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
C. For every authority not specified in Subsection A or B, the authority's
chief administrative officer holding local public office is the legal
custodian for the authority, but the officer may designate an employee
of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
A. Except as provided in § 116-6, any person has a right to inspect a record
and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in § 19.35(1),
Wis. Stats.
B. Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular
office hours. Original records shall not be removed from the premises
by the public.37
C. If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records
are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon
at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
D. A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those
available to Village employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 116-2 SLINGER CODE § 116-4
1:58
§ 116-5. Access procedures.
E. The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may
impose other reasonable restrictions on the irreplaceable or easily
damaged.
F. A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and
copying records per the Village Fee Schedule and § 19.35(1), Wis.
Stats.38
G. Pursuant to § 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each
authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for
inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a
notice containing a description of its organization and the established
times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the
methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to
records in its possession, and the cost thereof.39
A. A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the Village Clerk.
The Village Clerk will either respond to the request directly or forward
it on to the appropriate record custodian for a response. A request shall
be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or
the information requested. However, a request for a record without a
reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented
by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be
made orally, but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce
the request is commenced under § 19.37, Wis. Stats.40
B. The Village Clerk or the records custodian to whom the request has
been forwarded, upon request for any record, shall as soon as
practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the
requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole
or in part and the reasons therefor. If the Village Clerk or legal
custodian, after conferring with the Village Attorney, determines that a
written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party
making the request may first be required to itemize his or her request
in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance.
C. A request for a record may be denied as provided in § 116-6. If a request
is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a
written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the
requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written
request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a
written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written
denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the request for the
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 116-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-5
1:59
§ 116-6. Limitations on right to access.
record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review
upon petition for a writ of mandamus under § 19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or
upon application to the Attorney General or a district attorney.
A. Although not intended to be exhaustive, the following list of records are
exempt from inspection under this section pursuant to § 19.36, Wis.
Stats., and other applicable law:
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal
law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law.
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require
exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a
condition to receipt of aids by the state.
(3) Computer programs, although the material used as input for a
computer program or the material produced as a product of the
computer program is subject to inspection.
(4) A record or any portion of a record containing information
qualifying as a trade secret under § 134.90(1)(c), Wis. Stats.41
(5) Information maintained, prepared, or provided by the Village
concerning the home address, home electronic e-mail address,
home telephone number, or social security number of an employee
or an individual holding local public office, unless the employee or
individual holding local public office authorizes the Village to
provide access to such information.
(6) Information relating to the current investigation of a possible
criminal offense or possible misconduct connected with
employment by an employee prior to the disposition of the
investigation.
(7) Information pursuant to the employee's employment examination,
except an examination score if access to the score is not otherwise
prohibited.
(8) Information pertaining to one or more specific employees that is
used by the Village for staff management planning, including
performance evaluations, judgments, or recommendations
concerning future salary adjustments or other wage treatments,
management bonus plans, promotions, job assignments, letters of
reference or other comments or ratings relating to employees.
B. As provided by § 43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records
are exempt from inspection under this section.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 116-5 SLINGER CODE § 116-6
1:60
C. In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is
not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after
conferring with the Village Attorney, may deny the request in whole or
in part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest
resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full
access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which
disclosure may be refused include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which
were necessary and given in order to obtain the information
contained in them.
(2) Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
(3) Records of current deliberations concerning employment,
dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensations, performance, or
discipline of any Village officer or employee, or the investigation of
charges against a Village officer or employee, unless such officer or
employee consents to such disclosure.
(4) Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or
prevention.
(5) Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of
Village property, investing of Village funds, or other Village
business whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require
nondisclosure.
(6) Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data
of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a
substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person
referred to in such history or data.
(7) Communications between legal counsel for the Village and any
officer, agent or employee of the Village, when advice is being
rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in
which the Village or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is
likely to become involved, or communications which are privileged
under § 905.03, Wis. Stats.
D. If a record contains information that may be made public and
information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record
shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the
information that may not be made public from the record before
release. The custodian shall confer with the Village Attorney prior to
releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the Village
Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of
the custodian and the Village Attorney there is no feasible way to
separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without
reasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the
entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.
§ 116-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-7
1:61
§ 116-7. Retention and destruction of records. [Amended 12-3-2018
by Ord. No. 11-01-2018; 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 07-03-2019]
A. The Village of Slinger has adopted the Wisconsin Municipal Records
Schedule (WMRS) to provide clear and uniform guidance for the
retention and destruction of records common to most municipal
governments and increase cost-effectiveness in the management of
municipal records.
B. A copy of the current WMRS and related schedules for human
resources records, payroll records and risk management shall be
maintained by the Village Clerk and kept in an easily accessible location
for reference. An abbreviated summary of these schedules will also be
maintained to streamline municipal records management and ensure
that records are retained for the required length of time.
§ 116-7 SLINGER CODE § 116-7
1:62
ARTICLE II
Property Record Maintenance
[Adopted as Sec. 1.12 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 116-8. Assessor's office creates and maintains records; actual
view.
The Village of Slinger's Assessor's Office creates and maintains property
records for all real estate parcels within the Village of Slinger in which it
has jurisdiction. Pursuant to § 70.32(1), Wis. Stats., all properties that are
issued building permits are field reviewed, described, and valued by "actual
view." This means that each building permit requires:
§ 116-9. Fees to be charged for property record maintenance.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
Every person receiving an approved building permit from the Village in
which said building permit requires an employee of the Assessor's office
to physically view on site any descriptive property change in an effort
to maintain the property record shall pay a property maintenance fee
commensurate with the type of building permit issued by the Village. Fees
are per the Village Fee Schedule.43
A. Assessment personnel to initially process existing records or create
new records;
B. Physically review, on site, the purpose of each building permit to
document all property description additions and/or alterations; and
C. Process the information gathered in the field to determine an assessed
value.42
42.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1.12B, Definitions, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018.
43.Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is on file in the Village office and on the Village
website.
§ 116-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-9
1:63
Chapter 128
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
§ 128-1. Office of Village Administrator.44
In order to provide the Village of Slinger with a more efficient, effective
and responsible government under a system of a part-time Board President
and Village Board (hereinafter referred to as "Village Board"), at a time
when Village government is becoming increasingly complex, there is hereby
created the Office of Village Administrator for the Village of Slinger
(hereinafter referred to as "Administrator").
§ 128-2. Appointment, term of office and removal.
The Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard
to training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the
office, by a majority vote of the Village Board. For the purposes of
appointing or terminating the Administrator, the Board President and each
Board member shall cast one vote. The Administrator shall hold office for
an indefinite term subject to removal at any time by a majority vote of the
Village Board. This section, however, shall not preclude the Village Board
from establishing other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter or the Municipal Code of the Village of
Slinger.45
§ 128-3. Functions and duties of Administrator.
The Administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions and
ordinances of the Village of Slinger and Wisconsin State Statutes, shall
be the chief administrative officer of the Village, responsible only to the
Board President and the Village Board for the proper administration of
the business affairs of the Village, pursuant to the statutes of the State of
Wisconsin, the ordinances of the Village of Slinger, and the resolutions and
directives of the Village Board, with power and duties as follows:
A. General duties.
(1) Carry out directives of the Board President and Village Board
which require administrative implementation, reporting promptly
to the Board President and Village Board any difficulties
encountered herein.
(2) Be responsible for the administration of all day-to-day operations of
the Village government including the monitoring of all Village
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
45.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2.71C, Residency, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 116-9 SLINGER CODE § 128-3
1:64
ordinances, resolutions, Village Board meeting minutes and state
statutes.
(3) Establish when necessary administrative procedures to increase
the effectiveness and efficiency of Village government according to
current practices in local government, not inconsistent with
directives of the Board President and Village Board.
(4) Serve as ex officio nonvoting member of all Village commissions
and committees of the Village, except as specified by the Board
President and Village Board or Wisconsin State Statutes.
(5) Keep information concerning current federal, state, and county
legislation and administrative rules affecting the Village and
submit appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to the
Board President and Village Board.
(6) Keep informed concerning the availability of federal, state and
county funds for local programs. Assist department heads, Board
President and Village Board in obtaining these funds under the
direction of the Board President and Village Board.
(7) Represent the Village in matters involving legislative and
intergovernmental affairs as authorized and directed as to that
representation by the Board President and Village Board.
(8) Act as public information officer for the Village with the
responsibility of assuring that the news media are kept informed
about the operations of the Village and that all open meeting rules
and regulations are followed.
(9) Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications
between citizens and Village government to assure that complaints,
grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt
attention by the responsible official, and to assure that all such
matters are expeditiously resolved.
(10) Promote the economic well-being and growth of the Village
through public and private sector cooperation.
B. Responsibilities to the Board President and Village Board.
(1) Attend all meetings of the Village Board, assisting the Village Board
as required in the performance of their duties.
(2) In cooperation with the Board President, Village Board and the
Clerk, ensure that appropriate agenda are prepared for all
meetings of the Village Board, all Village Board committees, and all
other appropriate committees and commissions of the Village,
together with such supporting material as may be required; with
nothing herein being construed as to give the Administrator
authority to limit or in anyway prevent matters from being
§ 128-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-3
1:65
considered by the Village Board, or any of its committees and
commissions.
(3) Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as
requested by the Board President and Village Board, or as needed.
(4) Keep the Board President and Village Board regularly informed
about the activities of the Administrator's office.46
C. Personnel.
(1) Be responsible for the administrative direction and coordination of
all employees of the Village according to the established
organization procedures.
(2) Recommend to the Board President and Village Board the
appointment, promotion and, when necessary for the good of the
Village, the suspension or termination of department heads.
(3) In consultation with the appropriate department head, be
responsible for the appointment, promotion and, when necessary
for the good of the Village, the suspension or termination of
employees below the department head level.
(4) Serve as personnel officer for the Village with responsibilities to
see that complete and current personnel records, including specific
job descriptions, for all Village employees are kept; develop and
enforce high standards of performance by Village employees;
assure that Village employees have proper working conditions;
work closely with department heads to promptly resolve personnel
problems or grievances.
(5) Work closely with department heads to assure that employees
receive adequate opportunities for training to maintain and
improve their job-related knowledge and skills and act as the
approving authority for requests by employees to attend
conferences, meetings, training schools, etc., provided that funds
have been budgeted for these activities.
D. Budgeting and purchasing.
(1) Be responsible for the preparation of the annual Village budget, in
accordance with guidelines as may be provided by the Board
President and Village Board, and in coordination with department
heads, and pursuant to state statutes, for review and approval by
the Board President and the Village Board.
(2) Administer the budget as adopted by the Village Board.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 128-3 SLINGER CODE § 128-3
1:66
§ 128-4. Cooperation.
All officials and employees of the Village shall cooperate with and assist the
Administrator so that the Village government shall function effectively and
efficiently.
Chapter 134
VILLAGE BOARD
§ 134-1. Meetings.
§ 134-2. Presiding officer.
(3) Report regularly to the Board President and Village Board on the
current fiscal position of the Village.
(4) Supervise the accounting system of the Village and ensure that the
system employs methods in accordance with current professional
accounting practices.
A. Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Village Board shall be held
the first and third Monday of each calendar month at 6:00 p.m. Any
regular meeting may be rescheduled, as determined by the Village
Board. All meetings of the Village Board will be held at the Village Hall
unless otherwise noticed.47
B. Special meetings. Special meetings of the Village Board may be called
by the Village President or any two Trustees. The President of the Board
and each Trustee shall be notified at least 24 hours prior to the time
specified for such meeting; pursuant to § 19.84(3), Wis. Stats., in an
emergency notice may be given no less than two hours in advance.48
C. Adjournments. The Board may by a majority vote of those present, but
no less than three affirmative votes, adjourn from time to time to a
specific date and hour.
A. The presiding officer. The Village President shall preside. In the
absence of the President, the President Pro Tem shall preside.
B. Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, may
speak to a point of order in preference to any member, shall decide all
questions of order and shall conduct the proceedings of the meeting in
accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of
Order, revised, unless otherwise provided by statute or by these rules.
Any member shall have the right to appeal from a decision of the
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 128-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-2
1:67
§ 134-3. Roll call; quorum.50
§ 134-4. Village Board.
presiding officer. Such appeal is not debatable and must be sustained
by a majority of the members present, excluding the President.
C. Presiding officer may vacate Chair. Whenever the presiding officer
desires to make any motion, he shall vacate the Chair and designate a
Trustee to preside temporarily.49
A. As soon as the Board is called to order, the presiding officer shall
proceed to call the names of the members in alphabetical order, noting
who is present and who is absent, and shall record the same in the
proceedings of the Board. If there is not a quorum present, such fact
shall be entered on the minutes; and the Board may adjourn.
B. Quorum. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. The
President shall be counted in computing a quorum.
A. Order of procedure. The rules of procedure and the order of business
shall be conducted as follows, unless the same shall be temporarily
suspended by unanimous vote of the Board:
(1) Call to order; noting of roll call.
(2) Consent agenda.
(a) Approval of minutes.
(b) Approval of vouchers.
(c) Committee reports.
(d) Other.
(3) Public hearings.
(4) Public appearances.
(5) Unfinished business.
(6) New business.
(a) Resolutions.
(b) Licenses and permits.
(c) Other.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 134-2 SLINGER CODE § 134-4
1:68
§ 134-5. Standing rules of Board.
§ 134-6. General rules.
The Board may adopt such additional rules for the conduct of its business
as it deems necessary. The deliberations of the Board shall be conducted
in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules
of Order, Revised, which is incorporated in this section by reference. No
motion shall be withdrawn or amended without the consent of the member
making the same and the member seconding it.
§ 134-7. Ordinances, bylaws and resolutions.
(7) Introduction of ordinances.
(8) Communications.
(9) Staff reports.
(10) Executive session.
(11) Action on executive session items.
(12) Adjournment.
A. Before speaking. Every member shall address the presiding officer and
shall not be interrupted except by a call to order by the presiding
officer. When a speaking member is called to order by the presiding
officer, he shall close speaking until the question of order is decided or
permission is given to proceed. The Board shall not vote by ballot, and
the ayes and nays may be ordered on any question by any member,
when the roll shall be called in alphabetical order.
B. No member shall be permitted to vote on any question if he was absent
from the meeting room of the Board when the question was put; nor
shall any member who is absent from the meeting room at the time be
counted upon a decision. Every member who is within the meeting
room when the question is put shall vote unless excused by the
President or presiding officer.51
A. Public appearances. At any scheduled Village Board, or Village Board/
Utility Commission meeting, the Public Appearance portion of the
agenda shall afford interested individuals, or their agents, the
opportunity to speak to the Board on any subject appearing on the
agenda or any other matter of Village interest. The Village President
shall make determination regarding matters of Village interest.
Comments shall be limited to three minutes per individual or agent.
51.Editor's Note: Original Subsections C through F, which immediately followed this
subsection, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 134-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-7
1:69
§ 134-8. Special committees.
The Village President shall appoint all special committees and designate the
Chairperson of each. Special committee appointments, except designation
of the Chairperson, shall be subject to confirmation by a majority of the
members of the Board.
§ 134-9. Publication and effect of ordinances.
§ 134-10. Suspension and amendment of rules.54
These rules or any part thereof shall not be suspended, rescinded or
amended without the concurrence of a majority of the members of the
Board present.55
A. Ordinances and bylaws submitted to the Board shall receive three
separate readings by title and author by the Village Clerk before
passage. No ordinance or bylaw shall be considered unless presented in
writing by a Trustee.
B. No ordinance or bylaw shall have the third reading on the same day that
it is first read unless by a suspension of the rules herein provided.
C. No bill for an ordinance or bylaw shall pass in less than seven days from
its introduction, nor until it has been read three times as provided
herein, unless waived by the Village Board.52
D. Resolutions shall receive one reading before passage by the Board.
E. The Village Board shall carefully examine all resolutions, ordinances
and bylaws passed and supervise the printing of the same, and no
ordinance, resolution or bylaw shall be signed by the President until
such examination has been made.53
A. All general ordinances of the Village shall be posted at three public
places in the Village and shall be recorded, with an affidavit of posting,
by the Village Clerk in a book kept for the purpose. A printed copy of
such ordinance in any book or pamphlet and published or purporting to
be published therein by direction of the Village Board shall be prima
facie proof of due passage, posting and recording thereof.
B. All ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after passage
and posting, unless otherwise provided.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
55.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1.13, Mandating of employee benefits for private businesses,
which followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 134-7 SLINGER CODE § 134-11
1:70
§ 134-11. Power to authorize public works projects.
The Village Board shall have the exclusive power to authorize expenditures
on behalf of the Village pertaining to public works, specifically including the
power to determine whether to approve public works contracts, to borrow
funds, and to enter into contracts for public works projects. No referendum
is required except as may be required by Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 134-12. Authorizing Clerk to issue licenses and permits.
The Village Board delegates its authority to the Village Clerk to issue
permits and licenses unless expressly prohibited by Wisconsin Statutes.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 160
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 160-1. Purpose and findings.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of citizens of the Village of Slinger, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Village of
Slinger. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors
of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is
it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
B. Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects
of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports
made available to the Village, and on findings incorporated in the cases
of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v.
American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of
Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. 501 U.S. 560
(1991); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000); East of the
River Enterprises II v. City of Hudson, 2000 Wisc. App. Lexis 734 (Ct.
App. Aug. 1, 2000); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702
§ 134-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-1
1:71
(7th Cir. 2003), and on studies in other communities, including but not
limited to Phoenix, Arizona; Houston, Texas; Minneapolis, Minnesota;
St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden
Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin,
Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio;
Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; Bellevue,
Washington; New York, New York; and St. Croix County, Wisconsin;
and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on Regulation
of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota),
and statistics obtained from the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Village Board
finds that:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary and
unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled
by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently
no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments
responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.
(2) Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in higher
incidences of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees
of other establishments.
(3) Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented business, especially those which provide private
or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live
sex shows.
(4) Offering and providing such space encourages such activities,
which creates unhealthy conditions.
(5) Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually oriented businesses for the purposes of engaging in sex
within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
(6) At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including but not limited
to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection
(HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B, amebiasis,
salmonella infections and shigella infections.
(7) Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing
cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the HIV virus in the United
States: 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983, 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985,
and 253,448 through December 31, 1992.
(8) The State of Wisconsin Division of Health indicated that on July 25,
1986, there was 96 cases of AIDS reported in the state, including
54 cases that resulted in death and that a tenfold increase in
reported cases was expected between 1986 and 1991.
§ 160-1 SLINGER CODE § 160-1
1:72
(9) The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the
United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases
reported in 1982, and 45,200 through November 1990.
(10) The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported
annually remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases
being reported in 1990.
(11) In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General of the
United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV
infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous
drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components and
from an infected mother to her newborn.
(12) According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts.
(13) Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the
activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the
facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those
facilities.
(14) Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is
found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons
view adult-oriented films.
(15) Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related
crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where
sexually oriented business are located.
(16) Studies of the relationship between sexually oriented business and
neighborhood property values have found a negative impact on
both residential and commercial property values.
(17) There is an increase in the potential for infiltration by organized
crime for the purpose of unlawful conduct.
(18) The consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of
sexually oriented businesses exacerbated the deleterious
secondary effects of such businesses on the community. In fact, the
Supreme Court has gone so far as to assert that "common sense
indicates that any form of nudity coupled with alcohol begets
undesirable behavior." Ben's Bar, 2003 WL 132541, *19 (citations
omitted).
(19) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect the
substantial government concerns addressed in the above
subsections.
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-1
1:73
§ 160-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited,
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled or still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
matters exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
(20) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a
licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see
that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent
with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as
well as the citizens of the Village. It is appropriate to require
reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of
the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein.
(21) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially
related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of
such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases.
(22) In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is
desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this
chapter is designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to
such conduct.
(23) The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the
Village of Slinger will be promoted by the enactment of this
chapter.
A commercial establishment that has as a significant or substantial
portion of its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial
portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of
its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section
of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of
consideration, of any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs,
(1)
A.
§ 160-1 SLINGER CODE § 160-2
1:74
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, dance hall, bar, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment,
which:
slides or other visual representations, which are characterized by
their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or
for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.
(2)
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as "adult bookstore" or "adult
video store" so long as one of its principal business purposes is the
offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that
depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas. A principal business purpose need not be a primary use of an
establishment so long as it is a significant use based upon the visible
inventory or commercial activity of the establishment.
B.
This definition shall expressly exclude films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions
given an "R" rating by the Motion Picture Association of America.
C.
A. Persons who appear seminude;
Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
This definition shall expressly exclude films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions
given an "R" rating by the Motion Picture Association of America.
D.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions, which are characterized by the depiction of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible
from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions;
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
§ 160-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-2
1:75
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas. This definition shall expressly exclude films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic
reproductions given an "R" rating by the Motion Picture Association of
America.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
nude or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
BOARD — The Village Board for the Village of Slinger, Washington County,
Wisconsin.
DIRECTLY — To require physical contact. For instance, when this chapter
prohibits an employee to receive a gratuity "directly" from a patron, it
prohibits the direct touching of skin, other body parts or clothing.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY — The dominant or principal
theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to
films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or principal
character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY and EMPLOYMENT — Describe and pertain to any
person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented
business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether
the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent,
or by another status. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on
the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, and for another person, agrees
or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISH or ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
A.
The conversion of any existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
B.
§ 160-2 SLINGER CODE § 160-2
1:76
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license.
NUDE, NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully
opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED — To cause to function or to put
or keep in a state of doing business. "Operator" means any person on
the premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise
operational control of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or
keeps in operation the business. A person may be found to be operating or
causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether
that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
PREMISES — The real property upon which the sexually oriented business
is located, and all appurtenance thereto and buildings thereon, including
but not limited to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, the private
walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto under
the ownership, control or supervision of the owner or operator of the
business.
REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWS — A consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as part
of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.
SEMINUDE or SEMINUDE CONDITION — The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall
include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include
any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by
a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel,
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
establishment, that as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate,
associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities. The
definition of sexual encounter center or any sexually oriented business shall
not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
§ 160-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-2
1:77
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY —
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — Of a sexually oriented business, means
the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as
the floor areas exist on the date this chapter takes effect.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL — Of a sexually oriented
business, means and includes any of the following:
§ 160-3. Classification.
"Sexually oriented businesses" are classified as follows:
The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
A.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.
B.
The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus, or female
breasts;
A.
Actual sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
B.
Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the
activities set forth in Subsection A or B above.
C.
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
A. Adult arcades;
B. Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
C. Adult cabarets;
D. Adult motels;
E. Adult motion-picture theaters;
F. Adult theaters;
§ 160-2 SLINGER CODE § 160-3
1:78
§ 160-4. License.
§ 160-5. Application for license.
G. Escort agencies;
H. Sexual encounter centers.
A. Except as provided in Subsection D below, from and after the effective
date of this chapter, no sexually oriented business shall be operated or
maintained in the Village of Slinger without first obtaining a license to
operate issued by the Village of Slinger.
B. A license may be issued only for one sexually oriented business located
at one fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership, or corporation
which desires to operate more than one sexually oriented business must
have a license for each.
C. No licensee may transfer ownership or control of the sexually oriented
business to any other person, partnership or corporation.
D. All sexually oriented businesses existing at the time of the passage of
this chapter must submit an application for a license within 60 days of
the passing of this chapter.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license
shall submit an application to the Village Clerk. The application shall be
filed in triplicate and dated by the Village Clerk. A copy of the
application shall be distributed promptly by the Village Clerk to the
Village of Slinger Police Department and to the applicant.
B. If the Village of Slinger Police Department is aware of any information
bearing on the applicant's qualifications, that information shall be filed
in writing with the Village Clerk.
C. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
Village of Slinger. All applicants must be qualified according to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. An application shall be considered complete if it includes the
information required in this section.
E. An applicant for a license shall furnish the following information under
oath:
(1) Name and address.
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. Written
proof of age may be in the form of either:
(a) A copy of a birth certificate and current photo;
(b) A current driver's license with picture; or
§ 160-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-5
1:79
(c) Other picture identification document issued by a
governmental agency and demonstrating proof of age.
(3) The name, business location, business mailing address and phone
number of the proposed sexually oriented business.
(4) A statement as to whether the licensee of the sexually oriented
business intends to serve, sell, use or provide any intoxicating
liquor, cereal malt beverage or any type of alcoholic beverage on
the premises of the sexually oriented business.
(5) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the
name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the
name, address and ages of all shareholders of the corporation
owning more than 5% of the stock in said corporation and all
officers and directors of the corporation, and the name and address
of the registered agents.
(6) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, or any other type of
organization where two or more persons have a financial interest,
the application shall state the names, addresses and ages of all
persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture
or other type of organization.
(7) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business,
shall accompany the application for a sexually oriented business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but
shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(8) If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
an individual, he or she shall sign the application for a license as
applicant. If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual (such as a corporation or
partnership), each officer, director, director, general partner, or
other person identified in Subsection E(5) and (6) shall sign the
application for a license as the applicant. Each applicant must be
qualified under this section and each applicant shall be considered
as a licensee if the license is granted.
(9) Within 21 days of receiving an application for a license, the Village
Clerk shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted
or denied.
(10) Whenever an application is denied, the Village Clerk shall advise
the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the
applicant requests a hearing within 10 days of receipt of
notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held within 10 days
thereafter, as hereinafter provided.
§ 160-5 SLINGER CODE § 160-5
1:80
§ 160-6. Standards for issuance of license.
The Village Board shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more
of the following is found to be true:
§ 160-7. Fees.
A license fee of $250 shall be submitted with the application for a license.
If the application is denied, 1/2 of the fee shall be returned. The remainder
shall be applied toward processing and administrative costs.
§ 160-8. Display of license.
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place, at or near the
entrance of the sexually oriented business, so that it may be easily read at
any time.
(11) Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant
to the application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate
with regard to any information required by this chapter shall
constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible
for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the
Village Board.
A. An applicant (including all individuals, officers, directors, shareholders,
or persons with a financial interest in the organization) is less than 18
years of age.
B. An applicant is delinquent in the payment owed to the Village of Slinger
of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business.
C. An applicant has failed to provide information as required in § 160-5 for
issuance of the license.
D. The license application fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
E. An applicant has falsely answered a question or request for information
on the application form.
F. The proposed sexually oriented business is not in compliance with the
location restrictions established or physical layout restrictions
established for sexually oriented businesses in this chapter.
G. The applicant states or the Village Board subsequently discovers that
the applicant intends to serve, sell, use or provide any intoxicating
liquor, cereal malt beverages, or any type of alcoholic beverages on the
premises of the sexually oriented business.
H. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the
applicant, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented
business.
§ 160-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-9
1:81
§ 160-9. Renewal of license.
§ 160-10. Inspection.
§ 160-11. Suspension.
A. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner
suspended or revoked. A license must be renewed before operation is
allowed to continue. A license may be renewed only by making an
application as provided for in § 160-5. The application for renewal must
be filed not later than 60 days before the license expires. The
application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the Village of
Slinger and shall contain such information and data, given under oath
or affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license.
B. A license renewal fee of $250 shall be submitted with the application for
renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty in the amount of
$100 shall be assessed against any applicant who files for a renewal
less than 60 days before the license expires. If the application is denied,
1/2 of the total fees collected shall be returned.
C. If the Village of Slinger Police Department is aware of any information
bearing on applicant's qualifications, that information shall be filed in
writing with the Village Clerk.
A. For the purposes of ensuring compliance with this chapter, an
applicant, operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers
and any other federal, state, county or Village agency in the
performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this
chapter normally and regularly conducted by such agencies to inspect
at any time the business is occupied or open for business those portions
of the premises of a sexually oriented business which patrons or
customers are permitted to occupy.
B. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel
which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent
or temporary habitation.
A. The Village Board shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee, operator or
employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; or
(2) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter.
B. The Village Board shall give the licensee 10 days written notice of the
charges against him and the opportunity for a public hearing before the
Board, as hereinafter provided.
§ 160-9 SLINGER CODE § 160-12
1:82
§ 160-12. Revocation.
A. The Village Board shall revoke by written notice a license for a sexually
oriented business if a cause for suspension in § 160-11 occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
B. The Village Board shall revoke by written notice a license if it
determines that any of the following reasons exist:
(1) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any application or material facts were omitted from the application;
(2) The licensee, operator or any employee of the licensee violates any
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulation adopted by the
Board pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that in the case
of a first offense by a licensee where the conduct was solely that of
an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days,
if the Board shall find that the licensee had no actual or
constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the
exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive
knowledge;
(3) The licensee becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit;
(4) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid;
(5) Any intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverage or other alcoholic
beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the sexually
oriented business;
(6) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
(7) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(8) A licensee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(9) A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual act to occur
in or on the licensed premises. This Subsection will not apply to an
adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities
to occur either: in exchange for money; or in a public place or
within public view.
C. The Village Board, before revoking any license, shall give the licensee
at least 10 days written notice of the charges against him and the
opportunity for a public hearing as hereinafter provided.
D. The transfer of ownership or control of a license shall automatically and
immediately revoke the license.
E. Any licensee whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a
license for one year from the date of revocation.
§ 160-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-13
1:83
§ 160-13. Administrative review procedure.
Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes concerning municipal administrative
procedure shall govern the administrative procedure and review concerning
the granting, denial, renewal or nonrenewal of a permit or a license. A
request for an initial determination shall be made by an aggrieved person
pursuant to the provisions contained in § 68.08, Wis. Stats., to the Village
Clerk. An administrative appeal pursuant to the provision contained in
§ 68.10, Wis. Stats., may be made by an aggrieved person to the Board
of Appeals and a hearing shall be held by the Board of Appeals pursuant
to § 68.11, Wis. Stats. Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final
determination may seek judicial review pursuant to the provisions
contained in § 68.13, Wis. Stats.
§ 160-14. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 160-15. Physical layout of sexually oriented businesses.
Any sexually oriented business having available for customers, patrons
or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity must comply with the
following requirements:
A. Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and
from aisles and public areas of the sexually oriented business and shall
be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices.
B. Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
(1) Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms or cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
(2) Each booth shall have at least one side totally open to the public
lighted aisle which may be secured when the booth is in use by a
door which extends from a height of not less than two feet above
the floor.
(3) All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the
floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light-colored,
nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
(4) The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured
and easily cleanable.
(5) The lighting level of each booth, room, or cubicle when not in use
shall be a minimum of five footcandles at all times, as measured
from the floor.
§ 160-13 SLINGER CODE § 160-15
1:84
§ 160-16. Location.
§ 160-17. Responsibility of license.
C. Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at
any time. No occupant shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause
any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individual shall
damage or deface any portion of the booth.
A. No sexually oriented business shall be located:
(1) Within 500 feet of an existing sexually oriented business;
(2) Within 500 feet of any residential dwelling, including but not
limited to houses, apartments, condominiums, or flats;
(3) Within 500 feet of any preexisting place of worship, including but
not limited to any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building
which is primarily used for religious worship and related religious
activities;
(4) Within 500 feet of any public or private educational facility,
including but not limited to any child day-care establishments,
nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational
schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education
schools, junior colleges and universities. "School" includes the
school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for
another purpose and only incidentally at a school;
(5) Within 500 feet from any public park or recreational area which has
been designated for park or recreational activities, including but
not limited to a park, a playground, nature trails, swimming pool,
reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/
bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within
the Village which is under the control, operation or management of
the Village and recreational authorities; or
(6) Within 500 feet of any premises that in any manner sells or
dispenses alcohol or is licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage
control regulations of the state.
B. For the purposes of this section, distances are to be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the property line of the premises where a sexually oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in
Subsection A. The presence of a city, county, or other political
subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and
applying the distance requirements of this section.
A. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this section shall be deemed the act or omission of the
§ 160-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-17
1:85
§ 160-18. Escort agencies.
licensee if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge, or approval of the licensee, or as a result of the licensee's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the licensee
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the licensee committed the act or caused the omission.
B. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
licensee for the purposes of determining whether the licensee's license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
C. No employee of a sexually oriented business shall allow any minor to
loiter around or to frequent a sexually oriented business. It shall be the
duty of the licensee of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an
attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented
business at all times during such sexually oriented business's regular
business hours and to prevent any person under the age of 18 years of
age from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed
that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such
attendant asked for and was furnished:
(1) A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's
license; or
(2) Personal identification card issued by the State of Wisconsin
reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older.
D. The licensee shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner
at all times.
E. The licensee shall maintain at least five footcandles of light in the public
portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if
a lesser level of illumination in the aisles is necessary to enable a patron
to view any activity in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a
lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisle;
provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one footcandle of
illumination of said aisles, as measured from the floor.
F. The licensee shall insure compliance of the sexually oriented business
and its patrons with the provisions of this chapter.
G. The licensee shall insure that no alcoholic beverages are sold, used or
consumed on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort, or agrees to
act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 160-17 SLINGER CODE § 160-19
1:86
§ 160-19. Additional regulations concerning sexually oriented
businesses.
§ 160-20. Prohibition against children in sexually oriented
business.
It shall be prohibited for a person under the age of 18 years to be on the
premises of a sexually oriented business.
§ 160-21. Hours of operations.
§ 160-22. Exclusions.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the following establishments:
theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where
live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit
are offered on a regular basis; and in which the predominant business or
attraction is not the offering of entertainment which is intended for sexual
interests or titillation of customers; and where the establishment is not
distinguished by an emphasis on or the advertising or promotion of nude
or seminude performances. While expressive live nudity may occur within
these establishments, this chapter seeks only to minimize and prevent
the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses on the community.
Negative secondary effects have not been associated with the
establishments referenced in this section.
A. It shall be prohibited in a sexually oriented business for a person to
appear in a state of nudity or engage in specified sexual activities.
B. It shall be prohibited in a sexually oriented business, to appear in a
seminude condition, unless the person is an employee, who, while
seminude, is at least five feet from any patron or customer and on a
stage at least two feet from the floor.
C. It shall be prohibited for an employee, while seminude in a sexually
oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any
patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any
gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is seminude in a
sexually oriented business.
D. It shall be prohibited in a sexually oriented business to serve, sell, use,
provide or consume any intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverage or any
other alcoholic beverage.
A. No sexually oriented business shall be open between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon on Sundays.
B. All sexually oriented businesses shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the Slinger Police Department and the Building
Inspector.
§ 160-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-23
1:87
§ 160-23. Enforcement.
The Village of Slinger Police Department shall have the authority to enter
any sexually oriented business within the Village at all reasonable times to
inspect the premises and enforce this chapter.
§ 160-24. Violations and penalties; prosecution.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid license or in violation of this chapter is subject to a
suit for injunction as well as municipal prosecution. Such violation shall be
punishable by a fine of $500 plus court costs. Each day a sexually oriented
business so operates is a separate offense or violation.
Chapter 167
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 56. Police Department — See Ch. 99.
§ 167-1. False alarms requiring police response.
A. Alarm.
(1) Any device which, when actuated by a criminal act or other
emergency requiring police response, transmits a signal to a
central alarm system or produces an audible or visible signal
designed to notify persons within audible or visual range of signal.
(2) Alarm connections and monitoring will be done by the Washington
County Sheriff's Department Dispatch Center. Alarm requirements
will follow the requirements set forth by the Sheriff's Department.
(3) An annual registration fee will be set and billed by the Sheriff's
Department.
B. False/malfunctioning alarm. A signal from an alarm system resulting in
a response by the Police Department when an emergency situation did
not exist.
(1) The Sheriff's Department will annually supply the Slinger Police
Department with a list of the false/malfunctioning alarms that the
Department responded to.
(2) The Slinger Police Department will bill annually for false/
malfunctioning alarm responses within the Village limits per the
Village's fee schedule.
§ 160-23 SLINGER CODE § 167-1
1:88
§ 167-2. False alarms for fire alarm systems.
Chapter 171
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
(3) The Slinger Police Department will keep written records of all false/
malfunctioning alarm responses the Police Department handles.
Charges for false/malfunctioning alarms responded to by the
Slinger Police Department shall be billed to the owner and, if not
timely paid, shall be placed on the tax roll pursuant to the
provisions of § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
A. Special charge. The owner of the property in which a fire alarm has
been installed shall be subject to a special charge per the Village fee
schedule for the fourth false alarm and each one thereafter in a twelvemonth
period. Any such special charge may be waived by the Fire Chief
if the owner can show that the false alarm was not the result of the
negligence of the owner or the installation and/or maintenance of the
alarm system.
B. Collection of special charges. Special charges for false alarms, as
provided in Subsection A above, shall be billed to the owner and, if not
timely paid, shall be placed on the tax roll pursuant to the provisions of
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
§ 167-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-2
1:89

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption
[Adopted as Sec. 9.16 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 171-1. Consumption on public streets.56
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume, transport, carry or
possess any intoxicating liquor, wine or fermented malt beverage, except
in the original sealed package, either in or out of a vehicle in any of the
following places:
§ 171-2. Class "B" license holder requirement.57
The holder of a Class "B" fermented malt beverages or "Class B"
intoxicating liquor license shall make every reasonable effort to discourage
his patrons from taking fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors
or wine from the licensed premises when such beverages are served for
consumption on the premises.
§ 171-3. Notice concerning open containers.58
All premises licensed for the sale of fermented malt beverages, wine or
intoxicating liquor shall post a notice at each exit stating that "No beer,
liquor or wine may be carried in an open container out of the premises."
§ 171-4. Temporary licensing that allows consumption.
The Village Board of the Village of Slinger may permit the consumption
or possession of fermented malt beverages, wine or intoxicating liquors in
specifically authorized public places or at any event for which a temporary
"picnic" license has been issued.
A. Any Village-owned or -controlled parking lot.
B. Any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk or other similar place within
the Village of Slinger.
C. Any privately owned parking lot, driveway or lot used for vehicular
traffic and/or vehicular parking.
D. Any grounds under the control of the Slinger School District and the
grounds of any privately owned and operated school, church, hospital
or other institution frequented by the public, unless expressly
authorized by the owner thereof.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 171-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-5
1:91
§ 171-5. Violations and penalties.59
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-2 of the Code and shall be subject to a forfeiture
as provided in the Village's Schedule of Deposits.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 171-5 SLINGER CODE § 171-5
1:92
ARTICLE II
Licensing
[Adopted as Secs. 16.01, 16.02 and 16.07 of the former Municipal
Code]
§ 171-6. Quotas on licenses.60
The Village deems it to be in the public interest of the Village to limit the
number of Class "A" and Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses and
"Class A" and "Class B" intoxicating liquor licenses it issues in accordance
with the discretionary power given it by Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
§ 171-7. Liquor and beer licenses.
The provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., and also all acts amendatory thereof
and supplementary thereto are adopted as a portion of this article so far as
applicable, except as otherwise provided by this article.
A. Quotas. The Village shall issue Class "A" fermented malt beverage
licenses, Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses and "Class A"
intoxicating liquor licenses and "Class B" intoxicating liquor license in
conformity with Wisconsin Statutes.
A. Fees for any applications, petitions, licenses, or permits shall be as set
by the Village Board of the Village of Slinger within the guidelines and
provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.61
B. License investigation. The Village Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police
and the Building Inspector of each application for any license provided
in this article, and these officials shall inspect and cause to be inspected
each application and/or the premises, together with such other
investigation as shall be necessary to determine whether the applicant
and premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations,
ordinances and laws applicable thereto and whether the applicant is a
proper recipient of a license. These officials shall each furnish the
Board the information derived from such investigations, accompanied
by a recommendation as to whether the license should be granted or
refused. In determining the suitability of an applicant, consideration
shall be given to a background investigation conducted by the Slinger
Police Department for felony convictions and/or violations of Ch. 125,
Wis. Stats.62
C. License restrictions.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 171-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-7
1:93
(1) No initial or renewal alcohol beverage license shall be granted for
any premises for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the
Village are delinquent and unpaid.
(2) No initial or renewal alcohol beverage license shall be granted to
any person:63
(a) Delinquent in payment of any taxes, assessments or other
claims owed to the Village;
(b) Delinquent in payment of forfeiture resulting from a violation
of any ordinance of the Village.
(3) No liquor license or permit is required for a community park in the
Village of Slinger per § 125.06, Wis. Stats., License and Permit
Exemptions, Subsection (6), Public Parks. Fermented malt
beverages shall be sold by officers or employees of the county or
municipality under an ordinance or resolution, rule or regulation
enacted by the governing body.
(4) The Village Board reserves the right to revoke a Class "A" or "B" or
"Class A" or "Class B" liquor license issued hereunder that is not
used within 30 days after issuance or usage is discontinued or the
premises is abandoned for a period of 60 days or more. The liquor
license may be subject to revocation by the Village Board following
a public hearing. The license holder will be notified by certified
mail by the Village Clerk of the public hearing. No refund shall be
made of any part of the license fee for any liquor license issued
under this article that is revoked for cause or is voluntarily
surrendered.
(5) The following exceptions shall apply:
(a) The licensee may petition the Board for an extension of time
within which to use such license when the premises is
destroyed or damaged by fire or other natural causes or is
closed for remodeling for more than 60 days.
(b) Existing seasonal businesses, including the racetrack (dba
Slinger Speedway) and the ski hill (dba Little Switzerland)
shall not be subject to the 60 consecutive days of nonuse if
such time period is not during their operation season (April to
October for the racetrack and November to April for the ski
hill).
D. Fermented malt beverages. Fermented malt beverages may be sold in
any public park operated by the Village when sold by officers or
employees of the Village approved by the Board, without the necessity
of said officers or employees obtaining a bartender's license.64
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 171-7 SLINGER CODE § 171-8
1:94
§ 171-8. Operator's license.
All bartenders in the Village of Slinger must have an operator's license in
conformance with § 125.04, Wis. Stats., issued and approved by the Village
Clerk.
A. Fees. Fees for any applications, petitions, licenses or permits shall be
set by the Village Board of the Village of Slinger by a duly enacted
ordinance and may be changed from time to time.65
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 171-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-8
1:95
Chapter 178
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 178-1. Registration.
Property owners or renters shall register or cause to be registered by the
Village Clerk all of their electronic games, billiard tables, jukeboxes and
pinball machines on location for use no later than the third Monday of
June for approval by the Village Board and prior to their expiration on June
30. Amusement licenses run from July 1 to June 30 of the following year.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize the registration of
any slot machine or gambling devices not allowed by the state.
§ 178-2. Issuance of registration symbols.66
The Village Clerk shall require the registrant to submit the information as
may be necessary to identify the electronic games or amusement device
so registered and shall issue to the registrant an appropriate registration
symbol so designed as to permit its secure attachment to the amusement
device to be registered. Any person, firm or corporation delinquent in the
payment of taxes, personal or real, shall not be issued an amusement
license.
§ 178-3. Fees.
Fees for any applications, petitions, licenses or permits shall be as set by
the Village Board of the Village of Slinger by a duly enacted resolution and
may be changed from time to time.
§ 178-4. Seizure.67
The Chief of Police or any police officer shall seize or cause to be seized
any electronic game or amusement device upon which is not affixed a
registration symbol as herein required. The ownership or possession of any
nonregistered electronic game or amusement device is declared to be a
violation of this subsection.
§ 178-5. Transfer of registration symbols.68
Any transfer of registration symbols from one machine to another shall be
unlawful.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 171-8 SLINGER CODE § 178-6
1:96
§ 178-6. Counterfeit registration symbols.
No person shall counterfeit a registration symbol or shall transfer such
registration symbol from one amusement device to another without having
previously registered such transfer with the Village Clerk.
§ 178-7. Revocation of license of registration symbols.
Chapter 184
ANIMALS
A. By the Court. Upon a conviction of a violation of any provision of this
chapter, the Police Chief shall revoke and demand surrender of the
registration symbols by commanding a return thereof and notifying the
Village Clerk in writing of the name and address of the licensee or
registrant and the date of such revocation. The revocation shall be
effective as of the date of conviction, unless stayed on appeal.
B. By the Village Board. The Village Board may, after the issuance of any
license or registration symbols, revoke the same when any licensee has
made a material misstatement of fact in his application.69
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 178-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-7
1:97

ARTICLE I
Dogs and Cats
[Adopted as Secs. 13.01 and 16.04 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 184-1. State laws adopted.
The provisions of Ch. 174, Wis. Stats., exclusive of any penalties, are
adopted by reference and made a part of this article insofar as applicable.
§ 184-2. Running at large prohibited.
§ 184-3. Howling of dogs and cats prohibited. [Amended 12-3-2018
by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat which by howling,
yowling, yelping, barking or otherwise shall cause serious annoyance or
disturbance.
§ 184-4. Records required by kennels, pet shops, licensing.
No person operating a kennel or pet shop or other person selling pets within
the Village shall sell or place such animals without first preparing accurate
and complete records of such sale. Such records are necessary in tracing
the location and movement of animals suspected of rabies exposure.
§ 184-5. Dog and cat licenses.
A. No person owning, harboring or keeping a dog or cat shall permit the
same to run at large at any time within the Village.
B. A dog or cat shall be deemed at large within the meaning of this
subsection:
(1) If not on the premises of the person owning, keeping or harboring
such a dog or cat.
(2) If off the premises of the person owning, keeping or harboring such
dog or cat, not confined in a building or enclosure, securely tied, or
under control by leash.
C. No feral cat that has been treated by the Washington County Humane
Society as part of the Trap, Neuter and Return Program shall be
deemed to be at large. Such animals will be identifiable by the tipping
of their left ear. [Added 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 11-01-2016]
A. All dogs and cats over six months of age are required to be licensed.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
B. All dogs and cats subject to licensing shall be required to provide a
rabies vaccination certificate unless exception allowed under
Subsection F.
§ 184-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-5
1:99
§ 184-5.1. Regulating vicious dogs. [Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
06-01-2018]
C. No more than three dogs and three cats are permitted in a residence.
D. Fees for licenses shall be set by the Village Board by Resolution
annually.
E. The provisions of Ch. 174 and § 95.21(2) and (9)(d), Wis. Stats., are
adopted by reference.
F. The exemption with respect to rabies vaccinations is authorized by
§ 95.21(9)(d), Wis. Stats., which is adopted by reference, with the
following provisions:
(1) The exemption from a rabies vaccination is applicable for only one
dog per owner and/or residence per year.
(2) Each year the owner of a dog seeking an exemption from the rabies
vaccine requirement shall submit a letter from a veterinarian
complying with the requirement of § 95.21(9)(d), Wis. Stats., dated
not more than 30 days prior to the license application.
(3) The dog exempted from a rabies vaccination shall be allowed to be
walked within the Village, provided the owner keeps the dog on a
leash no longer than six feet in length.
(4) The owner of an unvaccinated dog authorized by this article shall
notify in writing the Village Police Department and Fire
Department of the fact that there is an unvaccinated dog at the
owner's residence.
(5) The owner shall, prior to the issuance of a license, sign a form
prepared by the Village in which the owner holds the Village
harmless for any damages amongst other things caused to any
party by the unvaccinated dog.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department
possessing, harboring or having the care, custody, whether temporarily
or permanently, of a dog.
VICIOUS DOG — A dog which, at any time, bites or has bitten one or
more people or domestic animals; or which unprovoked, bites a person,
or a dog or domestic animal or which has caused serious injury to a
person or a dog or domestic animal; or a dog which has been found to
be a vicious or dangerous dog in any other community.
SERIOUS INJURY — Any physical injury to a person or domestic
animal that results in a major fracture, muscle tears, disfiguring
(1)
§ 184-5 SLINGER CODE § 184-5.1
1:100
lacerations or wounds, or requires multiple sutures or corrective or
cosmetic surgery.
UNPROVOKED — Circumstances demonstrate that the dog was
not, at the time of the incident, being teased, attacked, tormented,
abused or assaulted by a person or another domestic animal.
(2)
B. Requirements and prohibitions.
(1) Leash and muzzle. No person owning, harboring, or having the
care of a vicious dog may permit such dog to go outside its kennel
or pen unless the dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer
than four feet in length. No person may permit a vicious dog to be
kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or
pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash. The dog may
not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts or
buildings. A vicious dog on a leash outside the dog's kennel shall be
muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the dog from
biting persons or other animals.
(2) Confinement. All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or
in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when
leashed and muzzled as provided in Subsection B(1) above. The
pen, kennel or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top
attached to all sides. A structure used to confine a vicious dog shall
be locked with a key or combination lock when the dog is within the
structure. The structure shall have a secure bottom or floor
attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be
embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures
erected to house vicious dogs shall comply with all applicable
municipal zoning codes and building regulations. All structures
shall be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(3) Confinement indoor. No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio,
or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to
exit the building on its volition. No vicious dog may be kept in a
house or structure when the windows are open or when screen
windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog
from exiting the structure.
(4) Prohibited in multiple dwelling. No vicious dog may be kept within
any portion of any multifamily dwelling.
(5) Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs shall
display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily
readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog." A similar
sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of the dog.
(6) Insurance. All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs shall
provide proof to the Chief of Police of public liability insurance in a
single incident amount of $50,000 for bodily injury to or death of
§ 184-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-5.1
1:101
any person or for the damage to property owned by any person
which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of
vicious dogs. The insurance policy will be maintained unless a tenday
written notice is first given to the Chief of Police. The owner
or custodian of the dog shall produce evidence of the required
insurance upon request of a law enforcement officer.
(7) Vicious dog determination. The Chief of Police or designee shall
investigate every dog complaint and make a determination as to
whether or not such dog is "vicious" as defined in Subsection A. In
the event the Chief of Police makes a determination that a dog is
"vicious" he/she shall so inform the owner, keeper or harborer of
such dog and provide such person a copy of this section.
(8) Appeal of vicious dog determination. Any person aggrieved by the
determination of the Chief of Police or designee, as provided in
Subsection B(8) above, may appeal such determination to the
Village Board.
(9) Disposition of vicious dogs. Any law enforcement officer of the
Village may take custody of an animal if the officer has reasonable
grounds to believe the animal is one of the type set forth in
§ 173.13(1)(a) 1. Thru 9. Wis. Stats. Subject to review by the circuit
court, the animal if taken into custody because it is hopelessly
injured, an imminent threat to public health or safety, or the health
or safety of itself or its custodians, shall be turned over to the
appropriate agency for euthanizing. This does not preclude the
immediate killing of a dog for the protection of other animals and
persons, as authorized by § 174.01 Wis. Stats.
§ 184-5.1 SLINGER CODE § 184-5.1
1:102
ARTICLE II
Responsibility for Pet Waste
[Adopted as Sec. 13.02 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 184-6. Animals; littering.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit fecal matter which
is deposited by such animal while off of the owner's premises to remain on
any street, alley, sidewalk, lawn, field or any public property, and it shall be
solely the responsibility of the animal owner immediately after deposit to
remove all fecal matter and dispose of it in a waste receptacle.
§ 184-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-6
1:103

ARTICLE III
Keeping of Exotic or Wild Animals
[Adopted as Sec. 13.03 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 184-7. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep, maintain, harbor,
breed or sell exotic or wild animals on a property or in any residence,
household or dwelling unit within the Village of Slinger.
§ 184-8. Definition.
As used in this article, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
EXOTIC OR WILD ANIMAL — Shall have the meaning of "wild animal"
as provided in § 169.01, Wis. Stats., and shall include any dangerous,
carnivorous, poisonous or venomous wild animal, insect, reptile,
invertebrate or amphibian, including but not limited to the following:
Alligator
Ape; Chimpanzee; gibbon; gorilla; orangutan; and siamang
Baboon
Bear
Bison
Cayman
Coyote
Chinchilla
Crocodile
Deer; includes all members of the deer family, for example white-tailed
deer, elk, antelope and moose
Elephant
Ferret
Gambian rat
Gamecock and other fighting bird
Hippopotamus
Hyena
Kangaroo
Lizard
Member of the canine species other than the domestic dog (canis
familiaris)
Member of the feline species other than the domestic cat (felis
domesticus)
Monkey
§ 184-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-8
1:105
Pig, to include pot-bellied
Poisonous or venomous insect
Ostrich
Prairie dog
Raccoon
Rhinoceros
Snake, constrictor or nonvenomous
Snapping turtle
Squirrel of flying or nonflying variety
Venomous snake
Venomous spider
Wasp and hornet
Wolf dog hybrid
Wolf
§ 184-9. Exceptions.
The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following animals,
provided that the conditions listed under § 184-10 have been met:
§ 184-10. Conditions for exception.
An exception as stated under § 184-9 is granted, provided that:
§ 184-11. Fancier's permit.
A. No more than six nonvenomous snakes capable of growing to no more
than five feet at maturity.
B. No more than six nonvenomous lizards capable of growing to no more
than three feet at maturity, measured from snout to end of body.
C. No more than three ferrets.
A. The owner-keeper has complied with all applicable state and federal
importation regulations and permit requirements and possesses any
required veterinary health certificate;
B. The animal shall be securely held and maintained in quarters so
constructed as to prevent its escape.70
A. A person who wishes to keep an exotic or wild animal, or who wishes to
keep a number of animals in excess of the number allowed under
70.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 13.03E, Existing nonconforming animals, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 184-8 SLINGER CODE § 184-11
1:106
§ 184-9, may apply for a fancier's permit, which may be granted at the
discretion of the Village Board. The fancier's permit application must
be submitted to the Village Clerk, who shall schedule a public hearing
on the matter at the first possible Village Board meeting. Notice of
the public hearing shall be given in accordance with § 985.07(1), Wis.
Stats., Class 1 notices, no less than two weeks before the Village Board
meeting at which the public hearing will be held. The Village Clerk shall
also give at least 10 days' prior written notice to all property owners
within 200 feet of the property for which a fancier's permit is being
sought. Failure of any notice to be received by any property owner
shall not, however, invalidate the action taken by the Village Board. A
fancier's permit will not be considered for review until the following
conditions have been met:
(1) The owner-keeper has complied with all applicable state and
federal importation regulations and permit requirements, and
possesses any required veterinary health certificate.
(2) The owner has submitted to the Village Clerk a completed
application for a fancier's permit, which shall list the type and
number of the subject animal(s) and their proposed location within
the residence, household or dwelling unit.
(3) The animals shall be securely held and maintained in quarters so
constructed as to prevent their escape.
(4) Should a permit be granted, such permit shall be valid for one year
from the date of issuance. The owner may apply annually with
updated information on the subject animals by filing a renewal
application form at least 30 days prior to the expiration date. If the
Village Board decides not to renew the permit, notice of the
nonrenewal shall be provided to the owner, and the owner shall
have the option to appeal for a public hearing and reconsideration
as described in § 184-12.
(5) Fees for any applications or permits shall be as set by the Village
Board of the Village of Slinger by a duly enacted resolution and may
be changed from time to time.
(6) Persons living in condominiums or other multifamily buildings must
obtain written authorization from their condominium association or
building owner to obtain a fancier's permit.
(7) The Village Board has the authority to require additional conditions
as it deems appropriate.
B. When reviewing an application for a fancier's permit, the Village Board
shall consider, but is not limited to, the following factors:
(1) Type and number of animal(s).
(2) Size of the subject parcel and proximity to other neighbors.
§ 184-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-11
1:107
§ 184-12. Nonrenewal or revocation of permit.
§ 184-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person found to be in violation of any one of the above sections in
this article shall be subject to forfeitures as stated in the Village of Slinger
Municipal Ordinance Deposit Schedule.
(3) Qualifications of the requester.
A. Annually prior to renewal of the permit, the Village Clerk shall inquire
of the Police Department regarding complaints and/or incidents
regarding the permittee and the permit address with reference to any
of the following:
(1) Personal injuries or property damages caused by permitted
animal(s).
(2) Animal noise or animal waste complaints.
(3) Animal(s) at large.
(4) Permit violations.
(5) Any other animal-related nuisance or annoyance conditions.
B. The presence of three or more separate such incidents within a twelvemonth
period, documented by an investigating police officer and having
resulted in a warning or the issuance of a citation to the permittee, shall
be presumed to arise to a condition where renewal or continuation of
the permit would injure public health, safety or welfare and disrupt the
peace and repose of the neighborhood, and shall require nonrenewal or
revocation of the permit. The Village Board also may choose not to
renew or revoke a permit for any cause if it finds that the keeping of the
animals has an adverse impact upon the health, safety or welfare of the
Village of Slinger or the immediate neighborhood where the animals
are kept. The Village Clerk shall promptly notify the permittee of the
nonrenewal or revocation by certified mail.
C. Any person aggrieved by the nonrenewal or revocation of an animalrelated
permit may appeal to the Village Board by submitting a written
request to the Village Administrator within 10 days of receipt of the
notice of nonrenewal or revocation. The Village Administrator shall
schedule a public hearing on the matter at the first possible Village
Board meeting. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in
accordance with § 985.07(1), Wis. Stats., Class 1 notices, no less than
two weeks before the Village Board meeting at which the public hearing
will be held. The Village Clerk shall also give at least 10 days' prior
written notice to all property owners within 200 feet of the property for
which an appeal is being sought. Failure of any notice to be received by
any property owner shall not, however, invalidate the action taken by
the Village Board.
§ 184-11 SLINGER CODE § 184-13
1:108
Chapter 198
BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES
§ 184-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-13
1:109

ARTICLE I
Registration of Bicycles
[Adopted as Sec. 6.11 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 198-1. Registration and license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place in the Village without having first registered
such bicycle and secured a license therefor.
§ 198-2. Application.
Application for registration and license for a bicycle shall be made by the
owner in writing upon blank forms furnished by the Police Department.71
§ 198-3. Registration fee and term of license.72
The registration fee for each bicycle shall be as set from time to time by the
Village Board. The licenses so issued shall be effective until the ownership
of the bicycle is changed or the license is canceled, pursuant to the terms of
this article.
§ 198-4. Cancellation of registration.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to cancel the registration of
and remove the license from any bicycle being operated upon any street
or public way in the Village of Slinger in an unsafe manner or in violation
of any state law or local ordinance, and such cancellation of registration
and removal of license shall be in addition to other penalties provided
hereunder.
71.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 6.11B, Inspection of bicycle, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-4
1:111

ARTICLE II
Play Vehicles on Streets or Sidewalks
[Adopted as Secs. 6.09 and 9.041 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 198-5. Riding bicycles, play vehicles or skateboards on
sidewalks.73
Persons may ride a bicycle, play vehicle, or skateboard upon a sidewalk
anywhere within the Village limits, provided that the operator shall, at
all times, give way to and not interfere with pedestrians. Every person
operating a bicycle, play vehicle or skateboard upon a sidewalk or walkway
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall exercise due care
when passing a bicycle rider or pedestrian.
§ 198-6. Regulation of play vehicles on Village street and public
parks.
§ 198-7. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violations of this article is as set forth in § 1-2 of the Code.
A. For the purpose of this section, "play vehicles" shall consist of
skateboards, scooters, in-line skates, roller blades, roller skates and
roller skis.
B. No person shall ride or operate a play vehicle on any street within the
Village of Slinger.
C. No person shall ride or operate a play vehicle in any shelters, gazebos,
basketball courts or parking lots of any Village park or in any public
area where such activity is prohibited by notice posted on appropriate
signs.
D. No person may ride or operate a play vehicle on the property of any
person or business without the written permission of the property
owner or the person in charge of the property.
E. Whenever any person is riding or operating a play vehicle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and
shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any
pedestrian.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 198-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-7
1:113
Chapter 206
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
§ 198-7 SLINGER CODE § 198-7
1:114
ARTICLE I
Control of Weeds and Noxious Plants
[Adopted as Sec. 10.06 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 206-1. Purpose.
§ 206-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DESTROY — The complete killing of weed plants above the surface of the
ground by the use of chemicals, cutting, tillage, cropping system, pasturing
livestock, or any or all of these in effective combination, at such time
and in such manner as will effectually prevent such weed plants from
maturing to the bloom or flower stage.[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
11-01-2018]
INVASIVE PLANTS — Classified as an invasive speces as defined in Wis.
Stats. 23.22.[Added 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 04-02-2018]
LAWN OR TURF GRASS — Grass commonly used in regularly cut lawns
or play areas, such as, but not limited to, bluegrass, fescue and rye grass
blends. In lawn or turf areas, grass shall not exceed eight inches in height.
A. A variety of landscapes adds diversity and richness to the quality of life
in the Village of Slinger. There are also expectations regarding the
maintenance and appearance of landscapes which, if not met, may
decrease the value of nearby properties, degrade the natural
environment, or threaten public health and safety. It is therefore in the
public interest, and the intended purpose of this section, to provide
standards for the development and maintenance of the community's
landscapes, whether corporate, private, or public.
B. The Village recognizes that the majority of landscapes consist of
managed turf grass. However, the Village encourages the preservation
and planting of wildflowers and other native plants in managed
landscapes to reduce maintenance, conserve water, soil, and other
elements of the natural community.
C. The Village acknowledges the need to enjoy and benefit from the
variety, beauty, and practical values of natural landscapes, and allows
natural landscaping as an alternative to conventional landscaping.
D. It is also the intent of this section to prevent landscaped areas from
being unmanaged or overgrown in ways that adversely affect human
health or safety, or create a nuisance due to their visual appearance. It
is the express intent of this section that it shall be unlawful to allow the
growth of noxious weeds, certain prohibited plants, invasive plants, and
the rank growth of vegetation. [Amended 5-21-2018 by Ord. No.
04-02-2018]
§ 206-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-2
1:115
NATURAL LANDSCAPED AREAS — A land area planted and managed
to preserve or restore native Wisconsin grasses and forbs, native trees,
shrubs, wildflowers and aquatic plants, or a combination thereof. In such
areas, grasses and forbs may exceed eight inches in height.
NOXIOUS WEEDS AND PLANTS — As defined in § 66.0407, Wis. Stats.
Shall also be defined as any growth of weeds or grass that constitutes
a public nuisance as defined in § 336-3F of this Code, except in areas
designated as "natural landscaped areas" in accord with the definition in
this section and § 206-4 below.
§ 206-3. General lawn and landscaping maintenance requirements.
§ 206-4. Natural landscaped areas.
Natural landscaped areas as defined above in § 206-2, where grasses and
forbs may exceed eight inches in height, may be permitted in accord with
the following procedures and requirements:
A. The owner or occupant of any lands in the Village shall install and
maintain landscaping, plantings and other decorative surface
treatments, including turf grass, so as to present an attractive
appearance in all court and yard areas in accordance with generally
accepted landscaping practices in southeastern Wisconsin.
B. Lawns shall be maintained to a height not to exceed eight inches.
C. Exceptions to these requirements include natural landscaped areas as
described in § 206-4 below, and areas which are heavily wooded without
lawn or turf grass within the heavily wooded areas.
D. Plantings shall be maintained so as not to present hazards or a nuisance
to adjoining properties or to persons or vehicles traveling on public
ways and shall be maintained so as to enhance the appearance and
value of the property on which located and thereby the appearance and
value of the neighborhood and the Village.
A. Applicability. Natural landscaped areas may be permitted in all
residential, commercial, industrial and institutional zoning districts in
accord with the procedures described in this section. However, the
following zoning districts are exempt from the procedures described in
this section because of circumstances unique to such districts: parks
and recreation districts, conservancy districts, floodplain districts,
wetland districts, and planned unit development districts (PUDs).
B. Prior to installation, the owner or occupant of the premises shall apply
to the Village Engineer, who shall provide applicant with an application
form and a copy of this section. A scaled plan of the subject lot or parcel
shall be submitted, showing the area to be planted and a description
and location of the seeds, forbs, trees, shrubs or other plantings to be
installed. The plan should also include a statement of intent and
purpose of the natural landscaped area, such as "prairie restoration,"
§ 206-2 SLINGER CODE § 206-4
1:116
§ 206-5. Weed control.
"old field succession to woodland," "natural meadow," "erosion control,"
bird and wildlife sanctuary," etc., which implies a management
direction. The management and maintenance techniques to be
employed should be described in the statement of intent. The plan shall
be accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by the Village Board,
and the application form shall be signed by the property owner. The
Village shall review the plan and act to approve it, deny it, or approve it
with conditions within 30 days of its submittal. The plan review shall be
done by a committee consisting of the Village Engineer, Planner, Fire
Chief, a Planning Commission member, and a member with appropriate
knowledge of natural landscape materials. A permit for installation
of natural landscaped areas may be issued by the Village Engineer
only after review and recommendation by the committee. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
C. Natural landscaped areas may be located only in rear and side yards
and shall not be located in any street yards.
D. Natural landscaped areas shall be set back a minimum of five feet from
adjacent lot lines and from public or private street rights-of-way to
provide a perimeter buffer area around natural landscape areas. The
perimeter buffer area shall contain lawn or turf grass which is
maintained and mowed or may be heavily wooded areas. The perimeter
buffer areas are intended to minimize any adverse impact on adjacent
property owners or occupants, or to street rights-of-way.
E. Natural landscaped areas shall not be located within public utility
easements, drainage easements, drainage swales or public street
rights-of-way.
F. Natural landscaped areas shall not contain noxious weeds or plants as
described in § 206-2.
G. Natural landscaped areas which do not comply with either an approved
plan or with the requirements of this section shall be determined to be a
public nuisance, and the Village may order the nuisance abated in
accord with § 336-7 of this Code.
H. Natural landscaped areas which existed prior to July 6, 2003 may be
continued where they comply with the requirements of this section.
Such areas which do not comply because of their location or other
characteristics shall be considered to be nonconforming uses and may
be continued but shall not be enlarged, extended or expanded to
increase their degree of nonconformance. [Amended 12-3-2018 by
Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
I. If the subject property is sold or transferred to a new owner(s), a new
natural landscaped area plan shall be submitted for review and
approval as described in Subsection B.
§ 206-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-5
1:117
A. Property owners are required by law to destroy all noxious weeds,
invasive plants, and other rank growth of vegetation as defined herein
on lands in the Village which they own, occupy or control; including
lands in street rights-of-way between the property line and the roadway
pavement. [Amended 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 04-02-2018]
B. Penalty. Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
C. Notification. The Village Clerk shall annually, on or before May 15,
publish a Class 2 notice, under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., that every person is
required by law to destroy all noxious weeds and other rank growth or
vegetation, as defined herein, on lands in the Village which he owns,
occupies or controls, including lands in the street right-of-way between
the property line and the road pavement.
§ 206-5 SLINGER CODE § 206-5
1:118
ARTICLE II
New Lawn Establishment Permit
[Adopted as Sec. 16.13 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 206-6. Permit for lawn establishment by new residential
customers.
A permit is required for residential users of the Village's sanitary sewerage
system as a means of providing a credit for water utilized when establishing
a new lawn in accord with Village regulations. A permit will be issued based
upon the following criteria:
A. Only new residential customers connected to both Slinger water and
wastewater utilities and contributing only normal, domestic strength
waste are eligible for this permit.
B. The permit is valid only for the initial establishment period of lawns
within the Village of Slinger's corporate boundaries. The initial
establishment period is limited to three consecutive months only. The
Village Board may grant an extension of the initial establishment period
if deemed necessary due to extenuating circumstances. [Amended
9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 09-01-2017]
C. Approved permit holders will be issued a credit for the volume of
sewage discharged to the sewerage system for each of the affected
billing periods. The volume quantity charged for sewage discharged
during each billing period will be determined as follows. The utility will
establish the average volume of water used monthly by the permit
applicant based on past usage. The average volume determined by the
utility will establish the fixed volume charge for sewage discharged
during each billing period in which the permit is valid. If there is no past
usage, the utility's average customer usage will be used. [Amended
9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 09-01-2017]
D. The volume charge for water used during the permit period will remain
the actual volume of water passing through the customer's meter. No
credit or adjustment will be made for the volume of water used during
the permit period.
E. A permit fee will be charged for the new lawn establishment permit.
The permit fee will be set by the Village Board of the Village of Slinger
by a duly enacted resolution and may be changed from time to time.
§ 206-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-6
1:119
Chapter 215
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 56.
Alarms — See Ch. 167.
Outdoor furnaces — See Ch. 271.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 526.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 206-6 SLINGER CODE § 206-6
1:120
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted as Secs. 30.00 to 30.031 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 215-1. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the design, construction,
alteration, demolition and moving of all buildings and structures.
§ 215-2. Title.
These regulations shall be known and cited as the "Municipal Building
Code" and shall be construed to secure their expressed intent and to
ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they are dependent upon
building construction.
§ 215-3. Application of Wisconsin Commercial Building Code.74
The Wisconsin Commercial Building Code, Ch. SPS 360 (erosion control),
Chs. SPS 361 to 366, Chs. SPS 375 to 379, Wis. Adm. Code., are hereby
made a part of this article by reference with respect to those classes of
buildings to which such provisions apply. A copy of said code is on file in the
office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 215-4. Application of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code.75
The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, Chs. SPS 320 to 325, Wis. Adm.
Code, inclusive, and all amendments thereto, are hereby made a part of
this article by reference and shall apply to all one- and two-family dwellings
and alterations and additions thereto, the initial construction of which
was commenced after the effective dates of the various chapters of the
Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. A copy of said code is on file in the office
of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 215-5. Application of Wisconsin Uniform Building Code
All buildings and structures hereafter erected, altered, repaired, moved or
demolished that are used or designed to be used for the purpose herein
defined shall comply in full with the requirements of this section.
A. Zoning laws. No provision of this article shall be construed to repeal,
modify, or constitute an alternative to any lawful zoning regulations.
B. New buildings. The construction requirements of the Wisconsin
Uniform Building Code shall apply to all buildings not covered under
§§ 215-3 and 215-4.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-5
1:121
C. Existing buildings. The code shall also apply to buildings and conditions
described in this section.
(1) An existing building to be occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling, which building was not previously occupied.
(2) An existing structure that is altered or repaired, when the cost of
such alterations or repair during the life of the structure exceeds
50% of the equalized value of the structure, said value to be
determined by the Assessor of the municipality.
(3) Additions and alterations, regardless of cost, made to an existing
building shall comply with the requirements of this section. The
provisions of Subsection D of this section shall also apply.
(4) Roof coverings. When more than 25% of the roof covering of a
building is replaced in any twelve-month period, all roof coverings
shall be in conformity with applicable sections of the code.
D. Alterations and repairs. The following provisions shall apply to
buildings altered or repaired:
(1) Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations
to any existing building or structure, accommodating a legal
occupancy and use but of nonconforming type of construction,
which involves either the structural members of floors or roofs,
beams, girders, columns, bearing or other walls, room heating and
air-conditioning systems, arrangement, light and ventilation,
changes in location of exit stairways or exits, or any or all of the
above, then such existing construction shall be made to conform to
the minimum requirements of this article applicable to such
occupancy and use and given type of construction.
(2) Repairs. Repairs for purposes of maintenance, or replacements in
any existing building or structure which do not involve the
structural portions of the building or structure, or which do not
affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or
efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection, or exterior
aesthetic appearance and which do not increase a given occupancy
and use, shall be deemed minor repairs.
(3) Alterations when not permitted. When an existing building or
structure, which for any reason whatsoever does not conform to the
regulations of this article, has deteriorated from any cause
whatsoever to an extent greater than 50% of the equalized value of
the building or structure, no alterations or moving of such building
or structure shall be permitted. Any such building or structure shall
be considered a menace to public safety and welfare and shall be
ordered vacated and thereafter demolished and debris removed
from the premises.
§ 215-5 SLINGER CODE § 215-5
1:122
§ 215-6. Application of Wisconsin Administrative Plumbing and
Electrical Code.76
All plumbing work shall be done in conformity with Chs. SPS 380 to 387,
Wis. Adm. Code, Plumbing. All electrical work, including the placing of
wires and other equipment, shall be done in conformity with the current
Wisconsin Electrical Code in effect.
(4) Alterations and repairs required. When any of the structural
members of any building or structure have deteriorated from any
cause whatsoever to less than their required strength, the owner of
such a building or structure shall cause such structural members to
be restored to their required strength; failing in which the building
or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and shall
be vacated and thereafter no further occupancy or use of the same
shall be permitted until the regulations of this article are complied
with.
(5) Extent of deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration of
any existing building or structure shall be determined by the
Building Inspector.
(6) Use of unsanitary building. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use or
permit the occupancy or use of any building or structure that is
unsanitary or dilapidated, or deteriorated, or out of repair, thereby
being unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use until the
regulations of this article have been complied with.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:123

ARTICLE II
Inspections, Permits and Certificates
[Adopted as Secs. 30.04 to 30.12; 30.47, 30.49, 30.50, 30.51 and
30.53, of the former Municipal Code]
§ 215-7. Building, Plumbing and Electrical Inspector.77
There is hereby created the Building Inspection Department. The Inspector
appointed by the municipality shall act as head of this Department.
§ 215-8. Permits.
A. Duties. The Inspector is vested with the authority and responsibility to
enforce all laws and controlling safe building construction including
issuance of citations for violations of Chapters 56, 167 and 271 of the
Village's Code. He shall make periodic inspection of existing public
buildings at the site of buildings damaged by any cause whatsoever to
determine the safety of buildings affected thereby.
B. Rights. The Inspector or his authorized agent shall have the power and
authority at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to enter upon
any public or private premises and make inspection thereof and to
require the production of the permit for any building, plumbing,
electrical or heating work being done or the required license therefor.
No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such
premises to the above-described representatives of the municipality
while in the performance of their duties.
C. Records. There shall be kept in the Building Inspection Department a
record of all applications for building permits in a book for such
purpose and each permit shall be regularly numbered in the order of
issue. Also, a record showing the number, description and size of all
buildings erected indicating the kind of materials used and the cost of
each building and aggregate cost of all buildings in the various classes,
shall be kept. There shall be kept in the Building Inspection
Department, a record of all inspections made, and of all removal and
condemnation of buildings, and a record of all fees collected showing
the date of their receipt. The Inspector shall make a written annual
report to the governing body of the municipality relative to these
matters.
D. Plan review and fee schedule. Commercial plan review will be
performed by a certified commercial building inspector, for new
buildings, additions onto existing buildings, or building renovations,
when the entire building does not exceed 50,000 cubic feet. Plan review
fees will be consistent with the current Wisconsin State Fee Schedule.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:125
A. Permits required. No building, plumbing or electrical work, or project
shall hereafter be built, enlarged, altered or demolished within the
municipality or moved into, within or out of the municipality except as
hereinafter provided, unless a permit therefor shall first be obtained by
the owner or his agent from the Inspector. Permits required are as
follows:
(1) Building.
(2) Air conditioning.78
(3) Wrecking or razing.
(4) Heating.
(5) Moving of buildings.
(6) Occupancy.
(7) Reroofing and re-siding.
(8) Plumbing.
(9) Electrical.
(10) Other permits as required by governing municipality.
B. Application for the appropriate permit.
(1) Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a
blank form to be furnished by the Inspector and shall state the
name and address of owner of the building and the owner of the
land on which it is to be erected, the name and address of the
designer, and shall set forth a legal description of the land on which
the building is to be located, the location of the building, the house
number thereof and such other information as the Inspector may
require. With such application, there shall be submitted to the
Inspector three complete sets of plans, specifications and three
copies of a survey.
(a) Survey. The survey shall be prepared and certified by a
surveyor registered by the State of Wisconsin; shall be made in
no case prior to one year prior to the issuance of a building
permit; and shall bear the date of the survey. The certified
survey shall also show the following:
[1] Location and dimensions of all buildings on the lot, both
existing and proposed.
[2] Dimensions of the lot.
[3] Dimensions showing all setbacks to all buildings on the lot.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-8 SLINGER CODE § 215-8
1:126
[4] Proposed grade of proposed structure, to city or Village
datum.
[5] Grade of lot and or road opposite lot.
[6] Grade and setback of adjacent buildings. If adjacent lot is
vacant, submit elevation of nearest buildings on same side
of road.
[7] Type of monuments at each corner of lot.
[8] Watercourses or existing drainage ditches.
[9] Seal and signature of surveyor.
[10] Square footage of lot.79
(b) Plans and specifications.
[1] All plans shall be drawn to a scale not less than 1/4 inch
per foot, on paper or cloth in ink, or by some other process
that will not fade or obliterate, and shall disclose the
existing and proposed provisions for water supply, sanitary
sewer connections and surface water drainage. All
dimensions shall be accurately figured. Drawings that do
not show all necessary detail shall be rejected. A complete
set of plans for residential construction shall consist of:
[a] All elevations.
[b] All floor plans.
[c] Complete construction details.
[d] Fireplace details (3/4 inch per foot) showing cross
section of fireplace and flues.
[e] Plans of garage when garage is to be built
immediately, or location of garage when it is to be
built at a later date.
[2] All plans shall remain on file in the office of the Inspector
until at least one year after the completion of the building,
after which time the Inspector may return the same to the
owner, may keep them for public record, or may destroy
them.
(2) Application for a plumbing or electrical permit shall be made in
writing upon a blank form furnished by the Inspector and supplying
the information required on such blank.
79.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 215-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:127
C. Waiver of some requirements. At the option of the Inspector, plans,
data, specifications and survey need not be submitted with an
application for permit to execute minor alterations and repairs to any
building, structure or equipment, provided the proposed construction is
sufficiently described in the application for permit.
D. Seal of registered engineer or architect. All plans, data and
specifications for the construction of any building or structure or for
any construction in connection with existing buildings and structures,
other than one- and two-family residences, containing more than
50,000 cubic feet, total volume, submitted with an application for
permit, shall bear the seal of the Wisconsin registered architect or
registered engineer. The plans shall also be stamped as approved as
required by the Department of Safety and Professional Services of the
State of Wisconsin. Such building or structure shall be constructed
under the supervision of a Wisconsin registered architect or engineer
who shall be responsible for its erection in accordance with the
approved plans. No permit shall be granted for such structure unless
such construction will be under the supervision of a Wisconsin
registered architect or engineer, as required by the Wisconsin Statutes.
A written statement to this effect shall be filed by the architect or
engineer with the Inspector with the application for permit.80
E. Drainage.
(1) Grading of lots. The plans shall show the present and proposed
grades of the lot on which it is proposed to erect the building for
which a building permit is sought and of the immediately adjoining
property in sufficient detail to indicate the surface water drainage
before and after the completion of grading. No permit shall be
issued if the erection of the building and the proposed grades shall
unreasonably obstruct the natural flow of water from the surface of
adjoining property or obstruct the flow of any existing ravine, ditch,
drain or stormwater sewer draining neighboring property, unless
suitable provision is made for such flow by means of an adequate
ditch or pipe, which shall be shown on the plans and shall be
constructed so as to provide continuous drainage at all times.
(2) Stormwater drains. No dwelling shall be erected nor shall existing
provisions for conveyance of water from the roof of any dwelling be
altered or replaced unless provision is made to convey water from
the roof of the dwelling in such a manner that such water will not,
directly or indirectly, pass thence into the sanitary sewer system.
No stormwater or surface water drains may be connected with the
sanitary sewer system, whether installed above or below the
surface of the ground.
F. Inspector to issue permit.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-8 SLINGER CODE § 215-8
1:128
(1) If the Inspector finds that the proposed building will comply in
every respect with this article, other municipal ordinances, and all
laws of the State of Wisconsin, and lawful orders issued pursuant
thereto, he shall issue a building permit. After being approved, the
plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect which
involves any of the above-mentioned ordinances, laws or orders, or
which involves the safety of the building, except with the written
consent of the Inspector filed with such application.
(2) In case adequate plans are presented, the Inspector, at his
discretion, may issue a permit for a part of the building before
receiving the plans and specifications of the entire building. It shall
be unlawful to commence work on any building or alteration before
the building permit has been issued. The issuance of a permit upon
the plans and specifications shall not prevent the Inspector from
thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and
specifications or from preventing building operations being carried
thereunder when in violation of any ordinance of the municipality
or laws of the State of Wisconsin or lawful orders issued pursuant
thereto.
(3) For the construction of buildings requiring approval of the
Department of Safety and Professional Services of the State of
Wisconsin, no permit shall be issued until such approved plans are
received by the Inspector.
G. Inspector may revoke permits.
(1) The Inspector may revoke any permit, certificate of occupancy, or
approval issued under the regulations of this article and may stop
construction or use of approved new materials, equipment,
methods of construction, devises, or appliances for any of the
following reasons:
(a) Whenever there is a violation of any regulation of this article or
of any other ordinance, law, or lawful orders or Wisconsin
Statutes relating to the same subject matter.
(b) Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes
dangerous to life or property.
(c) Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provisions
of the application for permit, or of the permit.
(d) Whenever, in the opinion of the Inspector, there is inadequate
supervision provided on the job site.
(e) Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been
made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data
specifications, or certified lot or plot plan on which the
issuance of the permit or approval was based.
§ 215-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:129
§ 215-9. Residential building bond.
(f) Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an
approval or occupancy given by the Inspector for the use of any
new materials, equipment, methods of construction devices, or
appliances.
(2) The notice revoking a permit, certificate of occupancy, or approval
shall be in writing and may be served upon the applicant for the
permit, owner of the premises, and his agent, if any, and on the
person having charge of construction.
(3) A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building,
structure, equipment, or premises in question by the Inspector.
(4) After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted,
it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any
construction operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit
which has been so revoked shall be null and void, and before any
construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as
required by this article, shall be procured and fees paid therefor,
and thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation
shall be in compliance with the regulations of this article.
H. Fees.
(1) A weatherproof card signed by the Inspector indicating the permit
has been issued shall be posted at the job site during construction.
After issuance of a building permit, the approved plans shall not be
altered unless any proposed change is first approved by the
Inspector as conforming to the provisions of this article.
(2) The building permit shall become void unless operations are
commenced within six months from the date thereof, or if the
building or work authorized by such permit is suspended at any
time after work is commenced, for a period of 60 days. The period
of time may be extended by the Inspector if the delay was due to
conditions beyond the control of the applicant.
(3) Before any work is commenced or recommenced after the permit
has lapsed, a new permit shall be issued at the regular fee rate. In
any event, all work shall be completed within 18 months from the
date of issuance of the permit.
(4) A schedule of permit fees for building, electric, HVAC and plumbing
shall be set by the Village Board of the Village of Slinger by a duly
enacted resolution and may be changed from time to time. The
current fee schedule is on file in the Village office.81
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-8 SLINGER CODE § 215-9
1:130
§ 215-10. Moving buildings.
A. Deposit required at time of building permit. Any property owner or
their representative who applies for and receives a building permit for a
residential building shall deposit with the Village Treasurer a cash
deposit, the residential building bond, as indicated in the schedule of
permit fees set through duly enacted resolution by the Village Board.
B. Retention of bond. The residential building bond shall be a non-interestbearing
deposit and will be retained by the Village until all driveways,
driveway approaches, sidewalks and required landscaping have been
constructed according to Village standards and/or until any damage to
Village infrastructure caused by the building's construction has been
repaired to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector and Village
Engineer.
C. Return of bond. Once the Building Inspector has conducted a final
inspection of the new construction and has found that all requirements
have been met, he shall direct the Village Treasurer to release the bond
to the property owner.82
D. Forfeiture of bond. In the event the property owner or their
representative fails to comply with written directives from the Building
Inspector requiring the construction of any required improvement such
as driveway, sidewalk or landscaping and/or the repair of any damage
to Village infrastructure resulting from construction, the Village may
perform the required work as needed and deduct the cost of such work
from the residential building bond.
E. Additional costs may apply. Notwithstanding forfeiture of the
residential building bond as discussed in Subsection D, the property
owner shall remain responsible for reimbursing the Village for all actual
costs and expenses incurred to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this section.
A. General. No person shall move any building or structure upon any of
the public rights-of-way of the municipality without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Inspector and upon the payment of the
required fee. Every such permit issued by the Inspector for the moving
of a building shall designate the route to be taken, the conditions to be
complied with, and shall limit the time during which said moving
operations shall be continued.
B. Moving damaged buildings. No building shall be repaired, altered or
moved within or into the municipality that has deteriorated or has been
damaged by any cause (including such moving and separation from its
foundation and service connections in case of moved buildings), 50% or
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-10
1:131
more of its equalized value, and no permit shall be granted to repair,
alter or move such building within or into the municipality.
C. Continuous movement. The movement of buildings shall be a
continuous operation during all the hours of the day, and day by day and
at night, until such movement is fully completed. All of such operations
shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares.
No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street
crossing or intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to
any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lighted lanterns shall be
kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night.
D. Street repair. Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall
within one day after said building reaches its destination, report that
fact to the Inspector who shall thereupon in the company of the
Municipal Highway Commissioner, inspect the streets and highways
over which said building has been moved and ascertain their condition.
If the removal of said building has caused any damage to any street or
highway, the person to whom the permit was issued shall forthwith
place them in good repair as they were before the permit was granted.
On the failure of said permittee to do so within 10 days thereafter to the
satisfaction of the governing body, said body shall repair the damage
done to such streets and hold the person obtaining such permit and the
sureties on his bond responsible for the payment of same.
E. Conformance with code. No permit shall be issued to move a building
within or into the municipality and to establish it upon a location within
the said municipality until the Inspector has made an investigation of
such building at the location from which it is to be moved, and is
satisfied from such investigation that said building is in a sound and
stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the
requirements of this Building Code in all respects. A complete plan of
all further repairs, improvements and remodeling with reference to
such building shall be submitted to the Inspector, and he shall make a
finding of fact to the effect that all such repairs, improvements and
remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of the Building
Code, and that when same are completed, the building as such will so
comply with said Building Code. In the event a building is to be moved
from the municipality to some point outside the boundaries thereof, the
provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications for
proposed alterations to such building may be disregarded.
F. Bond.
(1) Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way
in this municipality, the party applying therefor shall give a bond to
the municipality in a sum to be fixed by the Inspector and which
shall not be less than that set forth in the current fee schedule; said
bond is to be executed by a corporate surety or two personal
sureties to be approved by the governing body or designated agent
conditioned upon, among other things, the indemnification to the
§ 215-10 SLINGER CODE § 215-10
1:132
municipality for any costs or expenses incurred by it in connection
with any claims for damages to any persons or property and the
payment of any judgment, together with the costs and expenses
incurred by the municipality in connection therewith, arising out of
the removal of the building for which the permit is issued.83
(2) Unless the Inspector, upon investigation, shall find it to be a fact
that the excavation exposed by the removal of such building from
its foundation shall not be so close to a public thoroughfare as to
permit the accidental falling therein of travelers or the location,
nature and physical characteristics of the premises and the falling
into such excavation of children under 12 years of age unlikely, the
bond required by Subsection F(1) shall be further conditioned upon
the permittee erecting adequate barriers and within 48 hours,
filling in such excavation or adopting and employing such other
means, devices or methods approved by the Inspector and
reasonably adopted or calculated to prevent the occurrences set
forth herein.
G. Insurance. The Inspector shall require, in addition to said bond above
indicated, public liability insurance covering injury to one person in the
sum of not less than the amount set forth in the current fee schedule
and for one accident in a sum not less than the amount set forth in the
current fee schedule, together with property damage insurance in a
sum not less than that set forth in the current fee schedule, or such
other coverage as deemed necessary.84
H. Planning Commission or other assigned board or commission.
(1) No such permit shall be issued unless it has been found as a fact by
the Planning Commission of the municipality by at least a majority
vote, after an examination of the application for the permit which
shall include exterior elevations of the building and accurate
photographs of all sides and views of the same, and in case it is
proposed to alter the exterior of said building, plans and
specifications of such proposed alterations and after a view of the
building proposed to be moved and of the site at which it is to be
located, that the exterior architectural appeal and functional plans
of the building to be moved or moved and altered, will not be so at a
variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and functions
plan of the building already contracted or in the course of
construction in the immediate neighborhood, or the character of
the applicable district established by the zoning ordinances of the
municipality, or any ordinance amendatory thereof or
supplementary thereto, as to cause a substantial depreciation in
the property values of said neighborhood within said applicable
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-10
1:133
§ 215-11. Razing of buildings.
district. In case the application proposes to alter the exterior of
said building after moving the same, he shall submit with his
application papers, complete plans and specifications for the
proposed alterations. Before a permit shall be issued for a building
to be moved and altered, the applicant shall give a bond to the
municipality's Planning Commission, which shall not be less than
the sum set forth in the current fee schedule, to be executed in
the manner provided in Subsection F hereof to the effect that he
will, within a time to be set by the Planning Commission, complete
the proposed exterior alterations to said building in the manner
set forth in his plans and specifications. This bond shall be in
addition to any other bond or surety which may be required by
other applicable ordinances of the municipality. No occupancy
permit shall be issued for said building until the exterior alterations
proposed to be made have been completed.85
(2) Upon application being made to the Inspector, he shall request a
meeting of the Planning Commission to consider applications for
moving permits which he has found comply in all respects with all
other ordinances of the municipality. The Planning Commission
may, if it desires, hear the applicant for the moving permit in
question and/or the owner of the lot on which it is proposed to
locate the building in question, together with any other persons,
either residents or property owners, desiring to be heard, giving
such notice of hearing as they may deem sufficient. Such hearing
may be adjourned for a reasonable length of time, and within 48
hours after the close of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall,
in writing, make or refuse to make, the finding required by
Subsection H hereof, and file it in the office of the Clerk, who shall
send a copy of it to the Inspector.
A. Razing of buildings. The Inspector is hereby authorized to act for the
municipality under the provisions of § 66.0413, Wis. Stats., relating to
the razing of buildings and all acts amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto. The municipal treasurer is authorized to place
the assessment and collect the special tax as therein provided.
B. Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent
shall notify all utilities having service connections within the building,
such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections. A permit to
demolish or to remove a building shall not be issued until it is
ascertained that service connections and appurtenant equipment, such
as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in
a safe manner. Excavations shall be filled with solid fill to match lot
grade within five days of removal of the structure. Any excavation shall
be protected with appropriate fences and/or barriers.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-10 SLINGER CODE § 215-12
1:134
§ 215-12. Inspections.
A. Notification. Upon notification from the permit holder or his agent,
required inspections of the construction of any buildings, structures
and equipment shall be made as follows:
(1) Inspection to determine if the location on the premises is in
compliance with approved certified lot or plot plan of the premises
and the terms of the permit.
(2) Inspection to determine if the construction of footings as to
thickness, width, placing of reinforced steel, if required, and
foundation walls is in compliance with approved plans, data and the
terms of the permit. Recertification of the footings and foundation
location and elevation shall be provided to the Inspector prior to
pouring concrete.
(3) Inspection of all wall, floor and roof framing, fire stopping, and
bracing when completed, and of all pipes, chimneys, ventilating
and other ducts, shafts and equipment when in place, but before
any such work is covered, enclosed or concealed by other
construction.
(4) Inspection of all insulating materials and vapor retarder.86
(5) Inspection prior to laying concrete for basement floor to inspect
subgrade, drain tile, and forms.
(6) Final inspection. Upon the completion of any building, structure,
equipment, or construction for which a permit was issued and
before the same is occupied or used, a final inspection shall be
made by the Inspector and until such building, structure, or
equipment is in compliance with all the requirements of this article
and terms of the permit, no occupancy shall be maintained. If the
construction conforms to the requirements of this article, a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued.
B. Coordinated inspections. All provisions of the laws and regulations of
the municipality, and of legally adopted rules of local fire and health
officials in respect to the operation, equipment, housekeeping, fire
protection, handling and storage of flammable materials, liquids and
gases and the maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions of use in
occupancy in all buildings shall be strictly enforced by the
administrative officials to whom such authority is delegated. Whenever
inspection by an authorized enforcement officer discloses any violation
of the provisions of this article, or of any other rules, regulations, or
laws, he shall immediately notify the administrative officer having
jurisdiction of the violation.
86.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 215-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-12
1:135
§ 215-13. Stop-work order.
Whenever the provisions of this article or of the plans approved thereunder
are not complied with, a stop-work order shall be served on the owner or
his representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the site of the
construction. Such stop-work order shall not be removed except by written
notice of the Inspector after satisfactory evidence has been supplied that
the violation has been corrected.
§ 215-14. Certificate of occupancy.
C. Certified report. The Inspector may require a certified report of all
required inspections as regulated by this article from the registered
architect or registered engineer supervising the construction of any
building, structure, or equipment requiring their supervision. Such
certified report shall state in detail that all construction work has been
executed in accordance with all of the regulations of this article,
approved plans, specifications, terms of the permit; and further that
such construction work was executed in accordance with accepted
architectural and engineering standard procedures.
D. Zoning Board of Appeals or other assigned board or commission. Any
person feeling himself aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Inspector
may appeal from such ruling to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 20
days after written notice of such ruling shall have been delivered to
him. Such appeal is to be in writing, setting forth the order appealed
from, and the respects in which said person feeling himself aggrieved
claims that said order or ruling is erroneous or illegal. Said notice of
appeal shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall thereupon notify the
Inspector of said appeal, and the appeal shall be heard at the next
meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals. Said Zoning Board of Appeals,
after consideration thereof, shall affirm, reverse or modify said ruling
as is just in the premises. The ruling or order of the inspection shall be
enforced until changed by said Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. Inspections.
(1) The Inspector shall make a final inspection of all new buildings,
additions, and alterations. If no violations of this or any other
ordinance be found, the Inspector shall issue a certificate of
occupancy, stating the purpose for which the building is to be used.
(2) No building, nor part thereof, shall be occupied until such
certificate has been issued, nor shall any building be occupied in
any manner which conflicts with the conditions set forth in the
certificate of occupancy.
B. Use discontinued.
(1) Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied
contrary to the provisions of this article, the Inspector shall order
§ 215-12 SLINGER CODE § 215-14
1:136
§ 215-15. Access key panel.87
All buildings which contain four or more residential dwelling units shall
have an access key panel for the fire department.
§ 215-16. Identification of products.
All materials shall be identified by the approved label, the grade mark, the
trade mark, or by other approved manufacturer's identification.
§ 215-17. Violations and penalties.
such use or occupancy discontinued and the building or portion
thereof vacated by notice served on any person using or causing
such use or occupancy to be continued. Such person shall vacate
such building or portion thereof within 10 days after receipt of
the notice or make the building or portion thereof comply with the
requirements of this article.
(2) Any building, structure, or premises, or any part thereof, hereafter
vacated or damaged by any cause whatsoever so as to jeopardize
public safety or health shall not hereafter be occupied or used
under an existing certificate of occupancy or without the same,
until an application has been filed and a new certificate of
occupancy issued.
C. Change. It shall be unlawful to change the use of any building,
structure, premises, or part thereof without first obtaining from the
Inspector an approval of such change in the occupancy or use, and a
certificate of occupancy therefor.
D. Hardship. The Inspector shall have the authority and power to permit
the occupancy of any building or structure in the municipality, prior to
issuance of an occupancy certificate, in all such cases of hardship as in
his judgement and discretion warrant occupancy before final state of
completion as set forth in this article. Before granting such permission,
the Inspector shall first examine the premises and determine if it is safe
and sanitary. The Inspector shall determine the time within which such
building or structure can be completed, such time shall not exceed 120
days.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure in violation of any provisions of this article, or to
cause, permit or suffer any such violations to be committed. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a penalty as set forth is § 1-2 of the Code. It shall be the
responsibility of the offender to abate the violation as expeditiously as
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-17
1:137
§ 215-18. Failure to obtain permit.
It shall be unlawful to commence work prior to obtaining a permit therefor.
Double fees shall be charged if work is commenced prior to the issuance of
a permit.
§ 215-19. Payment of building, plumbing and electrical inspector.89
The Village shall be paid an amount for each building, electric and plumbing
permit, and this amount will be set by the Village Board and may change
from time to time.
§ 215-20. Fences.
§ 215-21. Permit fees.90
A schedule of fees for building, electric and plumbing permits shall be set
by the Village Board of the Village of Slinger by a duly enacted resolution
and may be changed from time to time.91
possible, and each day that such violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense.88
B. If in any action a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, nor
shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the
Inspector constitute a defense.
A. Fences and gates. No person shall construct, install, enlarge or alter a
fence, except in accordance with this chapter.
B. Permit required. No person shall construct, install, enlarge, or alter any
private fence unless a building permit has first been obtained from the
Building Inspector. Application shall be on forms provided by the
inspector and shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale showing
the following:
(1) Location of the fence on the lot and distance from lot lines.
(2) Type, size, height of fence and materials to be used in construction
and gate locations.
(3) All fences must comply with § 550-68C and D of Chapter 550,
Zoning, of the Village of Slinger.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
90.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
91.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Permit Fees is on file in the Village office.
§ 215-17 SLINGER CODE § 215-21
1:138
Chapter 224
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling — See Ch. 412, Art. II. Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 224-1. Permit required.92
No person shall kindle any fire within the Village without first obtaining a
permit from the Village Hall. Such permit shall be subject to any conditions
for the protection of life and property imposed by the Fire Chief and
communicated to the permittee. The fee for this permit shall be set by the
Village Board.
§ 224-2. Burning prohibitions.
§ 224-3. Emergency regulations.
The Village Administrator may, when necessary, declare an "emergency
condition of fire hazard." During such declared emergency, no burning shall
be permitted unless burning is done or controlled by the Fire Department
in the interest of public safety.
§ 224-4. Conditions of burning.
Chapter 233
A. No person shall kindle garbage, except in an indoor incinerator.
B. No person shall kindle any recyclable item as defined in Chapter 412,
Solid Waste, Article II, Recycling, of this Code.
A. Weather restriction. No fire shall be ignited if the wind velocity, as
reported by the U.S. Weather Bureau in Milwaukee, is more than 12
miles per hour.
B. Place restricted. No person shall kindle or cause to be kindled any fire
in or upon any street, alley or public way within 25 feet of any building
or within any fire lane, unless within a metal enclosure with cover
attached to prevent the escape of sparks and burning materials.
C. Adult supervision. An adult shall be in attendance on the property
where the fire is burning and shall be in view and control of the fire at
all times.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 215-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-4
1:139
CIGARETTE/TOBACCO PRODUCTS LICENSES
§ 233-1. Cigarettes/tobacco products.93
It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense cigarettes/tobacco products in the
Village of Slinger by any means without first obtaining a license therefor.
Selling or dispensing cigarettes/tobacco products under a license is not
allowed at such times as the licensed place is closed.
§ 233-2. Fees.
Fees for any applications, petitions, licenses or permits shall be as set by
the Village Board of the Village of Slinger by a duly enacted resolution and
may be changed from time to time.
Chapter 239
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 224-4 SLINGER CODE § 233-2
1:140
ARTICLE I
Drug Paraphernalia
[Adopted as Sec. 9.17 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 239-1. Definition.94
As used in this article, "drug paraphernalia" shall be defined as provided in
§ 961.571, Wis. Stats.
§ 239-2. Determination of drug paraphernalia.95
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the standards of
§ 961.572, Wis. Stats., shall apply.
§ 239-3. Prohibited activities.
A. Possession of drug paraphernalia. No person may use, or possess with
intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare,
test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale
or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance or
controlled substance analog in violation of this article.96
B. Manufacture, sale or delivery of drug paraphernalia. No person may
sell, deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent
to deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance or controlled substance analog in violation
of this article.97
C. Exemption. This subsection does not apply to manufacturers,
practitioners, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons
who conduct is in accordance with Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
D. Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this article shall be seized
and forfeited to the Village as provided in the Code.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 239-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-3
1:141

ARTICLE II
Synthetic Cannabinoid
[Adopted as Sec. 9.26 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 239-4. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any one or more of the
controlled substances referenced in § 66.0107(1)(bn), Wis. Stats., including
such amendments, recodification and renumbering as may be made thereto
from time to time in the future. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
statutory limitations against local enforcement regarding repeat offenders
shall apply, as described in said statute.
§ 239-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Any chemical used in violation of this article shall be seized and
forfeited to the Village.
B. Any person who violates § 239-4 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
penalty as described in § 1-2 of this Code and the penalties may also
include such other sanctions as provided in § 961.41(3g)(em), Wis.
Stats., excluding imprisonment. The code and statute references herein
shall include such amendments, recodification and renumbering as may
be made from time to time in the future.98
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 239-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-5
1:143
Chapter 259
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 239-5 SLINGER CODE § 239-5
1:144
ARTICLE I
Use of Firearms in Village
§ 259-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — A weapon which expels a missile by the explosive force of gun
powder, compressed air or compressed gas.
MUZZLELOADER — A firearm into which the projectile and usually the
propellant charge is loaded from the muzzle of the gun.
RIFLE — A portable, long-barreled firearm designed for long-range
precision shooting.
SHOTGUN — A firearm designed to be fired from the shoulder, which uses
the energy of a fixed shell to fire a number of small pellets called "shot" or
a solid projectile called a "slug."
§ 259-2. Restriction on use of firearms.
Firearms shall be discharged within the Village only in compliance with the
following standards:
§ 259-3. Permits required.
A. Law enforcement or military personnel in the performance of their
duties.
B. On privately owned property no less than five acres in size with the
permission of the property owner, in accordance with the permit
process described in § 259-3 below.
C. Firearm usage shall be shotgun or long-barreled muzzleloaders only.
Rifle, handgun, pistol or cannon discharge by non-law-enforcement or
military personnel is not allowed in the Village.
D. Use of authorized firearms shall be for hunting purposes only during
lawful hunting seasons. Target practice or other nonhunting use of
firearms is not allowed in the Village.
A. No person may discharge any firearms in the Village of Slinger without
written permission by the landowner, who must have obtained a valid
permit from the Village Board.
B. No firearms shall be discharged within 100 feet of any street, road or
highway, nor within 300 feet of another person's occupied dwelling in
the Village, nor shall any permit be issued therefor.
§ 259-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-4
1:145
§ 259-4. Permit application.
An application shall be submitted to the Village Board by a property owner
wishing to hunt or allow hunting on their property in the Village. The
application shall be made using forms provided at Village Hall.
§ 259-5. Liability not assumed.
The Village of Slinger does not assume any liability for damages to persons
or property caused by the discharge of firearms.
§ 259-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
penalty as described in § 1-2 of this Code.
§ 259-7. Shooting permit.
A. The application form must include an overview map of the subject
property specifying the amount of acreage.
B. If approved by the Village Board, the permit for discharging weapons
within the Village shall be valid from July 1 through June 30 of the
following year.
C. The annual fee for a firearms discharge permit shall be set by the
Village Board.
D. A copy of the landowner's written permission to hunt on the land and a
copy of the Village Board-issued permit shall be carried by the person
granted permission at all times when discharging firearms and shall be
exhibited to officers of the Police Department upon demand.
A. No persons shall shoot, shoot at, pursue, take, catch, hunt or kill any
wild animals in the Village of Slinger, unless a firearms discharge
permit therefor has been duly issued to the owner of the subject
property and that property owner has granted written permission as
required by this article.
B. The Village Board may revoke any permit issued hereunder, at any time,
upon complaint lodged against any permit holder.
§ 259-4 SLINGER CODE § 259-7
1:146
ARTICLE II
Throwing or Shooting of Projectiles
§ 259-8. Prohibition; exception.
To further public health and safety, no person shall throw or shoot any
object, arrow, stone, or other missile or projectile, by hand, by firearm,
by bow and arrow, by crossbow, by spring gun, by electric weapon, by
slingshot, by blowgun or by any other means, at any person or at, in or
into any building, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park, playground or other
public place within the Village.
A. Except when lawfully hunting with a bow and arrow or crossbow at a
distance greater than 100 yards from a building located on another
person's land, as described in § 29.038(3)(b)1a, Wis. Stats. This
restriction does not apply if the person who owns the land on which the
building is located allows the hunter to hunt within 100 yards of the
building. A person who hunts with a bow and arrow or crossbow within
the Village of Slinger is required to discharge the arrow or bolt from the
respective weapon toward the ground.
§ 259-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-8
1:147
Chapter 266
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 336.
§ 266-1. Sale and discharge of fireworks restricted.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
FIREWORKS — Fireworks means anything manufactured, processed or
packaged for exploding, emitting sparks or combustion which does not
have another common use, and specifically includes everything within
the definition of "fireworks" as described within § 167.10(1), Wis. Stats.,
specifically including, without limitation by reason of enumeration,
subsections 1(e) (caps), 1(f) (toy snakes), 1(i) (sparklers), 1(k) (fuseless
devices), 1(L) (smoke-producing devices), 1(m) (cylindrical fountains),
and 1(n) (cone fountains).
NOVELTY FIREWORKS — Only the following items:
POSSESSION — The act, fact or condition of having control, custody, or
care of fireworks; storage of fireworks; or handling of fireworks.
PUBLIC DISPLAY — Use of fireworks at an event that is open to the
public or to which the public may be invited, which may be on publicly
owned or privately owned property, with or without charge.
SPARKLERS — A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding
36 inches in length that is designed to produce audible or visible
effects or to produce audible and visible effects.
(1)
POPPERS — A device designed to spray out paper confetti or
streamers and which contains less than 1/4 grain of explosive
mixture.
(2)
SMOKE BALLS — A device that is designed primarily to burn
pyrotechnic smoke-producing mixtures, at a controlled rate, and
that produces audible or visible effects, or audible and visible
effects, and which contains less than 1/4 grain of explosive mixture.
(3)
TOY SNAKES — A toy snake which contains no mercury, and which
contains not more than 1/4 grain of explosive mixture.
(4)
PUNKS — A substance that smolders when ignited that contains
not more than 1/4 grain of explosive mixture, which is used to light
fireworks.
(5)
§ 259-8 SLINGER CODE § 266-1
1:148
§ 266-2. Fireworks display permit.
B. Prohibition. All sale, possession or use of fireworks is prohibited in the
Village of Slinger, subject to the exceptions noted in Subsection C.
C. Exceptions. The prohibitions of Subsection B shall not apply in the
following strictly limited circumstances:
(1) In transit. Possession of fireworks is not prohibited during
transportation of the fireworks to a city, town, village or county
where the possession of the fireworks is authorized by permit or
ordinance, provided that the fireworks remain in the Village for a
period of less than 12 hours.
(2) Public display. Upon petition to the Village Board, the Village Board
may authorize public display of fireworks, and fireworks storage in
preparation for the public display, subject to such reasonable
conditions as the Village Board may impose. Refer to § 266-2,
Fireworks display permit, for information on the procedures for
obtaining a display permit.
(3) Possession of small quantities of novelty fireworks. Novelty
fireworks may be possessed within the Village, provided that the
total quantity of all such novelty fireworks on a single lot is less
than 10 pounds gross weight, which includes the weight of all
packaging material.
(4) Sale of small quantities of novelty fireworks. Novelty fireworks may
be sold within the Village, provided that the quantity limitations for
possession of novelty fireworks described in Subsection C(3) shall
be met by all sellers and purchasers of such items.
(5) Use of small quantities of novelty fireworks. Novelty fireworks may
be used within the Village, provided that the quantity limitations
for possession of novelty fireworks described in Subsection C(3)
shall be met by all users. The time, place and manner of use shall
be such that it does not constitute a public nuisance in violation of
Chapter 336, Nuisances, of this Code.
D. Seizure of fireworks. The Police Department shall seize, at the expense
of the owner, all fireworks stored, handled, sold, possessed or used by
any person who violates this section or state laws adopted herein. Such
seized fireworks shall be destroyed after conviction for a violation or if
no conviction occurs, shall be returned to the owner.
E. Penalties and remedies. In addition to, and not the exclusion or
prejudice of, such other penalties and remedies as may apply, any
person who violates this section shall be subject to the penalties and
remedies set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
Construction and Penalties, of the Village Code.
§ 266-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-2
1:149
A. Display permit. As provided in § 167.10(3), Wis. Stats., the Village of
Slinger may regulate the issuance of fireworks user's permits. As
further provided in § 266-1 of this chapter, the Village of Slinger
prohibits the sale, possession and use of fireworks, subject to certain
exceptions, one of which relates to public displays of fireworks. The
user's permit for such a public display, known as a display permit, shall
be subject to the procedures and limitations of this subsection.
B. Limited events. Display permits may be issued for festivals and public
or private celebrations that satisfy the definition of public display set
forth in § 266-1A of this chapter.
C. Application. The party responsible for the display shall file an
application with the Village Clerk on forms provided by the Village
Clerk. The fee for a display permit shall be paid at the time of the
application in the amount set by Village Board resolution. The permit
application must be received by the Village Clerk not less than 30 days
prior to the requested date of use and not less than two weeks before a
scheduled Village Board meeting. The application must include a list of
the fireworks to be used in the display and a map of the location
indicating where the display will take place.
D. Fire Department review. The Village Clerk shall provide a copy of all
display permit applications to the Slinger Fire Department for review
and recommendation to the Village Board.
E. Village Board action. No permit shall be granted by the Village
President unless the Village Board determines that the applicant will
use the fireworks in a festival or public or private celebration that
constitutes a public display pursuant to § 266-1A of this chapter and
that all reasonable precautions will be exercised with regard to the
protection of the lives and property of all persons and that the display
will be handled by a competent professional operator and conducted in
a suitable, safe place and manner. Before the Village President executes
any fireworks permit approved by the Village Board, the applicant shall
file with the Village Clerk a certificate of liability insurance issued by an
insurance company authorized to write such policies in the State of
Wisconsin in the amount of $1,000,000 for bodily injury to any one
person, in the amount of $2,000,000 for injury to more than one person,
and in the amount of $1,000,000 for damage to property that may arise
by reason of use or discharge of fireworks under the permit. The Village
of Slinger shall be named as one of the insureds in said policy of
insurance.
F. Limitations. This section implements § 167.10, Wis. Stats., and is
subject to municipal liability described therein. No findings or action
taken by the Village Board per this section, even if made in error, shall
relieve the permittee or operator from the obligation to ensure that
their activities are conducted in a safe and lawful manner, to protect
people and property, nor does the Village assume any such
responsibility.
§ 266-2 SLINGER CODE § 266-2
1:150
G. Permit. A permit under this subsection shall specify all of the following
and shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the permit holder.
(2) The date, time and location of permitted use.
(3) Other special conditions prescribed by ordinance or the Village
Board in its approval.
(4) Such other information or limitations as the Village may require
from time to time.
(5) The permit shall be revoked when a no-burn order is in place on the
date of display.
(6) As stated in NFPA 1123, whenever in the opinion of the AHJ
(authority having jurisdiction), the Village of Slinger or the
operator any hazardous condition exists, the fireworks display shall
be stopped until the condition is corrected. If high winds,
precipitation or other adverse weather conditions prevail or begin
such that a hazard exists, the fireworks display shall be postponed
or discontinued immediately until such time as the situation is
corrected. The Village of Slinger may revoke the permit due to
hazardous conditions or adverse weather conditions on the date of
the display.99
H. Revocation of permit.
(1) If a permit is revoked under § 266-2G(5) or (6), at the request of the
applicant:
(a) The permit may be reissued for a subsequent date within 60
days of the revoked date of display subject to staff approval; or
(b) The permit application fee may be reimbursed to the applicant
less a $25 administrative fee.
(2) The permit holder shall give notice of such display to the Village
Fire Chief and Village Chief of Police at least five days before the
date of authorized use, along with a copy of the permit, or the
display permit is void.
(3) A permit under this subsection may not be issued to a person under
18 years of age.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 266-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-2
1:151
Chapter 271
FURNACES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 271-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR SOLID-FUEL-BURNING FURNACE — Any equipment, device,
or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, affixed, or situated
outdoors or in any accessory building for the primary purpose of
combustion of solid fuel such as wood, coal, corn cobs, wood or coal pellets
or other combustible solid fuels to produce heat or energy used as a
component of a heating system providing heat for any interior space or
water source.
§ 271-2. Prohibition.
No person shall install, or operate an outdoor solid-fuel-burning furnace in
the Village of Slinger.
§ 271-3. Existing units.
Outdoor solid-fuel-burning furnaces existing prior to the effective date of
this chapter shall be considered nonconforming units and may be continued
to be operated, provided they do not cause a public nuisance. Such units
may be maintained to continue their operation but shall not be replaced.
Chapter 279
GRADING AND EXCAVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 526.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 279-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 266-2 SLINGER CODE § 279-1
1:152
FILL — The normal and usual soil resulting from excavating or grading
of lands, but shall not include building materials, refuse or any other
manufactured articles of any kind whose use as fill is prohibited.
§ 279-2. Permit required.
Whenever any party desires to deposit fill in any amount, except any fill
used for topsoil dressing on any lands in the Village, such party shall first
obtain a fill permit from the Building Inspector. A permit shall not be
required for fill deposited at a licensed landfill site or for any lands for
which a valid building permit has been issued or for roadway construction
projects. Topsoil placement to maintain or establish a lawn or other
landscaping is not considered to be fill, provided such topsoil does not
exceed a total of four inches in depth.
§ 279-3. Application.
The Building Inspector shall provide application forms for fill permits which
shall show the following information:
§ 279-4. Issuance or denial.
If the Building Inspector is satisfied that issuance of a fill permit is not in
the best interest of the owners of adjacent lands or of the Village, he shall
refuse to issue such fill permit.
§ 279-5. Fee.
The Building Inspector shall collect the fee set by the Village Board by
resolution from time to time before issuance of the fill permit and shall
deliver such fee to the Clerk. Failure to obtain a fill permit shall result in the
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Place where fill is to be deposited and the owner thereof.
C. Existing and proposed elevation of area to be filled at a distance of not
more than twenty-five-foot intervals.
D. Existing elevation of adjacent lands within 50 feet of the area to be
filled at distance of not more than twenty-five-foot intervals.
E. A sketch showing the above information and the route to be traveled to
the fill site.
F. Approximate quantity of fill.
G. Time required for filling.
H. Party responsible for leveling, seeding or sodding.
I. Method for erosion control during filling.
§ 279-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-5
1:153
imposition of double fees. Such permit shall be posted on the site where the
fill is to be deposited so as to be visible from the public roadway.
§ 279-6. Leveling of fill.
All fill deposited pursuant to a fill permit shall be leveled within 30 days of
the last deposit.
§ 279-7. Obstruction to drainage prohibited.
The damming, filling, relocating or otherwise interfering with the natural
flow of surface water in a natural drainage course, the intended flow of
surface water in an approved subdivision or the existing flow between other
properties shall not be permitted, except with the approval of those Village,
county and state agencies having jurisdiction.
§ 279-8. Violations and penalties.
No person shall deposit any fill in the Village without a valid fill permit. In
case of any violation of this section, the Building Inspector, Village Board,
Village Attorney or Village police officers, or any neighboring property
owner who would be damaged by such violation, may institute appropriate
action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this section. Penalties may
be charged in accord with Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
Construction and Penalties.
Chapter 307
LITTERING
§ 307-1. Littering prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall deposit any mud, glass, refuse or waste,
filth, grass clippings, leaves or other litter upon the streets, highways,
alleys, sidewalks, parks or other property of the Village or upon any private
property or into or upon any body of water or stream within the Village.
§ 307-2. Construction.100
At the time of the issuance of a building permit for a home or other major
construction requiring excavation a deposit as set by the Village Board is to
be paid to the Clerk of the Village and refunded only if an occupancy permit
is issued or final inspection is made for said construction without a violation
of this chapter. Upon issuance of a citation, the deposit will be forfeited to
the Village.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 279-5 SLINGER CODE § 307-3
1:154
§ 307-3. Enforcement.101
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to report any violation of
this section to the Police Department for issuance of a citation either to the
violator or, in the case of construction work, if the violator is not known, a
citation shall be issued to the building permit holder.
§ 307-4. Violations and penalties.102
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating this chapter shall
be punishable as set forth in § 1-2 of the Code. Each day of violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 313
LOITERING
§ 313-1. Loitering or prowling.103
No person shall loiter or prowl in a place at a time or in a manner not usual
for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for
the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances
which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted
is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or
peace officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal
himself or any object.
§ 313-2. Obstruction of highway by loitering.
No person shall obstruct any street, bridge, sidewalk or crossing by
lounging or loitering on or upon the same after being requested to move on
by any police officer.
§ 313-3. Obstruction of traffic by loitering.
No persons shall loaf or loiter in groups or crowds upon the public streets,
alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges or in any other public place
within the Village in such a manner as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct
the ordinary free use of such public streets, sidewalks, streets, street
crossings and bridges or other public places by persons passing along and
over the same.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 307-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-4
1:155
§ 313-4. Loitering after being requested to move.
No person shall loaf or loiter in groups or crowds upon the public streets,
sidewalks or adjacent doorways or entrances, street crossings or bridges or
in any other public place or on any private premises without invitation from
the owner or occupant, after being requested to move by any police officer
or by any person in authority at such places.
§ 313-5. Loitering in public places.
No person shall loiter, lounge or loaf in or about any depot, theater, dance
hall, restaurant, store, public sidewalk, public parking lot or other place of
assembly or public use after being requested to move by any police officer.
Upon being requested to move, a person shall immediately comply with
such request by leaving the premises or area thereof at the time of the
request.
§ 313-6. Loitering in or on school property.
No person not in official attendance or on official school business shall enter
into, congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in or on any school
property within the Village between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on official
school days.
§ 313-7. Violations and penalties.104
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating this chapter shall
be punishable as set forth in § 1-2 of the Code. Each day of violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 320
MINORS
104. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 313-4 SLINGER CODE § 313-7
1:156
ARTICLE I
Curfew
[Adopted as Sec. 9.11 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 320-1. Children out at night.
§ 320-2. Parental violation.106
No parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a child under
the age of 18 years shall permit or suffer such child to loiter, idle or remain
upon any street, alley or other public grounds in the Village between 11:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless such child is accompanied by
his/her parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of such
child.
§ 320-3. Responsibility of operators of places of amusement.107
No person operating a place of amusement or entertainment within the
Village, or any agent, servant or employee of any such person, shall permit a
A. No person under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle, whether on foot or
in any means of transportation, or remain upon any street, alley or
other public grounds in the Village between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless such child is accompanied by his/
her parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of such
child.105
B. Exceptions.
(1) This article does not apply to a child:
(a) Performing an errand as directed by parents, guardian or
persons having lawful custody.
(b) Who is on his/her own premises or the areas immediately
adjacent thereto.
(c) Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets,
alley, public places or in a motor vehicle after such hour.
(d) Returning home from a supervised school, church or civic
function.
(2) These exceptions, however, shall not permit a child to
unnecessarily loiter about the streets, alleys or public grounds or
be in a parked motor vehicle on the public street.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 320-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-3
1:157
child under the age of 18 years to enter or loiter in such place of amusement
or entertainment between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day,
unless such child is accompanied by his/her parent, guardian or other adult
person having legal custody of such child.
§ 320-4. Responsibility of hotels, motels and rooming houses.108
No person operating a hotel, motel, lodging or rooming house within the
Village, or any agent, servant or employee of any such person, shall permit
a child under the age of 18 years to loiter in such place of amusement
or entertainment between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day, unless such child is accompanied by his/her parent, guardian
or other adult person having legal custody of such child.109
§ 320-5. General penalty.
A. Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child
described in this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2
of this Code.
B. Any child who violates this article, after being detained and released,
shall be dealt with under Ch. 48, Wis. Stats.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
109. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 9.11E, Loitering in or on school property, F, Detaining a child,
and G, First and subsequent violations, which immediately followed this section, were
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 320-3 SLINGER CODE § 320-5
1:158
ARTICLE II
Truancy
[Adopted as Sec. 9.14 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 320-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE EXCUSE — As defined in §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis.
Stats.110
HABITUAL TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an
acceptable excuse part or all of five or more days on which school is held
during a school semester.
TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse
for all or part of any day on which school is held during a school semester.
§ 320-7. Truancy or habitual truancy prohibited.
A. A child is prohibited from being a truant or habitual truant.
B. Upon finding that a child is truant, the court may enter an order making
one or more of the following dispositions:
(1) An order for the pupil to attend school.
(2) A forfeiture set forth in the schedule of forfeitures set by the Village
Board. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed
against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or
both.111
C. Upon finding that a child is a habitual truant, the court may enter an
order making one or more of the following dispositions:
(1) Suspend the person's operating privilege for not less than 30 days
nor more than one year.
(2) An order for the person to attend school.
(3) A forfeiture set forth in the schedule of forfeitures set by the Village
Board, which may be assessed against the person, the parents or
guardian of the person, or both.112
(4) Other reasonable conditions including a curfew, restrictions
regarding going to or remaining on specified premises, and
restrictions as to associating with other children or adults.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 320-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-7
1:159
(5) An order placing the person under formal or informal supervision
for a period of up to one year.
(6) An order for the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian to
participate in counseling at their expense or to attend school with
the person, or both.
(7) Any other sanctions as provided in § 118.163, Wis. Stats.
§ 320-7 SLINGER CODE § 320-7
1:160
ARTICLE III
Purchase and Possession of Tobacco Products
[Adopted as Sec. 9.19 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 320-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CIGARETTE — Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or any substance other
than tobacco.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person employed by the state or any
political subdivision of the state for the purpose of detecting and preventing
crime and enforcing laws or ordinances and who is authorized to make
arrests for violations of the laws or ordinances that he/she is employed to
enforce.113
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated,
plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff,
including snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other
chewing tobacco; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings
of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner
as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for
chewing and smoking; but "tobacco products" does not include cigarettes,
as defined above.
§ 320-9. Prohibited actions.
Except as provided in § 320-10, no person who is less than 18 years of age
may do any of the following:
§ 320-10. Exception.
A child may purchase or possess cigarettes or tobacco products for the sole
purpose of resale in the course of employment during his/her working hours
if employed by a retailer licensed under § 134.65(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 320-11. Seizure of tobacco products by law enforcement officers.
A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette or tobacco product
involved in any violation of § 320-9.
A. Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette or tobacco product.
B. Falsely represent his/her age for the purpose of receiving any cigarette
or tobacco product.
C. Possess any cigarette or tobacco product.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 320-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-12
1:161
§ 320-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-2 of the Village Code.
§ 320-12 SLINGER CODE § 320-12
1:162
ARTICLE IV
Sale, Purchase and Possession of Electronic Nicotine Delivery
System Vapor Products
[Adopted 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 03-01-2018]
§ 320-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VAPOR PRODUCTS — Noncombustible products, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employ a mechanical heating element, battery,
electronic circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that
can be used to produce a vapor in a solution or other form, including but
not limited to an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, vaporizers, or similar products or devices. Vapor products
shall include any vapor cartridge, solution, or other container, which may
or may not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, vaporizer, or
similar products or devices. Vapor products do not include any products
regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration under
Chapter V of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
§ 320-14. Sale of electronic nicotine delivery system vapor products
to minors.
No person, by himself, his servant or agent, or as the servant or agent of
any other person, shall sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of by vending
machine or otherwise, any electronic nicotine delivery system vapor
products to any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 320-15. Purchase or possession of electronic nicotine delivery
system vapor products by person under 18 prohibited.
No person under 18 years of age may falsely represent his or her age for the
purpose of receiving any electronic nicotine delivery system vapor product.
No person under 18 years of age may purchase, attempt to purchase, or
possess any electronic nicotine delivery system vapor products except as
follows:
§ 320-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in §1-2 of the Village Code.
A. A person under 18 years of age may possess electronic nicotine delivery
system vapor products for the sole purpose of resale in the course of
employment during his or her working hours if employed by a retailer.
The defenses provided in § 134.66(3)(a) to (c), Wis. Stats., shall also be
defenses to any prosecution hereunder.
§ 320-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-16
1:163
Chapter 329
NOISE
§ 329-1. Generally.
No person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing or
unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or disturb a person
of ordinary sensibilities in or about any public street, alley or park or any
private residence.
§ 329-2. Operation of motor vehicles.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as to cause the tires to squeal,
the horn to blow excessively or the motor to race excessively.
§ 329-3. Public address systems and amplifiers.
No person shall use or operate any public address (PA) system, amplifier
or device which increases the volume of voice, music or other sounds so
loud as to disturb the public peace or the quiet and peacefulness of the
neighborhood.
§ 329-4. Construction and machinery noise.
Except for emergencies, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., no
person shall operate any loud vehicles, residential lawn mowers, chain saws
or any other loud machinery.
§ 329-5. Use of dynamic braking devices prohibited.
§ 329-6. Violations and penalties.114
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating this chapter shall
be punishable as set forth in § 1-2 of the Code. Each day of violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Definition. A dynamic braking device, commonly referred to as "jake"
brakes, "Jacob's" brake, engine brake or compression brake, means a
device primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an
internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of
braking without the use of wheel brakes.
B. Use prohibited. No person shall use a motor vehicle within the Village
limits where the dynamic braking device is in any way engaged or
activated on such motor vehicle or any unit a part thereof, except for
emergency situations for the purpose of avoiding a collision with
another object or vehicle.
114. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 320-16 SLINGER CODE § 329-6
1:164
Chapter 336
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 184.
§ 336-1. Public nuisances prohibited.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance.
§ 336-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
PUBLIC NUISANCE — A thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property
which shall continue for such length of time as to:
§ 336-3. Public nuisances affecting health.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration
shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the
definition of § 336-2.
Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public;
A.
B. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
C. Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct
or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way or the use of public property.
D.
A. Adulterated food. All decayed, adulterated or unwholesome food or
drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
B. Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended
for human consumption or food, which are not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.
C. Breeding places for vermin, etc. Accumulations of decayed animal or
vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing
material, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes,
disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
§ 329-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-3
1:165
D. Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other
insects can multiply.
E. Privy vaults and garbage cans. Privy vaults and garbage cans which are
not flytight.
F. Noxious weeds.
(1) All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation, and all
weeds, grasses and plants over eight inches in height, which:115
(a) Detract from the surrounding area and properties.
(b) Become a possible fire hazard as determined by the Village.
(c) Become a health hazard due to their pollen or might be a cover
for disease-carrying rodents and other small animals.
(d) Are of infectious or poisonous nature in or adjacent to a
populated area, regardless of height.
(e) Become a potential hazard to vehicular traffic, in vision
clearance triangles.
(2) This subsection does not include trees, shrubs or noxious weeds as
described in §§ 66.0407 and 94.38, Wis. Stats.
G. Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream,
lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial
wastes or other substances.
H. Noxious odors, etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the
Village emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous,
noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely
repulsive to the physical sense of ordinary persons which annoy,
discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable
number of persons within the Village.
I. Street pollution. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter,
alley, sidewalk or public place within the Village.
J. Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes,
gases, fly ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric pollutants within the
Village limits in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of
ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to
property in the Village.116117
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
117. Editor's Note: Original Subsection K, Open cisterns, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 336-3 SLINGER CODE § 336-3
1:166
§ 336-4. Open cisterns, wells, basements or other dangerous
excavations prohibited.
No person shall have or permit on any premises owned or occupied by him
any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations or other
dangerous openings. All such places shall be filled, securely covered or
fastened in such manner as to prevent injury to any person, and any cover
shall be of a design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed by
children.
§ 336-5. Public nuisances offending morals and decency.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and
decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other
nuisances offending public morals and decency within the definition of
§ 336-2:
K. Storage of waste tires. The storage or accumulation of waste tires that
are determined to be no longer suitable for their original purposes
because of wear, damage or defect located within the Village of
Slinger.118
(1) Exception. A firm located within a business district conducting a
permitted business use whereby new tires are an integral part of
the operation may store waste tires not to exceed 100 at any one
time in an approved enclosed area properly fenced and screened
from public view.
(a) The Fire Department of the Village is hereby designated as the
approving and inspecting authority in the enforcement of this
chapter for the protection of health, safety and welfare of the
public.
A. Disorderly houses. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill
fame, and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or forms of gambling not
permitted by Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Gambling devices. All gambling devices and slot machines.
C. Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer. All places where intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed,
bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or licenses as
provided for by the ordinances of the Village.
D. Continuous violation of Village ordinances. Any place or premises
within the Village where Village ordinances or state laws relating to
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 336-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-5
1:167
§ 336-6. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting
public peace or safety coming within the definition of § 336-2.
public health, safety, peace, morals and welfare are openly,
continuously, repeatedly and/or intentionally violated.119
E. Illegal drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of
drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of
state laws or Village ordinances.
A. Signs, billboards, etc. All signs and billboards, awnings and other
similar structures over or near street, sidewalks, public grounds or
places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to
endanger the public safety.
B. Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered within the
Village in violation of the Village ordinances and state law relating to
materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within
such district.
C. Unauthorized traffic signs. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or
devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or
railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official
traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of its
color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interferes with the
effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
D. Obstruction of intersections. All trees, hedges, billboards or other
obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets,
alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when
approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
E. Tree limbs. All limbs of trees which project over and less than 15 feet
above any public sidewalk or street.120
F. Dangerous trees. All trees which are injurious to public health or safety
because of a diseased or damaged condition; and the storage of cut elm
wood, unless such wood is debarked or sprayed with an effective elm
bark beetle destroying insecticide.
G. Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by state
laws and Village ordinances.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 336-5 SLINGER CODE § 336-6
1:168
§ 336-7. Abatement of public nuisances.
H. Dilapidated buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or
out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit
for human use.
I. Wires and cables over streets. All wires and cables over streets shall
comply with the rules of the State of Wisconsin as to height and
uniformity.
J. Noisy animals or fowl. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl
which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or
making of other noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or
any considerable number of persons within the Village.
K. Obstruction of streets; excavations. All obstructions of streets, alleys,
sidewalks or crosswalks, and all excavations in or under the same,
except as permitted by the ordinances of the Village or which, although
made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for
an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has
been accomplished, or do not conform to the permit.
L. Unlawful assemblies. Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property
abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley
or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing
traffic and free use of the streets and sidewalks.
M. Materials and equipment. All dilapidated, inoperable machinery,
rotting, dilapidated or unsightly matter and trash of any kind, except
that any items as above enumerated which the owner has declared and
pays personal property tax on.
A. Enforcement. The Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department and
the Building Inspector shall enforce those provisions of this chapter
that come within the jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall make
periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to insure that such
provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this section
to abate a public nuisances unless the official shall have inspected or
caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to
exist and have satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist.121
B. Summary abatement. If the inspecting official determines that a public
nuisance exists within the Village and that there is a great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, the proper official may cause the same to be abated and
charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.122
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 336-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-7
1:169
§ 336-8. Cost of abatement.125
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
costs of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance; and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
such cost shall be assessed against the property as a special charge.
§ 336-9. Violations and penalties.126
Any person who maintains a nuisance as defined in this chapter or who
violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation, rule or order made
hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of the Village
Code.
C. Abatement after notice. If the inspecting official determines that a
public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such
nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall serve notice on
the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same
within 10 days. If such nuisance is not removed within such 10 days, the
proper official may cause the nuisances to be removed as provided in
Subsection B above.123
D. Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Village or its
officials in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
E. Court order. Except when necessary under Subsection B, no official
hereunder shall use force to obtain access to private property to abate a
public nuisance but shall request permission to enter upon private
property if such premises are occupied, and if such permission is
denied, may apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order assisting
the abatement of the public nuisance.124
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 336-7 SLINGER CODE § 336-9
1:170
Chapter 341
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS AND LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land division and development — See Ch.
495.
§ 341-1. Street numbering.
All lots and parts of lots in the Village shall be numbered in accordance with
the street numbering plan established by the Village. All lots and parts of
lots hereinafter platted shall be numbered to conform as nearly as possible
to the general scheme of numbering as set forth on the Village numbering
plan.
§ 341-2. Numbering required.127
§ 341-3. Number standards.
The figures or words which shall be used to indicate the number of a
structure shall be no less than three inches in height, shall be clearly visible
from and of contrasting color to the color and surface of the underlying
structure, and shall be clearly readable from a distance of 50 feet.
A. Existing buildings. The owners of every house, dwelling and business
established in the Village shall cause to have numbers placed on houses
and buildings in accordance with the following: Letters not less than
three inches in height shall be distinctly legible and shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the front of each house and building. If the
numbers are not clearly visible from the street, they shall be attached to
a post or pole of sufficient height so that the numbers are clearly visible
from the driven portion of the street adjoining the property. Post
numbers shall be installed on either side of the driveway entrance
leading to the property no less than five feet and no more than 10 feet
from the driveway.
B. New buildings. Before a certificate of occupancy is issued, the builder
or owner of every new dwelling or business establishment in the Village
shall designate on or attach to such structure a street number in the
manner set forth in § 341-2A above.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 336-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-4
1:171
§ 341-4. Violations and penalties.128
Any owner or occupant of any building required to be numbered who
neglects or fails to comply with this chapter in respect to attaching and
maintaining the proper number on such building shall be notified by the
Building Inspector or Police Department, in writing, to comply with the
terms of this chapter. If the owner or occupant neglects to so comply for 10
days after service of such notice, he shall be subject to a penalty as set forth
in § 1-2 of the Village Code. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 349
PARADES
§ 349-1. Definitions.
§ 349-2. Permit required.
No person shall form, direct, lead or participate in any parade or special
event in any area used principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic unless
prior Village Police Chief approval has been obtained.
A. In this chapter, the terms used shall be defined as follows:
MARSHAL — Includes police officers designated to maintain proper
order.
PARADE — Includes any parade, march or procession of any kind and
the associated assembly areas.
SPECIAL EVENT — Includes, but is not limited to, organized runs,
walks, races of any type, or similar event; art fairs, street dances,
circuses, theatrical or other exhibition, and commercial sales when
conducted in the traveled portion of a street.[Amended 12-3-2018 by
Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
B. Hereinafter, the word "parade" is synonymous with "special event."
A. Parade permits shall be issued by the Village Clerk upon review by the
Village Police Chief and approval by the Village Board; [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
B. A completed application for a parade permit shall be made not less than
30 days in advance of the parade and shall contain the proposed route
and times of the event; [Amended 9-3-2019 by Ord. No.
09-01-2019]
C. The parade permit fee shall be per the fee schedule approved by the
Village Board, plus any municipal costs associated with the special
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-4 SLINGER CODE § 349-2
1:172
§ 349-3. Exceptions.
A permit shall not be required for the following:
§ 349-4. Financial responsibility.
§ 349-5. Denials.
An application for a parade permit may be denied by the Village Board if:
event, except for parades or special parades sponsored by the Village.
Only one fee shall be charged for a multiple-day event. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
A. A funeral procession, Memorial Day Parade, Village- or schoolsponsored
parades. [Amended 5-7-2018 by Ord. No. 04-01-2018]
B. Students going to and from school classes or school activities, providing
such conduct is under the supervision of school authorities.
C. Use of the Ice Age Trail. [Added 5-7-2018 by Ord. No. 04-01-2018]
A. A certificate of liability insurance in the following amounts must be
provided prior to the issuance of the permit:
(1) One-million-dollar policy for events such as athletic events,
fireworks displays and bicycle races;
(2) Five-hundred-thousand-dollar policy for special activities such as
runs, walks, carnivals, circuses, concerts and festivals; [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
(3) Three-hundred-thousand-dollar policy for other activities such as
parades, trade shows, and art and craft shows. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
B. The Village reserves the right to designate the appropriate level of
insurance and, if substantial risk is present, may require additional
levels of insurance.
A. It is for a parade that is to be held on a work day during hours when and
at places where, in addition to the proposed parade, the flow of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic is usually delayed by its own volume.
B. It is for a parade that is to be held between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
C. Sufficient police officers are not provided to reasonably assure the
orderly conduct of the parade, as determined by the Police Department.
Costs shall be the responsibility of the permit holder for extra man
hours of the police officer(s).
§ 349-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-5
1:173
§ 349-6. Revocation.129
The Chief of Police may revoke a permit already issued if he deems that
such action is justified by an actual or potential emergency due to weather,
fire, riot, other catastrophe or the likelihood of a breach of the peace or by
a major change in the conditions forming the basis of issuance.
§ 349-7. Conduct of participants.130
The Village Board may promulgate such rules as necessary to ensure the
safety of participants and spectators. The rules shall include, but are not
limited to, the following:
D. More than one assembly area or more than one dispersal area is
proposed.
E. Permission for use of property for assembly, dispersal or check points
has not been obtained.
F. The proposed route or parade would substantially disrupt business,
traffic or neighborhoods.
G. There is a reasonable probability the parade would involve violation of
federal or state highway law, or of other applicable provisions of this
Code of Village ordinances.
H. The granting of the permit would conflict with another permit already
granted, or for which application is already pending.
I. The Department of Transportation fails to approve a detour route if
required.
J. The applicant fails to arrange for emergency medical services.
A. No alcoholic beverages are permitted on any float or vehicle;
B. Nothing is to be thrown from any float or vehicle;
C. Vehicles and floats are to be operated in a safe and responsible manner
at all times;
D. No one is permitted to board or depart any float or vehicle while it is in
motion;
E. Permanent route markers, including paint or similar substances, are
not permitted on either private or public property.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 349-5 SLINGER CODE § 349-8
1:174
§ 349-8. Interference.131
No person shall hamper, obstruct or impede or interfere with any parade
or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or
used in the parade, nor shall any other organization or group of persons not
authorized by the permittee to participate in the parade.
§ 349-9. Driving through parades.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or person comprising
a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade unless directed to do so by a police officer. However,
the parade shall permit passage of authorized emergency vehicles.
§ 349-10. Violations and penalties.132
Any person who violates any parade permit and conduct provision of this
chapter or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of the Village Code.
Chapter 356
PARKS AND PARKWAYS
§ 356-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect Village parks and parkways
and appurtenances thereto from fire, abuse and desecration; to provide
for the recreational use of these areas; to control and regulate traffic and
maintain general order therein; and to further the safety, health, comfort,
morals and welfare of all persons within the parks and parkways.
§ 356-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Village Parks, Recreation and Forestry Board.
PARK and PARKWAY — Unless otherwise stated, include the grounds,
buildings thereon, waters therein, and any other property which is now
or may hereafter be under the control or jurisdiction of the Village Parks,
Recreation and Forestry Board.
§ 356-3. Administration.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 349-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-3
1:175
§ 356-4. Park hours.
A. Issuance of permits. All permits required by this chapter shall be issued
by the Parks and Recreation Director, or his/her designee, in writing
and subject to the Village's adopted park rules and regulations. The
person to whom such permit has been granted shall be bound by such
rules and regulations as fully as though they were inserted in the
permit. Any person to whom such permit has been granted shall be
liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by the Village or by any
person by reason of negligence of the permit holder or his/her agents.
B. Leasing of equipment. The Parks and Recreation Director shall have the
authority to lease equipment suitable for recreational purposes to
private or public organizations upon such terms as may be determined
by the Parks, Recreation and Forestry Board. The lease shall bind the
lessee to save and keep the Village harmless from any and all liability
arising out of the leasing and use of such equipment. The Parks and
Recreation Director, at his/her sole discretion, shall have the authority
to require the lessee to provide public liability insurance covering the
use of such equipment and/or a refundable sum of collateral on the
equipment being leased.
C. Supplementary rules. Until otherwise directed, the Parks and
Recreation Director may adopt additional or revised rules and
regulation for the proper conduct and administration of the parks and
parkways in the Village not inconsistent with this chapter.133
A. Generally, except for vehicular traffic moving upon through streets or
roadways, or except when the Board publishes general permission to
use all or certain parks or parkways upon summer nights, the parks and
parkways shall be closed from 11:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m., and no person
shall remain therein during such hours, provided the Board may, from
time to time, in all or in any of the parks or parkways, publish or post
closing hours different from the above or may discontinue closing
hours, as in the judgment of the Board may appear reasonable and
necessary.
B. Emergency closings. In an emergency or when, in the judgment of the
Board or authorized Police or Fire Department personnel or the Village
Board, the public interest demands it, any portion of the parks or
parkways or buildings therein may be closed to the public or to
specifically designated persons until permission is given to return.
133. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 11.04, powers of police, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 356-3 SLINGER CODE § 356-5
1:176
§ 356-5. Interference with park employees.134
No person shall interfere with or in any manner hinder any employee of
the Village, nor any employee of a contractor engaged in constructing,
repairing or caring for any portion of the parks or parkways while in the
discharge of duties conferred by this chapter.
§ 356-6. Conduct in parks.
A. Use and sale of alcoholic beverages regulated. Any person wishing to
sell or dispense beer may do so only in designated areas and then only
with permission of the Village and by obtaining a permit.135
B. Disorderly conduct.
(1) No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in the Village parks
or parkways.
(2) No person violating Subsection B(1) above shall be allowed to
remain in any park or parkway.
(3) Any person arrested or issued citations for criminal/disorderly/
ordinance violation activity in a Village of Slinger park will not be
permitted to return to any public lands owned or operated by the
Village of Slinger and under the jurisdiction of the Parks,
Recreation and Forestry Board.136
C. Smoking restricted. No person shall smoke or hold a lighted cigarette,
cigar or pipe in an park building or section thereof or in any park or
parkway area when officially posted notices prohibit smoking.
D. Refuse disposal. No person shall scatter, drop or leave any debris,
refuse, garbage or rubbish in any portion of the parks or parkways
except in the receptacles provided for that purpose.137
E. Use of radios and television regulated. Auto radios, portable radios,
television sets and receiving or amplifying equipment shall be turned
low at all times so as not to be heard beyond 20 feet from such
instrument unless louder volume is specifically permitted in connection
with a public gathering or a temporary use for which a permit has been
granted by the Clerk.138
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
136. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II); this ordinance also repealed original subsection (F), Games, which immediately
followed this subsection.
§ 356-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-6
1:177
F. Gambling prohibited. No unlicensed gambling shall be allowed in the
park.139
G. Interference with other persons. No person shall in any manner disturb,
harass or interfere with any person or party or their equipment or
property.
H. Permits for exclusive use of park areas. Permits for the exclusive use of
any picnic area, picnic equipment or play area for any specified date or
time may be granted at the discretion of the Village.140
I. Firearms and fireworks; hunting and trapping. No person shall fire or
discharge any firearm, including pistols, airguns, etc., in any park or
parkway. No person except an authorized permittee shall fire any
fireworks. No person shall engage in trapping or hunting, nor shall any
person hunt with bow and arrow within any park or parkway.141
J. Throwing of stones or missiles. No person shall throw stones or missiles
into, out of or within any park or parkway, nor use any slingshot.
K. Fires regulated.
(1) No person shall make or kindle any fire except in places provided
therefor. Fires are subject to such regulations as may be
prescribed.
(2) The use of charcoal burners in designated picnic areas shall be
permitted, provided lawns and other vegetation are not damaged.
All unburned coals or ash shall be disposed of so as to prevent fire
or other damage to any park property.
L. The Parks, Recreation and Forestry Director may ask the Police
Department on his/her behalf to issue park violation notices prohibiting
(ban) a person from being on any Village parkland for one year if the
person is arrested or issued a citation two or more times within a
twelve-month period for any violation that occurs on Village parkland.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee is also authorized to issue park
violation notices to those persons who the Chief of Police or his/her
designee determines have committed a serious offense on Village
parkland.
M. Persons who have received a park violation notice ban and return to
Village parks within the banned period of time are subject to penalty in
accordance with Village ordinances. Each violation of the ban shall
constitute a separate offense.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 356-6 SLINGER CODE § 356-7
1:178
§ 356-7. Uses requiring permits.
§ 356-8. Animals in parks.
A. Public meetings. No person shall hold or permit to be held any public
meetings, assembly or entertainment, religious, social, political or
otherwise, within the limits of any park or parkway without a permit
therefor from the Board, and then only in areas designated as assembly
areas by the Board.
B. Parades and processions. No parade, procession or funeral shall take
place in or pass through any park or parkway without a permit therefor
from the Board.
C. Speeches. No person shall make any oration or public speech using any
loudspeaker or other amplifying device without a permit therefor from
the Board.
D. Services and demonstrations.
(1) Permit required. No service or demonstration by any organization,
creed or sect shall be allowed within any Village park or parkway
except in those areas designated by the Board as assembly areas,
and then only with a permit therefor from the Board.
(2) Exception. This subsection shall not be construed to forbid the
offering of a prayer or hymn in connection with church picnics or
other similar gatherings.
E. Advertising and sales.
(1) Sales. No person shall sell, keep, or offer for sale any tangible
article, merchandise or thing, nor solicit for any trade, occupations,
business or profession or for alms within any park or parkway,
without a permit therefor from the Board, and such permit as may
be required by this Municipal Code.
(2) Advertising. No person shall distribute, post, affix or display any
card, handbill, sign, placard, target, banner, flag (except that of the
United States or the state) or advertisement within any park or
parkway or upon any of the gates or enclosure thereof without
authorization from the Village.142
A. Animals prohibited. No animal except those placed in the park or
parkways by the authority of the Board shall be conducted into or
allowed to remain within the Village parks and parkways.
B. Exceptions.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 356-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-8
1:179
§ 356-9. Bicycle riding/roller blades/skateboards.144
Bicycles, roller blades and skateboards shall be prohibited in areas so
designated.
§ 356-10. Protection of park property and equipment.
(1) Dogs on leashes. No person having the control or care of a dog shall
permit such dog to enter or remain in a public park or parkway
unless it is on a leash of suitable strength and not more than six
feet in length. The Board shall cause signs to be posted in areas
wherein dogs are not permitted.
C. Animal droppings. The owner of any animal shall be responsible for
removing all droppings from any park area.
(1) Any person violating § 356-8C shall be fined per the forfeiture
schedule as set by the Village Board. This provision shall modify
§ 1-2 of the Municipal Code with respect to penalties in that the
established minimums per offense shall apply. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to a person who is visually or
physically handicapped.143
A. Fish, waterfowl and game birds.
(1) No person shall place any animal or thing into or upon any of the
waters of the parks or parkways. Fishing shall be permitted only in
designated areas.
(2) No person shall kill, injure or attempt to injure or disturb any
waterfowl or other birds or animals, wild or domestic, within any of
the parks or parkways, nor shall any person rob or disturb the nest
or eggs of any bird or other animal therein.145
B. Vegetation and equipment.
(1) No person shall remove, damage or pluck any flowers or any
property within the park.
(2) No person in any park or parkway shall remove any device for the
protection of trees or shrubs, nor shall any person fasten a horse or
other animal to or in the vicinity of any tree or grass plant which
may be damaged by the animal.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 356-8 SLINGER CODE § 356-10
1:180
§ 356-11. Traffic regulations.
Chapter 363
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND AND JEWELRY DEALERS
§ 363-1. Statutory authority; adoption by reference.
The provisions of § 134.71, Wis. Stats., are adopted and made a part of this
chapter by reference. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or dealer in
secondhand articles and jewelry to engage in any such business within the
Village of Slinger without first obtaining a license in compliance with the
provisions of § 134.71(5), Wis. Stats.
§ 363-2. Fee.
Fees for a pawnbroker, secondhand article and jewelry dealer's license shall
be assessed as established under § 134.71(11), Wis. Stats.
§ 363-3. License application and issuance.
All license application and issuance procedures shall be in accordance with
§ 134.71(5) through (7), Wis. Stats.
(3) Erection of structures restricted. No person shall erect any
structure or edifice, temporary or permanent, without a permit
therefor from the Board.
A. Driving and parking in authorized areas.
(1) No person shall drive or park any traffic or pleasure vehicle or
burden upon any part of the parks or parkways except the proper
drives in parking areas.
(2) Vehicles normally shall be parked in designated parking areas.
Parking along roads and drives may be controlled by appropriate
signs.
B. Vehicles for hire. No person shall cause any vehicle for hire to stand
upon any part of the parks or parkways for the purpose of soliciting or
taking in passengers or persons other than those carried to the parks or
parkways by such vehicle.
C. Trucking. No trucking, except for Village purposes, shall be allowed in
the parks or parkways unless issued a permit therefor by the Village.146
D. Traffic controls. The Board shall cause to be erected such traffic control
signs as are necessary for the proper regulation and safe movement of
bicycles, pedestrians and equestrians.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 356-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 363-3
1:181
Chapter 370
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 336.
§ 370-1. Obedience to officers.
No person shall resist or in any way interfere with any officer of the Village
while such officer is doing any act in his official capacity and with lawful
authority, or shall refuse to assist an officer in carrying out his duties when
so requested by the officer.
§ 370-2. Trespassing.
No person shall enter or be upon the lands or premises owned or lawfully
occupied by another within the Village without the consent or permission of
the owner or occupant.
§ 370-3. Misuse of E911.
A. No person shall utilize the E911 Emergency Telephone Number system
for any purpose other than to report an emergency.
B. It shall be unlawful to report an alleged emergency knowing that the
situation which he/she reports does not exist.
C. An "emergency" under this section exists when the person reasonably
believes that immediate response by public safety personnel is essential
due to the risk or actual occurrence of:
(1) Death or great bodily harm.
(2) Property damage.
(3) Any other situation which mandates the immediate response of
public safety personnel.
D. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
forfeiture as set forth on the Schedule of Deposits, together with the
costs of prosecution.147
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 363-3 SLINGER CODE § 370-4
1:182
§ 370-4. Offenses against state law subject to forfeiture.148
Offenses against state law subject to forfeiture. Chapter 23 through all
of Chapter 968, Wis. Stats., are adopted by reference to define offenses
against the peace and good order of the Village.
§ 370-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 370-6. Ultimate or extreme fighting events prohibited.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in this Code. In addition to any penalty
imposed for violations of § 943.01(1), Wis. Stats., any person who shall
cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable
for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed
property. The parent or parents of any unemancipated minor child who
violated § 943.01(1) may also be held liable for the cost of repairing
such damaged or destroyed property in accordance with § 895.035,
Wis. Stats.
B. Juvenile penalty.
(1) Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
JUVENILE — A person who is 12 years of age or older, but less than
17 years of age.
(2) Penalty. Any juvenile who violated any provision of this Code, or any
rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant hereto, or any
provision of any code adopted herein by reference, upon conviction
of such violation, shall be subject to imposition of any of the
dispositions set forth in §§ 938.343 and 938.344, Wis. Stats., in
accordance with the provisions of those sections. Any juvenile who
violates a condition of a dispositional order under § 938.343 or
938.344, Wis. Stats., upon adjudication of such violation, shall be
subject to imposition of any of the sanctions set forth in
§ 938.355(6)(d), Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions of
that section.
A. In this section, "ultimate or extreme fighting event" means a fighting
bout or tournament that meets the following criteria:
(1) A state license under Ch. 444, Wis. Stats., has not been issued for
the event.
(2) Participants use any combination of boxing, kicking, wrestling,
hitting, punching or other combative contact techniques, which
combination of techniques is not specifically authorized by and
conducted pursuant to Ch. 444, Wis. Stats.
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 370-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-6
1:183
Chapter 377
PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND TRANSIENT RETAIL
MERCHANTS
§ 377-1. Solicitors; unlawful actions.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, canvasser or transient merchant as
defined in § 377-3 of this chapter to engage in any such business within the
Village of Slinger without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. A peddler, canvasser or transient
merchant may also be referred to generally as "solicitors" in other sections
of the Code.
§ 377-2. Fee.
Fees for any applications, petitions, licenses or permits shall be as set by
the Village Board of the Village of Slinger by a duly enacted resolution and
may be changed from time to time.
§ 377-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSERS — Includes any person, whether a resident of the Village of
Slinger or not, who goes from house to house, place to place, or from street
to street soliciting, taking or attempting to take orders for a sale of goods,
wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals, or personal
property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for a service to
be performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order or whether or not he
is collecting advance payments on such orders. Such definition shall include
any person who, for himself or for another person, firm or corporation,
hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, motor vehicle, trailer, structure,
tent, boat, hotel room, apartment, shop or other place within the Village
for the primary purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future
delivery.[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
PEDDLER — Includes any person, whether a resident of the Village of
Slinger or not, who goes from house to house, place to place, or street
to street conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, offering
B. No person shall operate, maintain, attend, participate in, promote or
assist in operating, maintaining, attending, participation in or
promoting an ultimate or extreme event held within the Village of
Slinger.
C. A person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
forfeiture in accordance with the bond schedule approved by the Village
of Slinger.
§ 370-6 SLINGER CODE § 377-3
1:184
or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to
purchasers. It shall not include vendors who distribute their products to
regular customers on established routes.[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord.
No. 11-01-2018]
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Includes any person, firm or corporation,
whether as owner, agent, consignee, or employee, whether a resident of
the Village of Slinger or not, who engages in a temporary business of
selling and delivering goods, wares, and merchandise within said Village,
and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies
any building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat,
public room in hotels, lodging house, apartments, shops or any street, alley
or other place within the Village for the exhibition and sale of such goods,
wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction, provided
that such definition shall not be construed to include any person, firm or
corporation who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell
from stock, but exhibits samples for the purpose of securing orders for
future delivery only. The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not
be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by
reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as
a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer.
§ 377-4. Exemptions.
The terms of this chapter shall not be held to include:
A. The acts of persons selling property at wholesale to dealers in such
articles; newsboys, acts of merchants, or their employees in delivering
goods in the regular course of business. Nor shall the terms of this
chapter be held to include or apply to any farmer or truck gardener who
shall vend, sell or dispose of, or offer to sell, vend or dispose of, the
products from the farm or garden occupied and cultivated by him, to
include the seasonal sale of Christmas trees. Nothing contained in this
chapter shall be held to prohibit any sale required by statutes or by
order of any court, or to prevent any person conducting a bona fide
auction or sale pursuant to law.
B. Any persons under the age of 18 who are residents of the Village or
pupils in the Slinger School District or a private or parochial school
located within the Village, and who are engaged in occasional door-todoor
sales in order to raise funds for school, school-related, schoolextracurricular-
related, scouting-related, athletic or religious activities.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
C. The Solicitor's fee may be waived in conjunction with special events
hosted by the Village. [Added 5-6-2019 by Ord. No. 05-01-2019]
§ 377-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-5
1:185
§ 377-5. Applications.
Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Village Clerk a
sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Village Clerk,
which shall give the following information:
§ 377-6. Charitable organizations; exemption.
Any organization, society, association or corporation desiring to solicit or
have solicited in its name money, donations, property, financial assistance of
any kind, desiring to sell or distribute any item, literature or merchandise
for which a fee is charged or solicited from persons other than members
of such organization upon the street, in office or business buildings, by
house or house canvass, or in public places for a charitable, patriotic or
philanthropic purpose shall not be exempt from this chapter, but shall be
exempt from payment of a license fee.
§ 377-7. Investigation and issuance.
A. Name and physical description of applicant;
B. Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and, in
case of transient merchants, the local address from which proposed
sales will be made;
C. A brief description of the nature of the business goods to be sold;
D. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship;
E. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
F. The source of supply of the goods or property to be sold, or orders taken
for the same sale thereof, where such goods or products are located at
the time said application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery;
G. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, other
than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and punishment or
penalty assessed therefor;
H. The last cities or villages, not to exceed three, where applicant carried
on business immediately preceding date of application, and addresses
from which such business was conducted in those municipalities.
A. Upon receipt of each application, it shall be referred to the Village Chief
of Police, who shall immediately investigate applicant's business and
moral character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public
good and shall endorse on such application in the manner prescribed in
this section within three business days after it has been filed with the
Clerk.
§ 377-5 SLINGER CODE § 377-7
1:186
§ 377-8. Loud noises and speaking devices.
No licensee, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow a horn,
ring a bell or use any sound-amplifying device upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks or other public places of the Village or upon private premises
where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be
capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or
other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods,
wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
§ 377-9. Use of streets.
No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
street, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location thereon, nor shall
any be permitted to operate in a congested area where such operation
might impede or inconvenience the public use of such streets. For the
purpose of this chapter, the judgment of the police department, exercised in
good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested
and the public impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 377-10. Exhibition of license.
Licensees are required to exhibit their certificates of license at the request
of any citizen.
B. If as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Village Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for
the same, and return said application to the Village Clerk, who shall
notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no
license will be granted.
C. If as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Village
Chief of Police shall endorse on the application to the Village Clerk, who
shall upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the
applicant his license. Such license shall contain the signature of the
issuing officer and shall show the name and address of said licensee,
the class of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder,
the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the
same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other
identifying description of any vehicle used in such licensed business.
Each peddler, canvasser or transient merchant must secure a personal
license. No license shall be used at any time by any person other than
the one to whom it was issued.149
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 377-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-11
1:187
§ 377-11. Duty of police to enforce.
It shall be the duty of the police of the Village of Slinger to require any
person seen peddling, soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by
such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his license and to enforce the
provisions of this chapter against any person found to be in violation of the
same.
§ 377-12. Records.150
The Chief of Police shall report to the Village Clerk all convictions for
violation of this chapter and the Village Clerk shall maintain a record for
each license issued.
§ 377-13. Revocation of license.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the
Village Clerk for any of the following causes:
§ 377-14. Expiration, renewal and transfer.
All licenses referenced in the section shall be issued for a period of one
month (30 days) from the date of issue. All licenses referenced herein are
renewable upon expiration for a maximum of two times, not to exceed
a total including the initial application of three licenses in one calendar
year, provided no justifiable complaint has been filed against the licensee.
The Village Clerk is empowered to revoke the license at any time, for just
cause, resulting in the forfeiture of fees paid. All licenses granted under this
section are nontransferable.
§ 377-15. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Village
Clerk in the denial of a license as provided in this chapter shall have the
A. Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the
application for license;
B. Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient
merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor;
C. Any violation of the ordinance;
D. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor;
E. Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser, and transient merchant,
as the case may be, in an unlawful manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general
welfare of the public.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 377-11 SLINGER CODE § 377-15
1:188
right to appeal to the Village Board of the Village of Slinger. Such appeal
shall be filed with the Village Board within 14 days after notice of the action
complained of with a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for
the written appeal. The Village Board shall set a time and place for hearing
on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant.
Chapter 381
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 381-1. Introduction, purpose and intent.
The Village Board hereby finds that there exist, or may exist in the future,
within the Village structures used for residential and nonresidential use
that are likely to affect by reason of their maintenance or lack thereof, the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Village. It is the
intent and purpose of this chapter to prevent or correct the existence of
such adverse conditions through the establishment of minimum standards
related to the maintenance, appearance and condition of residential and
nonresidential premises. This chapter of the Village Code shall also provide
for the enforcement of a minimum level of care and maintenance to
buildings and properties throughout the Village.
§ 381-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to the maintenance of
all buildings or structures and the land on which they are situated within
the Village of Slinger, whether or not the property was constructed, altered
or repaired before or after enactment of this Code.
§ 381-3. Responsibilities of owner or occupant.
Every owner and occupant of property within the Village of Slinger has a
responsibility to maintain such property in a sanitary, safe and groomed
condition. No owner or operator shall occupy or permit another person to
occupy any dwelling unit or premises that is in violation of the terms of this
chapter.
§ 381-4. Property maintenance standards.
A. Exterior walls.
(1) Any building or structure on property located within the Village
shall be kept in good, safe repair and maintained in good condition
as relates to exterior appearance. Exterior walls shall be free of
holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other
conditions that might admit rain or dampness to interior portions of
the walls or the occupied spaces of the building or structure.
(2) A building or structure, the exterior surface of which has been
painted or other preservatives applied, shall be repainted,
§ 377-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-4
1:189
resurfaced or otherwise treated in a workmanlike manner when
its condition has degraded to the point that more than 50% of
the exterior surface is peeling, chipping, flaking, cracking or in an
otherwise deteriorated condition.
B. Doors and windows.
(1) Exterior doors, when closed, shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or
rotting boards and any other conditions that might admit rain,
snow or dampness to the interior of the building.
(2) Windows shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or any
approved substitute which is without open cracks or holes.
C. Fences and retaining walls.
(1) Fences shall be properly maintained so as to avoid creating a health
or safety hazard. If paint or other preservatives have been applied
to the exterior surface, it shall be repainted or resurfaced or
otherwise treated in a workmanlike manner when its condition has
degraded to the point that more than 50% of the exterior surface of
the fence is peeling, chipping, flaking or in an otherwise
deteriorated condition.
(2) Retaining walls shall be structurally sound. No retaining walls shall
be constructed or maintained in such as manner as to cause an
unsafe condition or the repeated spillage of mud, gravel, or debris
upon any public sidewalk, street or adjoining property.
D. Lawn and landscaping.
(1) The owner or occupant of any lands in the Village shall install and
maintain landscaping, plantings and other decorative surface
treatments, including turf grass, so as to present an attractive
appearance in all court and yard areas in accordance with
generally accepted landscaping practices in southeastern
Wisconsin.
(2) Lawns shall be maintained to a height not to exceed eight inches.
(3) Exceptions to these requirements include natural landscaped areas
as described in § 206-4, Natural landscaped areas, and areas which
are heavily wooded without lawn or turf grass within the heavily
wooded areas.
(4) Plantings shall be maintained so as not to present hazards or a
nuisance to adjoining properties or to persons or vehicles traveling
on public ways and shall be maintained so as to enhance the
appearance and value of the property on which located and thereby
the appearance and value of the neighborhood and the Village.
(5) Weed control shall be regulated in accordance with Chapter 206
and § 550-90.
§ 381-4 SLINGER CODE § 381-4
1:190
§ 381-5. Administration and enforcement.
E. Porches, railings, stairways, decks and patios. Outside stairs, porches,
decks, patios and other appurtenances attached thereto shall be so
constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting loads as
required by the Building Code.
F. Roofs and drainage.
(1) Roofs shall be maintained so as not to leak, and water shall be
drained and conveyed so as not to cause damage to the exterior
walls, eaves, soffits and foundation.
(2) Gutters and downspouts, when provided, shall be adequately
secured and kept free of obstruction.
G. Storage of junk or discarded property. No person shall store junk or
discarded property including, but not limited to, automobiles,
automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing
machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts, wood, bricks, cement
blocks or other unsightly debris, except in an enclosure/building which
houses such property from public view or upon permit issued by the
Village Board.
H. Weed controls. Property owners are required by law to destroy all
noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation as defined herein,
on lands in the Village which he/she owns, occupies, or controls;
including lands in street rights-of-way between the property line and
the roadway pavement.
A. The Building Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and
is authorized to prepare and distribute any procedural rules deemed
necessary to administer the purposes of this chapter. The Building
Inspector is further authorized to make inspections in response to a
complaint of an alleged violation of this chapter.
B. Upon receipt of a written complaint concerning the maintenance of
property in the Village, the Building Inspector shall conduct a review of
the complaint that will include a visit to the subject property. The
Building Inspector may also initiate a violation review on their own
action if necessary. If the Building Inspector's review finds that a
violation does exist, they shall issue a notice in writing via first-class
mail setting forth the alleged violation and advising the owner,
occupant or agent that the violation must be corrected. The notice shall
also include a specified time period within which the correction must be
completed.
C. If the violation has not been corrected within the time allowed, the
Building Inspector may issue a citation on the property owner for the
violation.
§ 381-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-6
1:191
§ 381-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-2 of the Village Code (Section 21.09).
§ 381-7. Appeals.
Within 10 working days following the date of issuance of a notice by
the Building Inspector, the recipient of the notice may apply to the
Administrative Review Appeals Board of the Village of Slinger for a hearing
for consideration of the alleged violation(s) enumerated in the notice. The
applicant of such appeal shall be advised of the time and place of the
hearing at least seven working days prior to the hearing and shall be given
an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why such notice should be
modified, withdrawn or a variance granted.
Chapter 382
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 381-6 SLINGER CODE § 381-7
1:192
ARTICLE I
Hunting Prohibited
[Adopted as Sec. 9.00 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 382-1. Prohibited use of Village owned and leased land.
As permitted by § 29.038(2)(b), Wis. Stats., the Village prohibits access for
hunting and trapping on any portion of land that it owns or leases.
§ 382-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-1
1:193
Chapter 398
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 468.
§ 398-1. Creation.151
The Village Board, pursuant to the provisions of § 66.0621(1)(b), Wis. Stats.,
does hereby declare that the sewerage system of the Village, consisting of
the collection system (as hereinafter defined), waste collection and disposal
operations, sewerage system and all other appurtenances, and equipment
used for such purposes, or wastewater treatment plant (as hereinafter
defined), shall be designated the "Village of Slinger Sewer Utility" or the
"Sewer Utility." This public utility is not a public service subject to
regulation by the Wisconsin Public Service Commission.
§ 398-2. Purpose and general provisions.
This chapter regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains,
discharge of septage into the public sewerage system, and the discharge
of waters and wastes into the public sewerage systems within the Village
of Slinger. It provides for and explains the method used for imposing and
collecting sewerage service charges, sets uniform requirements for
discharges into the wastewater collection and treatment systems and the
issuing of permits to certain users, and enables the Village to comply with
administrative provisions and other discharge criteria which are required
or authorized by the State of Wisconsin or Federal law. Its intent is to derive
the maximum public benefit by regulating the characteristics of wastewater
discharged into the Village of Slinger sewerage system. This chapter shall
supersede any previous ordinance, rules or regulations, and shall repeal
all parts thereof that may be inconsistent with this chapter. If there is any
conflict between this chapter and any applicable statute, the state statute
shall be controlling.
§ 398-3. Management.
The operation, management and control of the Sewer Utility is vested in the
Village Board. All records of the Sewer Utility shall be kept by the Village
Clerk in the Village Hall or other officially designated place.
A. The Village Board or designated official shall have the power to
construct sewer lines for public use and shall have the power to lay
sewer pipes in and through alleys, streets, and public grounds of the
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 382-1 SLINGER CODE § 398-3
1:194
§ 398-4. Application.
The application of this chapter, its rules, regulations and rates shall apply
to all individuals, firms, corporations and institutions residing within the
corporate limit of the Village and any person, firm or corporation, by
attachment to the sewerage system or otherwise by contract or agreement
coming within the Village sewer service area subsequent to the effective
date hereof and all entities hauling wastes or trucking wastes and
discharging to the sewerage system.
§ 398-5. Definitions.
The meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as
amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972
(Pub. L. 92-500 and Pub. L. 93-243), or as modified by Chs. 281 and 283,
Village; and generally, to do all such work as may be found necessary or
convenient in the management of the sewer system. The Village Board
shall have power by itself, its officers, agents and servants, to enter
upon any land for the purpose of making an examination or to supervise
in the performance of its duties under this chapter, without liability
therefor; and the Village Board or designated official shall have the
power to purchase property which may be necessary for construction of
the sewer system or for any repair, remodeling or additions thereto.152
B. The rules, regulations and rates hereinafter set forth shall be
considered part of the regulations applicable to every individual or
entity connected to the sewerage system and all persons discharging
wastes to the sewerage system. Such rules, regulations and rates may
be changed from time to time as determined by the Village Board and
the right is reserved to make special rates and contracts in all proper
cases.
C. The Village Board shall cause an annual audit of the books of the Sewer
Utility to be made and shall make the books and records relating to the
Sewer Utility available for inspection during regular business hours.
D. A proportionate distribution of operation, maintenance and
replacement costs shall be maintained among user classes. Users shall
be notified annually of the sewer service charges associated with the
sewerage system.
E. The Sewer Utility shall be able to utilize the full authority provided in
§ 66.0821, Wis. Stats., with respect to financing methods, sewerage
service charges, and other matters therein dealt with, and shall have all
legal authority permitted for municipal utilities to charge reasonable
rates for services.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-5
1:195
Wis. Stats., or appropriate sections of the Wisconsin Administrative Code
adopted pursuant to Chs. 281 and 283.
AMMONIA NITROGEN (NH3-N) — One of the oxidation states of nitrogen,
in which nitrogen is combined with hydrogen in molecular form at NH3 or in
ionized form as NH4. Quantitative determination of ammonia nitrogen shall
be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods" or
Ch. NR 149, Wis. Adm. Code.153
BUILDING SEWER, LATERAL OR SERVICE PIPE — A sewer which carries
only sewage or industrial wastes from the building plumbing to the public
sanitary sewer. The lateral or service is defined as all necessary piping from
the building up to and including connection to the public main.154
CAPITAL COSTS — The cost of acquiring, purchasing, leasing, planning,
designing, constructing, extending and improving all or any part of the
sewerage system and of paying principal, interest or premiums on any
indebtedness incurred for these purposes.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — That amount of a specified oxidant
that reacts with a sample under controlled conditions. The quantity of
oxidant consumed is expressed in terms of its oxygen equivalence. COD is
a defined test; the extent of sample oxidation can be affected by digestion
time, reagent strength and sample COD concentration.155
COLLECTION SYSTEM — The system of sewers and appurtenances for
the collection, transportation and pumping of domestic wastewater and
industrial waste.
CONNECTION — Each physical connection to the municipal collection
system, including any private sewer system that connects to the municipal
collection system.
DEBT RETIREMENT — All annual principal and interest requirements and
obligations of the Village for the sewerage system.
DECANT WASTE — Scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from a holding tank
from which a portion of the liquid has been decanted. Any hauled waste with
a strength of 4,000 to 6,000 mg/l of COD, 250 to 1,000 mg/l of TSS or 20 to
100 mg/l of phosphorous shall be considered decant waste.156
DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants into the sewerage system
from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
DISCHARGE MONITORING STATION — A sampling and metering station
required to be installed through a discharge monitoring agreement signed
153. Editor's Note: The original definition of "biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). See now the definition of "chemical oxygen demand (COD)."
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
155. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-5 SLINGER CODE § 398-5
1:196
by an industrial user with the Village in order to obtain information on that
user's discharge to the system and to establish sewer user charges.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Waterborne wastes normally being
discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, apartment houses,
hotels, office buildings, factories and institutions, free of industrial wastes
and in which the average concentration of suspended solids is established
at or below 1,200 mg/l and the COD is established at or below 800 mg/l and
phosphorus at or below 6 mg/l.157
FIXED CHARGE — A charge levied on users monthly for each lateral
connected to the public sanitary sewer. The revenues generated from the
fixed charge shall be used to cover expenditures relating to customer costs
and costs related to flow not attributable to users (infiltration/inflow).
FLOW-PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample consisting of
portions of waste taken in proportion to the volume of flow of such wastes.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from a
holding tank. Any hauled waste with a strength of 1,200 to 4,000 mg/l of
COD, 250 mg/l of TSS or 20 mg/l of phosphorous shall be considered holding
tank waste.158
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — See "discharge."
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY — Recovery by the Village Board from the
industrial users of the sewerage system of the amount allowable for the
treatment of wastes from such users pursuant to § 204(b) of the Federal Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER (CLASS III) — Any nonresidential user identified in
Division A, B, D, E, or I of the Standard Industrial Classifications Manual.
Class III also shall include any user that discharges wastewater containing
toxic or poisonous substances as defined in § 307 or § 502 of the Act, or any
substance(s) causing interference in the wastewater facilities. Class III shall
include any nonresidential user who:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes
other than domestic wastewater, resulting from discharge from, flow from
or escape from any commercial, industrial, manufacturing or food
A. Is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards;
Has a nondomestic flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average
workday;
B.
Contributes more than 5% of the average dry-weather capacity of the
wastewater facility; or
C.
Is determined by the Village Board or Utilities Superintendent to have
the potential to adversely affect the wastewater facility.
D.
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-5
1:197
processing operation or process; from the development of any natural
resource; or any mixture of these with water or domestic wastewater.159
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of any sewer system,
wastewater treatment process, sludge disposal system, or their operation,
which substantially contributes to a violation of applicable discharge
permits.
MAY — Means it is permissible.
MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER — The wastewater of a community and
approved sanitary districts. From the standpoint of the source, it may
be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants together with any groundwater,
surface water, and stormwater that may have entered inadvertently into the
sewerage system.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or groundwater.
NORMAL SEWAGE — Sanitary sewage in which COD and total suspended
solids concentrations do not exceed normal concentration of:160
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST (O&M) — The actual sums spent
by the Village in the operation and maintenance of its sewerage system,
consisting of, but not limited to, each and all of the following purposes:
A. A five-day, 20° C. COD of not more than 800 parts per million.
A total suspended solids concentration of not more than 200 parts per
million.
B.
C. A phosphorus concentration of not more than 6.0 parts per million.
Wages and salaries of employees related to expenses of operation,
maintenance, clerical, laboratory and supervisory personnel, together
with fringe benefits and premiums paid on such wages and salaries.161
A.
B. Electrical power and other utility services.
C. Chemicals, fuel and other operating supplies.
Repairs to and maintenance of associated equipment, including system
monitoring and control software.162
D.
E. Premiums for hazard insurance.
159. Editor's Note: The original definition of "intercepting sewer," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II).
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-5 SLINGER CODE § 398-5
1:198
ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Building Inspector and/or
Utilities Superintendent shall be the Ordinance Administrator for purposes
of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.163
PERSON — Any and all persons, including an individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporations, association, society, institution,
enterprise, government agency, or other entity.
pH — The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen
concentration expressed in grams per liter. It shall be determined by one of
the procedures outlined in "Standard Methods."
PHOSPHORUS — The total phosphorus as determined in procedures set
forth in "Standard Methods."
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater before discharge to the Village sewerage system.
PRIVATE SEWER — A privately owned sewer serving two or more buildings
and not directly controlled by a public authority.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer that is controlled or owned by the public
authority.
REPLACEMENT FUND — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories and appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the wastewater treatment plant to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT CONNECTION (REC) — The wastewater flow
and loadings to the sewerage system equivalent to that contributed by an
average residential family unit. An average residential family equivalent
shall be calculated from time to time by the Village based upon the total
residential water use divided by the total number of residential customers.
RESIDENTIAL USER (CLASS I) — All premises used only for human
residency and that are connected to the sewerage system.
Premiums for insurance providing coverage against liability for the
injury to persons and/or property.
F.
G. Rents and leasing costs.
Operation, licensing and maintenance costs for trucks and heavy
equipment.
H.
I. Consultant and legal fees.
J. Training and educational expenses.
K. Routine capital improvements approved in the annual budget.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-5
1:199
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or
industrial waste, or a combination of both and into which storm, surface
and groundwater or unpolluted industrial wastewater are not intentionally
contributed.
SEPTAGE — Scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from a septic tank, soil
absorption field, holding tank, vault toilet or privy. This does not include the
waste from a grease trap. Any hauled waste with a waste strength greater
than 6,000 mg/l of COD, 1,000 mg/l of TSS or 100 mg/l of phosphorous or
higher shall be considered septage.164
SEWER SERVICE AREA — The areas presently served or anticipated to be
served by a municipal sewerage system, as defined in the Sanitary Sewer
Service Area for the Village of Slinger that is part of the SEWRPC Regional
Water Quality Management Plan.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping,
treating and disposing of domestic wastewater, industrial wastes and
hauled waste. Also may be referred to as "sewer system." The facilities
that convey wastewater from individual structures from private property
to the public sanitary sewer are specifically excluded from the definition
of "sewerage system"; except that pumping units and pressurized lines for
individual structures or groups of structures may be included as part of the
sewerage system when such units are allowed by the Village.
SHALL — Means it is mandatory.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration or flows during normal operation and which adversely affects
the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment
plant.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures set
forth in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and
Water Environment Federation.
STANDBY CHARGE — A charge, equal to 100% of the sewer use charge as
defined in § 398-7C of this chapter, imposed on properties that are adjacent
to a public sewer but which have failed to connect to the public sewerage
system within 365 days after the public sewer first becomes operational.
STORM SEWER — A sewer which carries storm and surface drainage, but
excludes domestic wastewater and industrial wastes.
SURCHARGE USER — A user of the sewerage system who discharges
waste, which has higher concentrations than domestic wastewater and is
assessed an additional charge (surcharge) for the constituents higher in
concentration than domestic wastewater.
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-5 SLINGER CODE § 398-5
1:200
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — Solids that either float on the surface
of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of
total suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set
forth in "Standard Methods." Also referred to as "suspended solids."
TOXICS — Any of the pollutants defined by federal regulations pursuant to
§ 307(a)(1) of the Act.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharging to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment plant provided.
USE FACTORS — Flow, COD, total suspended solids and infiltration/inflow
or the quantity of these factors as determined by the Village by sampling
and monitoring the wastewater treatment plant influent and surcharge
users and from the Water Utility records.165
USER — Any person discharging domestic wastewater or industrial wastes
into the collection system or entity discharging septage or other wastes
hauled to the sewerage system.166
USER CHARGE — A charge levied on users to recover the component
of total operation, maintenance and capital costs of the sewerage system
which relates to sewage flow generated by users of the system. The user
charge shall consist of a volumetric charge in terms of dollars per unit of
metered water usage.
UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT — The Utilities Superintendent of the
wastewater treatment and conveyance facilities, who shall be in charge of
and supervise the operations and functions of the wastewater treatment and
conveyance facilities and who shall report to the Village Administrator.167
WASTE — Any solids, liquid or gaseous material or combination thereof
discharged from any residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial
establishments and septage haulers into the collection system, storm sewer
or septage receiving station.
WASTE HAULER — A person or business holding a valid license to do
septage servicing under Ch. NR 113, Wis. Adm. Code.
WASTEWATER — A combination of the water-carried waste discharged
into the collection system from residences, business buildings, institutions
and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and
stormwater as may be present.
WASTEWATER PUMPING STATION OR LIFT STATION — A pumping facility
utilized to pump wastewater within the collection system.168
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-5
1:201
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT (WWTP) — Any Village-owned facility,
devices and structures used for receiving and treating wastewater from the
Village collection system.
WATER UTILITY — The Slinger Water Utility.
WPDES PERMIT — A permit to discharge pollutants obtained under the
Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES), as defined in
§ 283.01(10), Wis. Stats.
§ 398-6. General rules and regulations.
A. Declaration of policy. The Village Board finds and declares that the
public health, comfort and safety is preserved and enhanced by the
provision of the sewerage system in the promotion of a clean and
healthful environment and that the failure to connect to the sewerage
system is contrary to minimum health standards.
B. Connection.
(1) To assure preservation of public health, comfort and safety, the
owner of any house, building or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other habitation, situated
within the Village and adjacent to a public sewer or in a block
through which a public sewer extends shall connect to such system
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 365 days as
specified in a written notice to connect from the Village Board or
designated official, or if an immediate hazard exists within 30 days
upon receipt of notice from the Village Board or designated official.
(2) If any person fails to comply with Subsection B(1) above, the
Village, at its option, may take any or all of the following actions,
which are not mutually exclusive, and which shall be in addition to
other applicable penalties and remedies:
(a) Impose damages, penalties and remedies pursuant to § 398-16
of this chapter.
(b) Cause such connection to be made and the expense of the
connection shall be assessed as a special tax against the
property. The owner may, within 30 days after the completion
of the work by the Village, file a written option with the Village
Treasurer stating that he or she cannot pay the amount in one
sum and ask that it be levied in not to exceed five equal annual
installments and that the amount shall be so collected with
interest at a rate not to exceed 15% per year from the
completion of the work. The unpaid balance shall be a special
tax lien against the property.
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-5 SLINGER CODE § 398-6
1:202
(c) Impose a standby charge for the period of time in violation of
Subsection B(1) above, after providing at least 10 days' written
notice to any owner failing to make a connection to the
sewerage system, for an amount equal to 100% of the sewer
use charge as defined in § 398-7C of this chapter, payable
monthly for the period in which the failure to connect
continues. In the event the applicable house, building or
property is not connected to metered water, the sewer use
charge shall be calculated based upon an estimate of water
used by the facility as determined by the Village Board or its
designee, which estimate shall be stated in the notice to the
property owner. Upon failure to make such a payment, said
charge shall be imposed against the lot or parcel as a special
charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
(d) Assessments.169
[1] Sewer mains.
[a] Eight-inch and smaller: 100% assessable.
[b] Over eight inches, the Village shall pay the difference
in cost between the eight-inch and that of larger size
pipe.
[c] When special assessing, each of the benefited
properties abutting the improvement shall pay 50% of
the cost as calculated in Subsections A and B even if
only one is assessable.
[d] Laterals will be 100% assessable.
[2] Manholes. Manholes are 100% assessable.
[3] Lift stations, etc.
[a] The Village shall pay a prorated portion of the station
cost that is designed for additional service area.
[b] The Village shall pay a prorated portion of the force
main that is designed for additional service areas.
C. Alternative disposal prohibited.
(1) No person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool or other facility intended to be used for the disposal
of domestic wastewater if a public sewer is available. No new
buildings may be constructed within the sewer service area of the
Village without connecting to the public sewerage system.
169. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 398-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-6
1:203
(2) No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the Village,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village, sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
subchapter.
D. Plumbers. No plumber or other person will be permitted to engage in or
work at any plumbing in connection with the sewerage system without
first receiving a license from the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services.
E. General user regulations.
(1) Application for service.
(a) Every person requesting connection to the sewerage system
shall file an application in writing to the Village in such form as
is prescribed for that purpose. Blanks for such applications will
be furnished at the office of the Village Clerk. For new home
construction, this application will be included in the building
permit packet. The application must state fully and truly all the
use which will presently be made. If any change in use from
that set forth in this application is contemplated, the user must
obtain further application and permission from the Village
Engineer. If the applicant is not the owner of the premises, the
written consent of the owner must accompany the application.
(b) The application may be for service to more than one building or
more than one unit of service through one service connection
and, in such case, charges shall be made accordingly.
(c) If it appears that the service applied for will provide adequate
service for the contemplated use, the Building Inspector may
issue a permit, after appropriate fees are paid, for services as
shown on the application. If it appears that the service applied
for will not provide adequate service for the contemplated use,
the Building Inspector may reject the application.
(d) All expenses relating to the connection to the sewerage system
shall be paid by the applicant or owner at the time of permit
issuance.
(2) Connection costs. Persons attaching to a sewer main shall have the
lateral from the sewer main installed at their own expense. The
Sanitary Sewerage Facilities Impact Fee shall also be paid at the
time of issuance of a building permit.
(3) Sewer connections. After sewer connections have been installed
into any building or upon any premises, no plumber shall make any
alterations, extensions or attachments, unless the party ordering a
sewer connection or other work shall obtain and exhibit the proper
permit for the same from the Village Board or designated official.170
§ 398-6 SLINGER CODE § 398-6
1:204
(4) Laterals; user to keep in good repair. All users shall keep their own
laterals in good repair and protected from frost at their own risk
and expense and shall prevent any overburdening of the sewerage
system. The user is responsible for their lateral from the street
main through their facility served.171
(5) Backflow preventor. All floor drains shall have a backflow
prevention valve installed at the owner's expense.
(6) User use only. No user shall allow other persons to connect to or
permit other uses to be made of the sewerage system through his
or her lateral.
(7) Vacating of premises and discontinuance of service. Whenever
premises served by the sewerage system are to be vacated, or
whenever any person desires to discontinue service from the
system; the Village must be notified in writing. The owner of the
property shall be liable for any damages to the property of the
system other than through the fault of the system or its employees,
representatives, or agents.
(8) User to permit inspection. Every user shall permit the Village or its
authorized agent at all reasonable hours of the day to enter their
premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures and the
manner in which the drains and sewer connections operate. Should
the owner or occupant of the premises refuse voluntary access to
the premises, the Building Inspector is authorized to seek a special
inspection warrant under § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.172
(9) Responsibility. No claim shall be made against the Village or its
agents or employees by reasons of the breaking, clogging,
stoppage or freezing of any service pipe, nor from any damage
arising from repairing mains, making connections or extensions or
any other work that may be deemed necessary by the Village,
absent of gross negligence of the Village, its agents or employees.
The Village may cut off the service at any time for the purpose of
repairs or any other necessary purpose, any permit granted or
regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it shall
become necessary to shut off the sewer service within an area of
the Village, the Village shall, if practicable, give notice to each
affected user of the time when such service will be shut off.
F. Excavations. Excavation requirements in any easement or public rightof-
way shall be as specified and required by the authority having
jurisdiction over such easement or right-of-way.
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-6
1:205
G. Laterals.
(1) All laterals will be installed in accordance with the Wisconsin
Administrative Code as from time to time amended.173
(2) All laterals installed in the public right-of-way shall be a minimum
of six inches in diameter.
(3) The building sewer shall be inspected by the Building Inspector or
his designee upon completion of placement of the pipe and before
backfilling, and tested before and after backfilling. The Building
Inspector or his designee may order any lateral exposed and
removed if such lateral is covered before inspection.
H. Private sewer lines. Any private sewer lines serving more than one
building or any private laterals over 300 feet within the public road
right-of-way shall be designed to meet the requirements for public
sewerage systems in Ch. NR 110, Wis. Adm. Code.
I. Sewer connections to the mains. No persons except those having
special permission from the Village or persons in its service and
approved by the Village will be permitted under any circumstances to
connect to the public sanitary sewers. The kind and size of the
connection to the public sanitary sewers shall be that specified in the
permit or order from the Village. A minimum of 48 hours' notice shall be
given to the Village prior to connecting to any main.174
J. Extensions. The Village shall extend sewer mains to a new person(s) in
accordance with the following charges and the following conditions:
(1) When an extension of a sewer main is required by the prospective
user, said person shall make an application on such a form as is
prescribed for that purpose for such an extension in writing to the
Village Board or designated official. The Village Board or
designated official shall determine the length, diameter and
location of the extension, taking into consideration the prospective
demands for service, the capacity of downstream facilities, and the
orderly development of the particular area. No extension shall be
made for a distance less than the distance to the next manhole. All
sewer extensions shall be constructed in compliance with local and
state laws, ordinances, and regulations.
(2) When a sewer main is extended in response to a request by a
prospective user, the Village may finance the cost to extend the
main and place a special assessment for the cost of the extension
on the property of the person(s) who made the request and other
benefitting properties. If the Village determines that, in order to
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-6 SLINGER CODE § 398-6
1:206
§ 398-7. Annual budget and sewer service charges.
serve future development, the sewer main extension needs to be
of a greater diameter than is necessary to serve the property of
the applicant, the Village may pay for the difference in the cost of
the materials necessary to oversize the main to serve said future
development and shall not include such difference in materials cost
in the special assessments. All labor costs to install the sewer main
extension shall be included in the special assessment.175
(3) The Village Board may require the developer to enter a developer
agreement between the Village and the developer that shall state
the share of the costs of the sewer main extension that will be paid
for by the developer or prospective user.
(4) In addition to the charges made as above provided to each lot, each
user shall pay the full cost of the lateral from the main to their
building.
K. Chloride reduction. As required by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources and in order to reduce chloride in wastewater
treated in the wastewater treatment plant, the following rule is created
with regard to water softener installation:
(1) Water softeners. All new or replacement water softeners installed
in residential, commercial, industrial and institutional buildings
within the Village limits and in all sanitary districts and utility
districts served by the Village wastewater treatment facility shall
be "demand-based" water softeners. Water softeners functioning
only at predetermined time intervals shall no longer be permitted
in the Village, sanitary districts, and utility districts.
A. General.
(1) It shall be the policy of the Sewer Utility to establish sewer service
charges in such amount as to obtain sufficient revenues to pay the
following costs: 1. operation and maintenance including
contributions to a replacement fund; 2. debt service including debt
service reserves and coverage requirements.
(2) Those aspects of sewerage service charges relating to operation,
maintenance and replacement fund shall be in accord with any
relevant and applicable requirements imposed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources or by federal law.
(3) The utility may establish sewer service charges including sewer
user charges, monthly fixed charges, septage charges, ready to
serve charges, charges to extraterritorial users and other charges
as deemed necessary by the Village Board so as to assure that each
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-7
1:207
user of the sewerage system pays its proportionate share of the
cost of such facilities.
(4) A review of the user charge system shall be conducted on an annual
basis. This review shall include an analysis of the total costs of the
system and of wastewater contribution of users and user classes.
(5) The charges established hereunder may be developed using a
utility rate-making method, which would include recovery of
operation and maintenance costs plus depreciation and a return on
investment.
B. Budget to be prepared. On an annual basis, the Village Administrator
shall prepare a Sewer Utility Budget. The budgeted revenues shall be
sufficient to cover projected operation, maintenance and debt service
costs of the sewerage utility.
C. User charge.
(1) A user charge is hereby imposed upon all users of the sewer
system. The user charge will recover the component of total
operation, maintenance and capital costs of the sewerage system,
which relates to sewage flow attributable to users of the system.
The user charge shall be based upon the cost of treating flow, BOD,
suspended solids and phosphorus at the strength of domestic
wastewater. The User charge shall consist of a volumetric charge in
terms of dollars per unit of metered water usage. The basis for
billing user charges shall be metered water usage. For users
assigned a residential equivalent connection (REC), as defined in
§ 398-7K; the REC shall be the basis for the user charge.
(2) If any user of the sewer system is allowed by the Village to procure
any part or all of his water from sources other than the Water
Utility, the user shall furnish, install and maintain at his or her
expense water meters of a type approved by the Water Utility for
the purpose of determining the volume of sewage discharged to the
sewer system. At the discretion of the Village, a user procuring
water from other sources than the Water Utility may be assigned a
residential equivalent connection (REC) to be used as a basis for
the user charge as determined from § 398-7K. If in the opinion of
the Village Engineer the information in § 398-7K does not
accurately reflect the user's wastewater discharge to the sewerage
system, then the Village Engineer may assign a REC to the user.
The user charge for non-metered users shall be based upon an
estimated usage equivalent to the number of assigned RECs
multiplied by the average annual residential sewer usage.
(3) The residential water consumption for sprinkling as determined by
the Water Utility and any water credit meters for any refrigeration,
air conditioning system or industrial cooling water not entering the
sewer system shall not be used in computing the user charge.
§ 398-7 SLINGER CODE § 398-7
1:208
D. Monthly fixed charge. A monthly fixed charge is hereby imposed upon
each user connected to the sewerage system. The monthly fixed charge
shall recover costs related to wastewater treatment flow not directly
attributable to users (infiltration/inflow) and customer costs (including
accounting and billing). The monthly fixed charge shall be levied to
each lateral connection to the sewerage system and will consist of a flat
fee per connection.
E. Surcharges for certain industrial users. A surcharge shall be levied on
all users of the system who discharge wastes that have concentrations
of BOD, suspended solids or phosphorus greater than domestic
wastewater. The surcharge shall apply to any additional loadings over
and above that which would be generated on wastes at a strength equal
to domestic wastewater. The volume of flow used for computing waste
surcharges shall be the metered water consumption or the actual
volume of waste as determined by a sampling and metering manhole or
a discharge monitoring station. The amount of surcharge shall reflect
the cost incurred by the Village in removing BOD, suspended solids and
phosphorus.
F. Standby charge. A standby charge shall be imposed on each property to
which the Village has made sewer service available and a connection to
the system for service has not been made within 365 days from the date
of notice by the Village that the sewer service is available. The standby
charge shall be equal to 100% of the sewer use charge as defined in
§ 398-7C. In the event the applicable house, building or property is not
connected to metered water, the sewer use charge shall be calculated
based upon an estimate of water used by the facility as determined by
the Village approving authority or its designee, which estimate shall be
stated in the notice to the property owner.
G. Hauled waste charge.
(1) Charges shall be imposed for hauled waste treatment and disposal.
Charges for hauled waste discharges shall be based on flow, BOD,
TSS, phosphorus and such other constituents that affect the cost of
treatment and disposal. The volume of flow used for computing the
hauled waste charge will be the volume of hauled waste
discharged. All persons discharging hauled waste that has
concentrations greater than domestic wastewater shall be subject
to a surcharge. The amount of surcharge shall reflect the cost
incurred by the Village for removing BOD, TSS, phosphorus and
other pertinent constituents.
(2) The following waste strength parameters shall serve as the basis
for computing the surcharge to be applied, unless the hauled waste
discharge is sampled and analyzed:
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-7
1:209
Septic Tank Decant Holding Tank
BOD >1,000 mg/l 500 to 1,000 mg/l <500 mg/l
TSS >1,000 mg/l 250 to 1,000 mg/l <250 mg/l
Phosphorus >100 mg/l 20 to 100 mg/l <20 mg/l
(3) Any hauled waste with a waste strength greater than 1,000 mg/l of
BOD, 1,000 mg/l of TSS or 100 mg/l of Phosphorus shall be
considered septic tank waste for the purposes of imposing the
charge on hauled waste.
(4) All costs associated with administering the discharge of hauled
waste to the WTP, sample collection, laboratory analysis and billing
will be paid by the waste hauler.
H. Special rates. It is understood that the Village Board may at any time
hereafter set special rates for any large commercial service, industrial
use, extraterritorial areas, contract users or any other unique user that
does not readily fit into other categories of users.
I. Extraterritorial services.
(1) Municipal sanitary sewer service may be provided to
extraterritorial locations on request. Such service may require
municipal ownership of the interceptor and collection system,
excluding laterals, and shall require compliance with Village policy
pertaining to annexation.
(2) Except where negotiated and approved by the Village Board, the
Village shall not be held financially responsible for planning, design
or construction costs of the extraterritorial sewer system.
(3) Extraterritorial sewer recipients shall pay sewer user charges as
established by the Village.
J. Accounts and funds.
(1) Income and revenues derived by the Sewer Utility shall placed in
an account which is separate and distinct from the Village General
Fund.
(2) A replacement reserve fund shall be maintained with the purpose
of providing for the replacement of mechanical equipment in order
to maintain the capacity and performance for which the sewer
system facilities were designed. Other segregated funds (e.g. debt
reserve fund) may be established and maintained as necessary.
(3) The debt service fund shall contain all revenue transferred from
special assessment, tax incremental finance funds, property taxes,
residential equivalency charges and other sources intended for
debt. This fund shall be used only for the payment of principal and
interest and fees directly related to debt payments.
§ 398-7 SLINGER CODE § 398-7
1:210
K. Sanitary sewerage facilities impact fee. [Amended 10-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 10-07-2019]
(1) Authority. This subsection is authorized under § 66.0617, Wis.
Stats. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to
limit the power of the Village to adopt such ordinance pursuant to
any other source of local authority, nor to use any other methods or
power otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth
herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this
subsection.
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the community and to
facilitate the adequate provision for sanitary sewerage facilities by
imposing impact fees upon those wishing to connect to the Village's
sewer system or those mandated to connect in accordance with
§ 398-6B to pay for the capital costs that are necessary to
accommodate land development.
(3) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
CAPITAL COSTS — The capital costs to construct, expand, upgrade
or improve public facilities, including the cost of land, and
including legal, engineering and design and permit costs to
construct, expand, upgrade or improve public facilities, except
that not more than 10% of capital costs may consist of legal,
engineering and design costs unless the Village can demonstrate
that its legal, engineering and design costs which relate directly to
the public improvement for which the impact fees were imposed
exceed 10% of capital costs. Capital costs do not include other
noncapital costs to construct, expand, upgrade or improve public
facilities, the costs of equipment to construct, expand, upgrade or
improve public facilities or the costs for vehicles.
DEVELOPER — A person that constructs or creates a land
development.
IMPACT FEES — Cash fees imposed upon a developer under this
subsection.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The construction or modification of
improvements to real property that creates additional residential
dwelling units within the Village of Slinger Sanitary Sewer Service
Area or that results in nonresidential uses that create a need for
new, expanded, or improved public facilities within the Village of
Slinger Sanitary Sewer Service Area.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT CONNECTION (REC) — A unit of
measure for sewer-related impact fees equivalent to the average
amount of sewer capacity needed to supply one single-family
residential dwelling unit. For the purpose of the sanitary sewerage
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-7
1:211
facilities impact fees established under this subsection, one REC
shall be equal to 68,167 gallons annually.
(4) Imposition of impact fees.
(a) Impact fees are hereby imposed on all land development within
the Village of Slinger.
(b) For all development, impact fees shall be due in full upon the
issuance of a building permit.
(5) Sanitary sewerage facilities impact fee.
(a) Any developer creating or constructing development within the
Village shall pay a fee to the Village to provide for the capital
costs of sanitary sewerage facilities that are necessary to
accommodate land development, or the property owner shall
pay such fee, except as provided in Subsection K(6) below.
(b) The amount of the fee per unit to be constructed or created by
the proposed development, subject to adjustment pursuant to
Subsection K(8)(b) below, shall be as follows:
[1] The sanitary sewerage facilities impact fee shall be $2,652
per REC, subject to adjustment as described in Subsection
K(8)(b) below.
[2] For all residential users of the sanitary sewer system, the
following table shall be used to determine the number of
residential equivalent connections (REC) per dwelling unit
or building.
Residential Users REC
Condominium 1.00
Single-family home 1.00
Duplex 2.00
Multiple-family (2 bedrooms or
more)
1.00/unit
Multiple-family (1 bedroom or less) 0.75/unit
[3] For all nonresidential users of the sewer system,
anticipated sewer consumption shall be estimated from
the following table for purposes of computing sewer
impact fees unless the Village Engineer/Public Works
Director determines that the information in the table does
not accurately reflect the user's anticipated sewer
consumption, in which case the Village Engineer/Public
Works Director will estimate sewer consumption. The
RECs will be determined by dividing the estimated sewer
consumption by the sewer consumption for 1 REC. Upon
§ 398-7 SLINGER CODE § 398-7
1:212
completion of the REC computations, all RECs will be
rounded up to the nearest 0.5 REC.
Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code Description
Gallons per
Employee Hour
0742 Veterinary services for
animal specialties
20.0
0752 Animal specialty
services
16.0
0782 Lawn and garden
services
10.0
1446 Industrial sand 5.0
1521 General contractors-
Residential
2.3
1541 General contractors-
Industrial buildings and
warehouses
2.3
1611 General contractors-
Public works
2.3
1711 Plumbing, heating and
air conditioning
2.3
1731 Electrical work 2.3
1761 Roofing and sheet
metal work
2.3
1799 Special trade
contractors (not
elsewhere classified)
2.3
2013 Sausage and other
prepared meats
110.0
2065 Candy and other
confectionery products
50.0
2087 Flavoring extracts and
syrups (not elsewhere
classified)
75.0
2394 Canvas and related
products
2.3
2431 Millwork 5.0
2434 Wood kitchen cabinets 5.0
2522 Metal office furniture 2.3
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-7
1:213
Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code Description
Gallons per
Employee Hour
2721 Periodicals: Publishing
and printing
10.0
2731 Books: Publishing and
printing
10.0
2751 Commercial printing,
letterpress and screen
10.0
2752 Commercial printing,
lithographic
10.0
2789 Book binding and
related work
10.0
2795 Lithographic
platemaking and
related services
25.0
2819 Industrial inorganic
chemicals (not
elsewhere classified)
10.0
2834 Pharmaceutical
preparation
10.0
2841 Soap and other
detergents
15.0
2893 Manufacturing of
printing ink
30.0
2899 Chemicals and
chemical preparations
(not elsewhere
classified)
10.0
3079 Miscellaneous plastic
products
85.0
3111 Leather tanning and
finishing
345.0
3272 Concrete products,
except block and brick
25.0
3442 Metal doors, sash,
frames, molding and
trim
2.3
3444 Sheet metal work 40.0
3451 Screw machine
products
10.0
§ 398-7 SLINGER CODE § 398-7
1:214
Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code Description
Gallons per
Employee Hour
3462 Iron and steel forging 5.0
3469 Metal stampings (not
elsewhere classified)
5.0
3471 Electroplating, plating,
polishing, anodizing,
etc.
50.0
3479 Coating, engraving and
allied services (not
elsewhere classified)
100.0
3495 Wire springs 2.3
3498 Fabricated pipe and
fittings
2.3
3499 Fabricated metal
products (not
elsewhere classified)
25.0
3531 Construction
machinery and
equipment
5.0
3544 Spec. dies and tools,
die sets, jigs and
fixtures, molds
10.0
3562 Ball and roller bearings 5.0
3565 Industrial patterns 5.0
3569 General industrial
machinery and
equipment (not
elsewhere classified)
4.0
3576 Scales and balances,
except laboratory
2.3
3599 Machinery, except
electrical (not
elsewhere classified)
10.0
3613 Switchgear and
switchboard apparatus
5.0
3632 Household
refrigerators and home
and farm freezers
2.3
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-7
1:215
Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code Description
Gallons per
Employee Hour
3694 Electrical equipment
for internal combustion
engines
2.3
3714 Motor vehicle parts and
accessories
75.0
3999 Manufacturing
industries (not
elsewhere classified)
2.3
4141 Local passenger
transportation charter
service
2.3
4151 School buses 2.3
4212 Local trucking without
storage
10.0
4213 Trucking, except local 2.3
4225 General warehousing
and storage
2.3
4311 U.S. Postal Service 2.3
4722 Travel agency 2.3
4811 Telephone
communication
2.3
4832 Radio broadcasting 2.3
5042 Toys and hobby goods
and supplies
2.3
5063 Electrical apparatus
and equipment
2.3
5054 Electrical appliances 2.3
5072 Hardware -Wholesale
distribution
2.3
5082 Construction and
mining machinery and
equipment
2.3
5084 Industrial machinery
and equipment
2.3
5142 Frozen foods 10.0
§ 398-7 SLINGER CODE § 398-7
1:216
Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code Description
Gallons per
Employee Hour
5149 Wholesale groceries
and related products
(not elsewhere
classified)
10.0
5199 Wholesale nondurable
goods (not elsewhere
classified)
10.0
5211 Lumber and other
building materials
2.3
5231 Paint, glass, wallpaper 2.3
5251 Hardware- Retail sales 2.3
5261 Retail nurseries, lawn
and garden supply
stores
10.0
5271 Mobile home dealers 2.3
5311 Department stores 2.3
5331 Variety stores 2.3
5411 Grocery stores with
meat and produce
departments
16.0
5412 Grocery stores without
meat and produce
departments
6.0
5441 Candy, nut and
confectionery stores
10.0
5462 Retail bakeries- Baking
and selling
10.0
5499 Miscellaneous food
stores
2.3
5511 Motor vehicle dealers 5.0
5531 Auto and home supply
stores
2.3
5541 Gasoline service
stations
15.0
5551 Boat dealers 5.0
5611 Clothing stores 2.3
5651 Shoes stores 2.3
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-7
1:217
Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code Description
Gallons per
Employee Hour
5681 Furriers and fur shops 5.0
5711 Furniture, floor
coverings, appliances
2.3
5812 Eating places
(restaurants)
20.0
5813 Drinking places
(taverns)
45.0
5912 Drugstores and
proprietary stores
2.3
5921 Liquor stores 2.3
5931 Used merchandise
stores
2.3
5941 Sporting goods stores
and bicycle shops
2.3
5942-9 Miscellaneous stores 2.3
5992 Florists 10.0
5999 All other retail stores 2.3
6022-9 Banks 2.3
6122-63 Savings and loans 2.3
6311 Insurance companies 2.3
6411 Insurance agents 2.3
6512 Operators of
nonresidential
buildings
2.3
6515 Operators of residential
mobile home sites
2.3
6531 Real estate agents and
managers
2.3
6553 Cemetery subdividers
and developers
2.3
6722 Management
investment offices
2.3
7011 Hotels, motels, tourist
courts
0.5 REC/Unit
7211 Power laundries, family
and commercial
105.0
§ 398-7 SLINGER CODE § 398-7
1:218
Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code Description
Gallons per
Employee Hour
7212 Cleaning and laundry
pickup stations
2.3
7215 Fac. coin-op laundries
and dry cleaning
910.0
7221 Photographic studios 2.3
7231 Beauty shops 16.0
7241 Barber shops 10.0
7261 Funeral service and
crematories
15.0
7299 Miscellaneous services
(not elsewhere
classified)
2.3
7311 Advertising agencies,
employment services
2.3
7332 Blueprinting and
photocopying services
2.3
7351 Employment agencies 2.3
7391 Research and
development
laboratories
10.0
7395 Photofinishing labs 10.0
7512 Passenger car rental
and leasing, without
drivers
10.0
7531 Top and body repair
shop
5.0
7534 Tire re-treading and
repair shops
20.0
7538 General automotive
repair shops
5.0
7542 Car washes 115.0
7622 Radio and television
repair
2.3
7699 Repair shops and
related services (not
elsewhere classified)
20.0
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-7
1:219
Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code Description
Gallons per
Employee Hour
7832 Motion-picture
theaters, not drive-ins
20.0
7911 Dance halls, studios
and schools
20.0
7922 Theatrical producers 20.0
7933 Bowling alleys 50.0
7992 Public golf courses 45.0
7997 Membership sports and
recreation clubs
75.0
7999 Roller rinks,
gymnasiums, museums
20.0
8011 Offices of physicians 10.0
8021 Offices of dentists 10.0
8031 Offices of osteopaths 10.0
8041 Offices of chiropractors 10.0
8051 Skilled nursing care
facilities
20.0
8091 Health and allied
services (not elsewhere
classified)
10.0
8111 Attorneys 2.3
8211 Elementary and
secondary schools
20.0
8221 Colleges, universities
and professional
schools
25.0
8231 Libraries and
information centers
20.0
8249 Vocational schools (not
elsewhere classified)
20.0
8421 Arboreta, botanical and
zoological gardens
45.0
8621 Professional
membership
organizations
2.3
§ 398-7 SLINGER CODE § 398-7
1:220
Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code Description
Gallons per
Employee Hour
8641 Civic, social and
fraternal associations
15.0
8661 Religious organizations
(hours occupied only)
20.0
8699 Membership
organizations (not
elsewhere classified)
2.3
8911 Engineering,
architectural and
surveying services
2.3
8931 Accountants 2.3
9199 General government
(not elsewhere
classified)
2.3
9221 Police protection 2.3
9224 Fire protection 2.3
9451 Administration of
veteran's affairs
2.3
9999 All offices (not
elsewhere classified)
2.3
SIC Code Source: Office of Management and Budget,
Executive Office of the President
[4] Since the impact fee determined under Subsection
K(5)(b)[1] or [3] above is based upon the estimated
intended usage, the Village shall have the right to
recalculate the charge based upon actual usage for a
twelve-month period. At any time between the first and
third anniversary dates of establishment of the
nonresidential sewer service account, the Village may
review the account history to determine the highest actual
recorded usage in a twelve-month period.
[5] Based upon the information obtained under Subsection
K(5)(b)[4], the Village may recalculate the impact fee. If
the recalculated charge exceeds that of the amount paid
for the original charge, the additional amount shall
become due and payable at the time the adjustment is
made.
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-7
1:221
[6] Such fees collected by the Village shall be placed in a
special fund which shall be separate from the general fund
of the Village, and the special fund and all interest earned
thereon shall be used exclusively for the particular capital
costs for which the fee was imposed.
[7] Such fees shall be expended by the Village for the
aforesaid purpose within the time limits set forth in
§ 66.0617(9), Wis. Stats., or such fee amount paid along
with any interest that has accumulated shall be refunded
by the Village to the current owner(s) of the property with
respect to which such fee was imposed.
(6) Fee reduction. Any impact fee imposed under this subsection shall
be reduced to compensate for capital costs otherwise imposed by
the Village upon the land development subject to this subsection
for the same public facilities for which an impact fee has been
imposed under this subsection, including by way of special
assessments, special charges, land dedications, or any ordinance
adopted thereunder or any other items of value. Impact fees
imposed under this subsection shall also be reduced to compensate
for moneys received from the federal or state government
specifically to provide or pay for the public facilities for which the
impact fees under this subsection are imposed.
(7) Exemption from fees. The lawful new construction of a singlefamily
dwelling structure upon a nondivisible parcel of land
supporting or having supported a habitable single-family dwelling
structure razed or to be razed within one year of the date of the
issuance of a building permit for the new construction as part of the
new construction project shall be exempt from the fees imposed
under this chapter. Any new construction of a single-family
dwelling structure upon a single parcel of land, which project is
similar to but not exactly as described above to be exempt, may be
found to be exempt upon application to the Village Board and a
finding by the Village Board that such project does not bear a
rational relationship to the need for new, expanded, or improved
public facilities required to serve such development. The Village
Board may exempt or reduce impact fees for low-income housing
provided that no amount of an impact fee for which an exemption
or reduction is provided is shifted to any other development in the
land development in which the low-cost housing is located or to any
other land development in the municipality. Such application shall
be made to the Village Board prior to the payment of any fees under
this subsection.
(8) Administration and review.
(a) All fees collected and special accounts maintained under this
subsection shall be subject to administration by the Village
Treasurer. The Treasurer shall report annually to the Village
§ 398-7 SLINGER CODE § 398-7
1:222
§ 398-8. Method of billing and payment of charges.
Board with regard to all deposits, withdrawals, and fund
balances in these accounts. The purpose of the annual report
is to provide the Village Board with information necessary to
determine that all funds collected are spent within the time
required for the purpose intended and that the amount of fees
imposed continues to represent an equitable and reasonable
apportionment of the cost of public improvements and
requirements generated by land development. The revenue
and expenditure totals for each impact fee must also be
included in the Village's annual budget, and a summary of
the revenue and expenditure totals for each impact fee must
also be made available in the Village's annual budget summary
required under § 65.90(3)(a), Wis. Stats.
(b) As part of the annual budget process, the Village Board shall
review and consider for adoption the proposed impact fee
amounts set forth in the above Subsection K(5)(b)[1]. At such
time that the impact fee is adjusted to the maximum amount
calculated in the Public Facilities Needs Assessment ($2,652
per REC), the impact fees shall be increased annually at a rate
equal to the percentage change in the Engineering News
Record Construction Cost Index for the previous 12 months,
with the adjustment effective January 1 of each year. The
Village Treasurer or designee shall calculate the adjusted fees
and maintain a copy of the calculation and the adjusted impact
fees in the office of the Village Clerk.
(9) Appeal. Any developer upon whom an impact fee is imposed under
this subsection shall have the right to contest the amount,
collection or use of the impact fee to the Village Board, provided
that the developer files a written notice of appeal in the Village
Clerk's office within 90 days of when the fee is due and payable.
Such notice of appeal shall be entitled "Notice of Appeal of Impact
Fee" and shall state the developer's name, address, telephone
number, address (if available) and legal description of the land
development upon which the impact fee is imposed, and a
statement of the nature of and reasons for the appeal. The Village
Clerk shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the Village
Board at a regular meeting as soon as reasonably practicable under
the circumstances and shall notify the developer of the time, date
and place of such meeting, in writing, by regular mail, deposited in
the mail no later than at least three days before the date of such
meeting. Upon review of such appeal, the Village Board may adjust
the amount, collection, or use of the impact fee upon just and
reasonable cause shown.
A. Terms of payment. Sewer service charges shall be for the
corresponding period of the water bills and shall be payable to the
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-8
1:223
Village. Statements for such charges and assessments levied and
assessed in accordance with this chapter shall become due and payable
within 20 days after date of issuance. A penalty of 1% per month
shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed for final payment.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
B. Billing. The property owner is held responsible for all sewer bills on
premises that he or she owns. All sewer bills and notices of any nature
relative to the sewer service will be addressed to the owner and/or
occupant and delivered to the addressee by first class mail.
C. Failure to receive bill, no penalty exemption. Every reasonable care will
be exercised in the proper delivery of sewer bills. Failure to receive a
sewer bill, however, shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for
payment of sewer charges within the prescribed period nor exempt any
person from any penalty imposed for delinquency in the payment
thereof. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
D. Delinquent accounts.
(1) Authority. The Village Board of the Village of Slinger adopts
§ 66.0821(4)(d), Wis. Stats., by reference.
(2) Procedure. On October 15 in each year, notice shall be given by the
Village Treasurer to the owner or occupant of all lots or parcels of
real estate to which utility service has been furnished prior to
October 1 and payment for which is owing and in arrears at the
time of giving such notice. Such notice shall be in writing and shall
state the amount of such arrears, including any penalty assessed
pursuant to the rules of the Sewer Utility; that unless the
delinquent account is paid by November 1 thereafter, a penalty of
10% of the amount of such arrears will be added thereto; and that
unless such arrears, with any such added penalty, shall be paid by
November 15 thereafter, the same will be placed as a special
charge against the lot or parcel of real estate to which utility
service was furnished and for which payment is delinquent. Such
notice may be served by delivery to either such owner or occupant
personally or by letter addressed to such owner or occupant at the
post office addresses of such lot or parcel of real estate. On
November 16, the Village Treasurer shall certify and file with the
Clerk a list of all lots or parcels of real estate, giving the legal
descriptions thereof, to the owners or occupants of which notice of
arrears in payment where given as above specified and which
arrears still remain unpaid, and stating the amount of such arrears
together with the added penalty thereon as herein provided.176
(3) Lien for delinquent charges. Each delinquent amount for sewer
service, including penalty, shall thereupon become a lien upon the
lot or parcel of real estate to which the utility service was furnished
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-8 SLINGER CODE § 398-8
1:224
§ 398-9. Prohibited discharges.
and payment for which is delinquent, and the Village Clerk shall
insert the same as a special charge against such lot or parcel of
real estate. All proceedings in relation to the collection of general
property taxes and to the return and sale of property for delinquent
taxes shall apply to said delinquent special charge if the same is
not paid within the time required by law for payment of taxes upon
real estate.177
(4) Sewer service to rental dwelling units. This section applies only if
all of the following conditions are met:
(a) Sewer Utility service is provided to a rental dwelling unit.
(b) The owner of the rental dwelling unit notifies the Utility in
writing of the name and address of the owner.
(c) If requested by the Utility, the owner of the rental dwelling unit
provides the Utility with a copy of the rental or lease
agreement in which the tenant assumes responsibility for the
payment of the utility charges.
(5) Compliance. The Sewer Utility shall comply with at least one of the
following methods of notification:
(a) The Sewer Utility shall send bills for sewer service to a
customer who is a tenant in the tenant's own name. Upon
notification to a customer who is a tenant that charges for
sewer service provided by the Utility to the customer are past
due for more than one billing cycle, the Utility shall also serve
a copy of the notice on the owner of the rental dwelling unit in
the manner provided in § 801.14(2), Wis. Stats. If a customer
who is a tenant vacates the rental dwelling unit and the owner
of the rental dwelling unit provides the public utility, no later
than 21 days after the date on which the tenant vacates the
rental dwelling unit, with a written notice containing a
forwarding address for the tenant and the date that the tenant
vacated the rental dwelling unit, the Utility shall continue to
send past due notices to the customer at his or her forwarding
address until the past due charges are paid or until notice has
been provided the owner of the rental dwelling unit in the
manner set forth below.
(b) The Sewer Utility shall serve notice of the past due charges on
the owner of the rental dwelling unit within 14 days of the date
on which the tenant's charges become past due. The public
utility shall serve notice on the owner of the rental dwelling
unit in the manner provided in § 801.14(2), Wis. Stats.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-9
1:225
A. Storm and surface water. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged stormwater, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
stormwater retention or detention settlings, cooling water or hauled
waste to any sanitary sewer. Ground water may be accepted, with
special approval only, from engineered remediation projects if it is
determined that the collection or treatment system will not be
adversely affected.178
B. Prohibited pollutants. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged to the collection system, either directly or indirectly,
pollutants prohibited by § NR 211.10, Wis. Adm. Code, or any of the
following described wastes or wastewater:
(1) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the WWTP resulting in interference; but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the WWTP
which exceeds 104° F. (40° C.).
(2) Any wax, grease or oil, plastic or any other substance that will
solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between 32°
to 150° F. (0° to 65° C.).
(3) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the WWTP or sewerage system in a quantity that
may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewer system, such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and flesh, entrails, paper plates, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in
suspension in the municipal sewers (100% passing one-half-inch
screen, 90% passing one-quarter-inch screen).
(6) Any noxious or malodorous substance, which either singly or by
interaction with other substances is capable of causing odors
objectionable to persons of ordinary sensitivity.
(7) Any wastes or wastewater having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher
than 9.0 or having any corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazards to the sewerage system.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-9 SLINGER CODE § 398-9
1:226
(8) Any wastes or wastewater of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle them in the
sewer system.
(9) Any wastewater or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous
substance, such as plating or heat treating wastes, in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with wastewater treatment process,
to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create any hazard
in the sewerage system.
(10) Specific limits.
(a) Wastes containing metals in quantities that would cause the
Village to violate the conditions of its WPDES permit. Specific
limits for the concentration of metals discharged in wastewater
from industries shall not exceed the following:
Cadmium 0.07 mg/L
Chromium 1.71 mg/L
Copper 2.07 mg/L
Cyanide 0.65 mg/L
Lead 0.43 mg/L
Nickel 2.38 mg/L
Zinc 1.48 mg/L
(b) The limits are consistent with the categorical standards for
metal finishing.
(11) Any radioactive wastes greater than allowable releases as specified
by the current United States Bureau of Standards Handbooks
dealing with the handling and release of radioactivity.
(12) Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average
of 100 mg/l of either free or emulsified oil and grease or
combinations of both.
(13) Any cyanide or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating
hydrocyanic gas or acidification in excess of 1/2 (0.5) mg/l by
weight as cyanide in the wastes.
(14) Any fluid discharged during the maintenance or repair of vehicles,
other engine-driven equipment, or any mechanically driven
equipment. This includes, but is not limited to, antifreeze, gasoline,
oil, and greases.
(15)Wastes or wastewater which:
(a) Cause unusual concentrations of solids or composition as, for
example, in total suspended solids of inert nature, such as
§ 398-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-9
1:227
Fuller's earth and/or in total dissolved solids, such as sodium
chloride or sodium sulfate.
(b) Has a total COD, suspended solids, chlorides, or phosphorus
loading in excess of the wastewater discharge permit
described in § 398-13. [Amended 11-4-2019 by Ord. No.
10-06-2019]
(c) Is discharged without application for a wastewater discharge
permit or contractual agreement as required under § 398-13.
(d) Cause damage to the collection system or impair the treatment
process.
(16) Any pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the WWTP
or sewerage system, including, but not limited to, waste streams
with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the
test methods specified in § NR 661.21, Wis. Adm. Code.
(17) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
(18) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either
singly or by interaction are capable of creating a public nuisance or
hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for
their maintenance and repair.
(19) Any substance, which may cause the Village effluent or treatment
residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and
reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process.
(20) Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(21) Any wastewater, which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
C. Slugs. No person shall allow the discharge of slugs of water or wastes to
the collection system, which may be harmful to the operation of the
sewerage system. Where in the opinion of the Utilities Superintendent
slugging does occur, each person producing such a discharge into the
collection system shall construct and maintain at his or her own
expense a storage reservoir of sufficient capacity with flow control
equipment to insure an equalized discharge over a twenty-four-hour
period.
D. Wastes causing violation of WPDES permit. No person shall discharge
any waste or wastewater, which would cause the wastewater treatment
plant to be in violation of any of the requirements of the WPDES permit.
E. Wastewater exceeding available capacity. No person shall connect to
and discharge to the collection system, unless there is capacity
§ 398-9 SLINGER CODE § 398-9
1:228
§ 398-10. Accidental discharges.
Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this chapter.
Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the Village for review, and shall be
approved by the Village before constructing of the facility. Any person who
accidentally discharges wastes or wastewater prohibited under § 398-9 to
the sanitary sewer shall immediately report such discharge to the Utilities
Superintendent. The notification shall include location of discharge, date
and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective
actions taken. Any discharger who discharges prohibited materials shall be
liable for any expense, loss or damage to the Village wastewater facilities,
in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the Authority on account
thereof under state or federal law. Signs shall be permanently posted in
conspicuous places on discharger's premises, advising employees whom to
call in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. The Village Engineer shall
instruct all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with
respect to emergency notification procedure.
available in all downstream components of the sewerage system as
determined by the Village Engineer.
F. Limitations on wastewater strength.
(1) National categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated by
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall be met by all
dischargers of the regulated industrial categories.
(2) State requirements and limitations on discharges to the
wastewater treatment plant shall be met by all dischargers which
are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are
more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those
in this or any other applicable ordinance.
(3) The Authority reserves the right to amend this chapter to provide
for more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
wastewater treatment plant where deemed necessary to comply
with the objectives set forth in this chapter.
(4) No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in
any way, nor mix separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting
a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this
chapter.
§ 398-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-11
1:229
§ 398-11. Sand and grease trap installations. [Amended 12-3-2018
by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
Sand and grease traps shall be required at restaurants, repair garages,
gasoline stations, car washes and other industrial or commercial
establishments for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease
in excessive amounts, oil, flammable wastes, sand and other harmful
ingredients. Individual exemptions from this requirement may be granted
upon review by the Utilities Superintendent to "Category 1" restaurants
as defined by the Washington County Health Department under their
restaurant licensing program. All sand and grease traps shall be
constructed in accordance with the Wisconsin Plumbing Code and shall
be located as to be readily and easily accessible for easy cleaning and
inspection. The Village reserves the right to inspect all sand and grease
traps to ensure proper maintenance and effective operation. All sand and
grease traps shall be maintained by the owner at his or her expense in
continuous, efficient operation at all times. Maintenance reports shall be
submitted to the Utilities Superintendent annually, by January 31, detailing
all maintenance performed during the previous year. In the maintaining
of these interceptors, the discharger shall be responsible for the proper
removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and
shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject
to review by the Village.
§ 398-12. Hauled waste disposal.
A. Waste haulers. All waste haulers shall be licensed disposers in
accordance with § 281.48, Wis. Stats.
B. Hauled waste discharge permit. All waste haulers wishing to discharge
to the Village wastewater treatment plant shall possess a waste haulers
discharge permit prior to disposing of any wastes at the WWTP. Every
licensed disposer wishing to discharge hauled waste shall file a
nonrefundable filing fee and an application in writing to the Village
Engineer in such a form as is prescribed for that purpose. Forms for
such application will be furnished by the Village Engineer. The Village
Engineer will evaluate the applications and make a determination as to
the amount and conditions of hauled waste disposal at the WWTP. Every
sewage disposer shall file a certificate of insurance with the Village
prior to the Village issuing a discharge permit. The insurable amount
shall be equal to $300,000 for general liability, $300,000 for automobile
liability and the statutory limit for workers compensation.
C. Truck registration. Each truck of a permitted waste hauler discharging
to the WWTP shall be registered with the Village. Registered trucks will
be shown how to properly log in by utility personnel and given a log-in
procedure sheet for future reference. Any truck that does not follow the
procedure will not be allowed to discharge until properly registered.
D. Restrictions on disposal. Each hauled waste disposal permit shall be
issued subject to the conditions that if at any time the WWTP has
§ 398-11 SLINGER CODE § 398-12
1:230
operational problems, maintenance problems or threat of a WPDES
permit violation that are indirectly or directly related to hauled waste
disposal, the Village may immediately restrict hauled waste disposal
until such time as corrective action or mitigative measures have been
taken. Restriction may include prohibition of disposal of hauled waste.
E. Approved hauled waste only. The WWTP will accept only hauled waste
from domestic origin and permitted industrial or commercial hauled
waste. Waste haulers must characterize the waste they haul to the
WWTP. Hauled industrial and/or commercial waste will not be accepted,
unless the industry or commercial establishment has received a
wastewater discharge permit as specified in this section or has received
permission from the Village. Any new industrial or commercial hauled
waste must be reported to the Village by the waste hauler.
F. Designated receiving station. The designated hauled waste receiving
station is located at the WWTP. All hauled waste shall be discharged at
the WWTP, unless approval is obtained from the Village Engineer and/or
Utilities Superintendent for discharge of hauled waste to other
locations in the sewer system. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
11-01-2018]
G. Hours of operation. Specific hours of discharge and conditions shall be
set by the Utilities Superintendent. No special exceptions to the hauled
waste station hours of operation will be allowed. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
H. Documentation. Waste haulers are required to submit records of the
discharge to the hauled waste receiving station to the Department of
Natural Resources. These records shall be made available for
inspection by the Village upon request.
I. Spills. Waste haulers shall clean up all spills or deposits resulting from
their activity at the WWTP. Additional expenses shall be charged to the
waste hauler for cleanup of any spills, deposits or damage occurring as
the result of the disposer's activity at the WWTP.
J. Random sampling. At its discretion, the Village shall conduct testing of
random samples of hauled waste. If the hauled waste that is tested is of
a higher waste strength than that which was reported by the waste
hauler, the Village may charge the waste hauler retroactively for the
difference between the previous six month's volume of waste at the
waste strength of the tested sample and the amount that was actually
charged to the waste hauler based on reported waste strengths.
K. Hauled waste charges. Charges for disposal of hauled waste will be
established from time to time by the Village Board and approved by
resolution of the Village Board in accordance with § 398-7 of this
chapter.
§ 398-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-12
1:231
§ 398-13. Industrial wastewater discharge permit system.
L. Permit and registration fees. The waste hauler's discharge permit fee
and truck registration fee shall be set from time to time by the Village
Board.
M. Permit suspension or revocation. Failure to fulfill any of the above
requirements by any waste hauler may result in the suspension or
revocation of their hauled waste discharge permit.
A. Wastewater discharge permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be
required under this section if a person's discharge into the Village's
sewerage system has any of the following:
(1) A BOD concentration greater than 200 mg/l.
(2) A suspended solids concentration greater than 200 mg/l.
(3) A phosphorus concentration greater than 6.0 mg/l.
(4) A chloride concentration greater than 1,000 mg/l or 25 lbs/day.
[Added 11-4-2019 by Ord. No. 10-06-2019179]
(5) A volume of 25,000 gallons per day or greater discharged by any
user at one or more points of discharge.
(6) Any of the characteristics listed under § 398-9.
(7) Could cause the wastewater treatment plant to exceed its total
design loading for volume, COD, suspended solids or any other
pollutant.
B. Application procedure. Any such persons planning to discharge,
changing the characteristics of their discharge or whose discharge
permit has expired shall make application to the Village 60 days prior to
the discharge. All persons currently discharging shall make application
to the Village within 50 days after passage of this chapter. A discharge
permit will be required for each separate point of discharge into the
Village's sewer system. No person shall discharge waste or wastewater
into the Village sewer system without a wastewater discharge permit, if
required by this section.
C. Village acceptance of waste. If any wastewater is discharged, or
proposed to be discharged, to the public sewerage system containing
substances which in the judgment of the Village Board or designated
official may be detrimental to the sewerage system, the Village Board or
designated official may:
(1) Reject the wastes.
179. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(4) through (6) as
Subsection A(5) through (7), respectively.
§ 398-12 SLINGER CODE § 398-13
1:232
(2) Require pretreatment as an acceptable condition for discharge to
the sewerage system.
(3) Require a control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the waste not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
D. Permit application. Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file with the Village an application on the form prescribed
by the Village. In support of this application, the user shall submit the
following information:
(1) Name, address and standard industrial classification number of
applicant.
(2) Average daily volume of wastewater to be discharged.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by a
method approved by the Village Engineer.
(4) Time and duration of discharge.
(5) Average and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly
and seasonal variations, if any.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials and types of materials that are or
could be discharged.
(8) Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production.
(9) Number and type of employees and hours of work.
(10) Any other information as may be deemed by the Village to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
E. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user
charges and fees established by the Village Board. The conditions of
wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced by the
Village in accordance with this chapter and applicable state and federal
regulations. Permit conditions will include the following:
(1) The monthly wastewater discharge permit fee, fixed charge, user
charge and schedule for surcharge fees for the wastewater to be
discharged to the sewer system.
(2) The average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
§ 398-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-13
1:233
(3) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation of sampling and metering manholes
or discharging monitoring stations.
(5) Pretreatment requirements.
(6) Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater
discharges as specified by the Utilities Superintendent and
affording the Village access thereto.
(7) Average and maximum pollutant concentrations and total daily
average and maximum pollutant discharges for all pollutants
subject to limitations and prohibitions which are present in the
user's wastewater discharge.
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Village to insure
compliance with this chapter.
F. Pretreatment facilities. If the Village requires pretreatment facilities as
a condition for discharge to the sewerage system, then the following
conditions apply:
(1) Construction, operation and maintenance of pretreatment facilities
shall be at the expense of the person discharging the industrial
waste.
(2) Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to
proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for review to
the Village prior to the start of construction.180
(3) In accordance with Ch. NR 114, Wis. Adm. Code, all pretreatment
facilities shall be operated by qualified personnel holding
certificate of the proper class issued by the State DNR.
G. Industrial waste analysis, measurement and sampling.
(1) All persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewer system
shall construct and maintain sampling and metering manholes in
suitable and accessible positions on public property or easement to
facilitate the observation, measurement and sampling of all wastes
or wastewater. These manholes shall be located and constructed in
a manner approved by the Village Engineer. Plans, specifications
and any other pertinent information relating to proposed flow
equalization, pretreatment, or processing facilities shall be
submitted for review by the Village prior to construction if the
effluent from such facilities is to be discharged in the public
sewers.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-13 SLINGER CODE § 398-13
1:234
(2) The Village Utilities or its designee will monitor flow, collect
samples and perform laboratory tests on industrial waste
discharges as necessary to verify quantity of flow and/or character
and concentration of an industrial waste. The Village test results
shall be used to determine the applicable surcharge.181
(3) Waste or wastewater discharge may be sampled manually or by the
use of mechanical equipment as necessary to obtain a
representative twenty-four-hour composite sample. Samples shall
be taken at intervals to be established by contractual agreement
under § 398-13H or at intervals as determined by the Utilities
Superintendent or the Village Engineer. All costs for such sampling
shall be charged directly to the owner of the premises from which
the sampled discharge is generated. The sampling may be done by
Village personnel or their designee or may be requested to be done
by the facility owner. If the owner is requested to perform the
sampling, the selected method, contractor, or laboratory must be
pre-approved by the Village.
(4) When Ch. NR 101 or NR 202, Wis. Adm. Code, requires the
submittal of the character and concentration of wastes, waste
volume and production information to the district or State DNR, the
user shall have the waste character and concentration determined
by a DNR certified testing laboratory. A copy of the test results and
DNR reports shall be submitted to the Village Engineer.
(5) All measurements and test analysis of the characteristics of
industrial wastes shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR
136 methods approved by the Utilities Superintendent and shall
comply with state and federal law.
H. Contractual agreement. All persons required to make application for a
wastewater discharge permit shall, before issuance of the permit, enter
into a contractual agreement with the Village. The contractual
agreement shall contain the conditions set forth in the discharge
permit, requirements for industrial cost recovery charges and other
items deemed necessary by the Village.
I. Duration of permits. A permit shall be issued for one year and shall be
automatically renewed on a year-to-year basis thereafter, unless the
person is notified by the Village 60 days prior to the expiration of the
permit or any renewal thereof or unless the discharger has signed a
discharge monitoring agreement with the Village which specifies a
different duration period. The terms and conditions of the permit shall
be subject to modification and change by the Village during the life of
the permit, if so required because of any ordinances, statutes or rules
and regulations of the approving authority of any applicable state or
federal body. The person shall be informed of any proposed changes in
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-13
1:235
§ 398-14. Admission to property.
The Village, its agents and employees shall be permitted to gain access
to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
provisions of this subchapter, pursuant to § 66.0119 or 66.0417, Wis. Stats.
§ 398-15. Confidentiality of critical information.
When requested by a user who is furnishing a report or permit application
or questionnaire, the portions of such document which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for use by the Village
or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving
the person furnishing the report.
§ 398-16. Violations and penalties.
his permit at least 60 days prior to the effective date of change. Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.182
J. Transfer of a permit prohibited. Wastewater discharge permits are
issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new
owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation.
K. Revocation of permit. Any user who violates any of the conditions of his
or her permit contractual agreement or this chapter or of applicable
state and federal regulations is subject to having his or her permit
revoked.183
L. Discharge monitoring agreement. The Village may require an industrial
or any high volume or high strength waste discharger to enter into a
discharge monitoring agreement if in the judgment of the Village such
an agreement is necessary to properly evaluate the users discharge to
the sewerage system and/or to obtain adequate information to properly
assess a surcharge. In the absence of a discharge monitoring
agreement, the Village may assign a surcharge to a user, which in the
Village's judgment is appropriate of the user's discharge. The Village
may assess a surcharge to a user even though the Village does not
require the user to enter into a discharge monitoring agreement. A
sample of a discharge monitoring agreement is on file with the Village.
A. Damages. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewerage system. Any
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-13 SLINGER CODE § 398-16
1:236
person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest
under charge of disorderly conduct.184
B. Permit revocation. Any licensed waste hauler or permitted industrial
discharger found to be violating a provision of this chapter or any
conditions of the discharge permit may have its approval immediately
revoked. This revocation shall be done in writing and shall state the
reasons for the revocation.
C. Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewerage system
which causes damage to the sewerage system and/or receiving water
body shall, in addition to a fine, pay the amount to cover all damages,
both which will be established by the Village.
D. Liability for losses. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall become liable to the Village for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned by reason of such violation which the Village may suffer as a
result thereof.
E. Damage recovery. The Village shall have the right of recovery from all
persons, any expense incurred by the sewerage system for the repair or
replacement of any part of the sewerage system damaged in any
manner by any person by the performance of any work under their
control, or by any negligent acts.
F. Penalties. In addition to, and not to the exclusion or prejudice of, any
such other penalties and remedies that may apply, any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter or rules or regulations of
the Village or who shall connect a service pipe or discharge without
first having obtained a permit therefor; or who shall violate any
provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code, or
any other materials which are incorporated by reference, shall upon
conviction thereof be subject to a penalty as set forth in § 1-2 of the
Code. Each day in which any violation is continued beyond the aforesaid
notice time limit shall be deemed a separate offense. This, however,
shall not bar the Village from enforcing the connection duties set out in
§ 398-6 for mandatory connection.185
G. Appeal procedures. Any user affected by any decision, action or
determination, including cease-and-desist orders, made by the Village
official interpreting or implementing provisions of this chapter may file
with the Village Clerk's office a written request for reconsideration
within 15 days of the date of such decision, action, or determination,
setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for
reconsideration. Such appeal shall state the user's name, address,
telephone number, address, and a statement of the nature of and
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-16
1:237
Chapter 401
SEX OFFENDERS RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 401-0. Preamble
WHEREAS, the Village Board of the Village of Slinger, Washington County,
Wisconsin, deems it a priority to act in the interest of public safety within
our community, particularly in the interest of our children: and
WHEREAS, according to the U.S. Department of Justice, there are a record
number of convicted sex offenders living in our communities186; and
WHEREAS, all convicted child sex offenders have proven themselves to be
dangerous187; and
WHEREAS, research in this area has established sex offenders are
rearrested for sex crimes four times more frequently than non-sex
offenders188; and
WHEREAS, the reduction of crime and criminal recidivism are inextricably
linked to public safety within our community; and
WHEREAS, the risks posed by sex offenders against children, are nationally
recognized in such landmark legislation as the 1994 Jacob Wetterling
Crimes Against Children and Sexually Violent Offender Registration Act;
1996 Megan's Laws; and the 2006 Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety
Act; and these risks are also recognized by legislation in every state in the
United States of America including Wisconsin; and
reasons for the appeal. The Village Clerk shall schedule the appeal
for consideration by the Village Board at a regular meeting as soon
as reasonably practicable under the circumstances and shall notify the
user of the time, date and place of such meeting, in writing, by regular
mail, deposited in the mail no later than at least three days before
the date of such meeting. Upon review of such appeal, the Village
Board may change such decision, action or determination upon just and
reasonable cause shown.
186. Note: Sex Offender Management Assessment and Planning Initiative, July 2015, "This
includes offenders returning to the community upon release from incarceration as well as
offenders who are serving or who have been discharged from community-based
sentences."
187. Note: Kester, 2013 WI App 50, Paragraph 30.
188. Note: Sex Offender Management Assessment and Planning Initiative, July 2015, Langan,
P., Schmitt, E., & Durose, M. (2003). Recidivism of Sex Offenders Released From Prison in
1994.
§ 398-16 SLINGER CODE § 401-0
1:238
WHEREAS, the Village Board finds that the data concerning child sex
offenders is horrific and demonstrates the need for action, including the
following189:
• "sex crimes are unfortunately fairly common in the United States."
• "It is estimated that one in every five girls and one in every seven boys
are sexually abused by the time they reach adulthood."
• "Children are particularly vulnerable. Approximately 67% of all victims
of reported sexual assaults are under the age of 18, and more than half of
these victims are under the age of 12."
• "Most sexual offenses are committed by someone the victim knows . . .
or acquaintance."
• "No single factor or combination of factors can fully explain why
someone offends sexually, though some factors may combine to increase
people's tendency to offend. These factors are ... [physiological,
sociocultural, developmental] and situational/circumstantial (e.g. having
easy access to victims ...)."
• "About 12% to 24% of sex offenders will reoffend."
WHEREAS, the Village Board also finds these statistics of the U.S.
Department of Justice to be shocking and a call to action190:
• "Approximately 1.8 million adolescents in the United States have been
victims of sexual assault.
• "An estimated 60% of perpetrators of sexual abuse are known to the
child but are not family members, e.g. family friends, babysitters, child
care providers, neighbors."
WHEREAS, the creation of sex offender residency restrictions and safety
zones by municipal ordinance around locations where children regularly
congregate is a reasonable step toward protecting our children and
deterring recidivism by reducing the opportunity for new offenses within
our community; and
WHEREAS, the Village Board has reviewed many studies and reports
concerning recidivism of sex offenders and the effectiveness of sex offender
residency restrictions191, and has been fully advised in the matter; and
189. Note: Center for Sex Offender Management (CSOM) statistics. CSOM is a collaborative
effort of the U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, the National Institute
of Corrections, the State Justice Institute, and the American Probation and Parole
Association, and these quoted statistics are from its "Fact Sheet: What You Need to Know
about Sex Offenders".
190. Note: U.S. Department of Justice, National Sex Offender Public Website "Facts and
Statistics"
191. Note: These include but are not limited to: Recidivism of sex offenders released from
prison in 1994, U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, copyright
November 2003; The final report of the Commission to Improve Community Safety and Sex
Offender Accountability, of the State of Maine, dated January 2004; Sex Offender
Recidivism Prediction, Correctional Service of Canada dated October 14, 2004; Recidivism
§ 401-0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 401-0
1:239
WHEREAS, the literature on the subject includes some studies that support
the practice of imposing sex offender residency restrictions and others that
are critical of the practice; and
WHEREAS, the Village Board finds it to be significant that some of the
key studies that have concluded that sex offender residency restrictions
have limited effectiveness have added significant qualifications to that
conclusion; e.g. in "An Evaluation of Sex Offender Residency Restrictions
in Michigan and Missouri," (Huebner, et al., 2013), the authors generally
do not support sex offender residency restrictions, but nevertheless find
that following adoption of sex offender residency restrictions "the rate of
recidivism for technical violations significantly decreased for Missouri sex
offenders. . ." (id. at 9) and the number of sex offense convictions did
decline. . ." in Missouri (id. at 10); and
WHEREAS, the Village Board recognizes the merits, mentioned in some
studies, of individualized consideration of the risks and benefits of residency
restrictions on an offender-by-offender basis, though this assessment of
risks is not a perfect science and could give rise to equal protection or
other enforcement concerns; and on the local level it is important to provide
clear information to those who may want to locate in the Village, including
a map of available residency locations; and the Village Board finds that
this desire for uniformity and clarity outweighs the desire for individualized
consideration at the Village level, in general; and
WHEREAS, in review of the residency restrictions of communities
throughout Washington County and its environs, the Village Board finds
that many of such communities have an "original domicile restriction,"
which allows each community to take back its own while not adding an
additional burden of more than its own sex offenders to its community; such
burdens including neighborhood and citizen concerns and responses, risks
of recidivism, and potential property value impacts192; and
of Sex Offenders, May 2001, Center for Sex Offender Management; Treating Sex Offenders,
Wisconsin Lawyer Magazine, October 1994; The Impact of Residency Restrictions on Sex
Offenders and Correctional Management Practices: A Literature Review, Marcus Nieto and
Professor David Jung, California Research Bureau, California State Library, August 2006;
Sex Offenders: You Are Now Free to Move About the Country, and Analysis of Doe v.
Miller's Effects on Sex Offender Residential Restrictions, UMKC Law Review, Spring 2005;
There Goes the Neighborhood? Estimates of the Impact of Crime Risk on Property Values
from Megan's Laws, Linden and Rockoff, National Bureau of Economic Research, May
2006; The Effect of Proximity to a Registered Sex Offender's Residence on Single-Family
Housing Selling Price, Goliath Appraisal Journal, July 2003; Sex Offenders, Sexually
Violent Predators, Punishment, Residence Restrictions and Monitoring, California
Proposition 83, Analysis by the Legislative Analyst; An Evaluation of Sex Offender
Residency Restrictions in Michigan and Missouri, Huebner, et al., 2013.
192. Note: Property value impacts have been noted in numerous studies, including "The Effect
on Proximity to a Registered Sex Offender's Residence on Single-Family House Selling
Price," Larsen, J., Lowery, K., & Coleman, J. (2003), The Appraisal Journal, 71(3), 253-65;
and "Neighborhood Tipping and Sorting Dynamics in Real Estate; Evidence from the
Virginia Sex Offender Registry," Wentland, Bain, Brastow, Stoll, Waller, Social Science
Research Network, April 2013. Property values are only one such impact. Stop it Now, a
non-profit organization devoted to sex offender research, offers this advice to those
concerned about sex offenders moving into a neighborhood, among others: Create a family
safety plan; attend notification meetings; notify the police of suspicious activity; and don't
wait to take action for prevention. At a minimum, this heightened awareness and activity
§ 401-0 SLINGER CODE § 401-0
1:240
WHEREAS, if the Village of Slinger would not have an original domicile
restriction, the Village would have open doors for nonresident sex offender
residency when other communities have closed doors, inviting a substantial
increase in child sex offender placements, with the related adverse impacts
on the health, safety and welfare of the Village and its residents; and
WHEREAS, the Village Board believes that for all but the most severe
offenders, this risk of adverse impact declines as time passes following the
date of a designated offender's offense, as the offender matures, recovers
and reintegrates with society over time; and if this results in the offender
being removed from the state registration list, the offender is thereby
automatically removed from the Village residency restrictions; but even if
state registration is required, once 10 years has passed since the date on
which the person was released from prison or placed on parole, probation,
extended supervision or other supervised release for the sex offense,
provided it is not a Class A felony against a child, the Village Board finds
it is appropriate to remove the original domicile restriction and allow such
reformed citizen to move into the Village of Slinger in compliance with
this ordinance; and by opening this door the Village Board hopes that it
is establishing a precedent for its surrounding communities to open their
doors as well; and
WHEREAS, the Village Board recognizes that it cannot eliminate all risk of
child sex offender re-offense, and it must balance all of the competing public
policies, but intends by these regulations to strike the legislative balance
that is appropriate for the circumstances of the Village of Slinger; and
WHEREAS, it is not the intent of this chapter to banish sex offenders from
residing within the Village of Slinger, and careful attention has been given
to ensure that there are ample locations for sex offenders to reside within
the Village of Slinger in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 401-1. Residency and safety restrictions for sex offenders.
The Wisconsin Statutes govern the punishment of individuals who commit
sex crimes. The Wisconsin Statutes also govern the release into the
community of such individuals. The Village of Slinger has no authority or
intent to intervene in either area. The Village of Slinger recognizes statutory
residency restrictions and the limited exemptions enumerated in § 980.135,
Wis. Stats., for sex offenders released pursuant to § 980.08, Wis. Stats.
§ 401-2. Purpose.
This chapter is a nonpunitive, civil regulatory measure aimed at protecting
the public health, safety and welfare of the children and citizens of the
Village of Slinger from the risk that convicted sex offenders may re-offend
in locations close to their residences. The Village finds and declares that
sex offenders who prey upon children are a serious threat to public safety
burdens the families and neighbors where sex offenders are placed, and collectively this
burdens the Village staff and resources, for every Designated Offender placement.
§ 401-0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 401-2
1:241
and it is necessary for the Village to enact reasonable measures to reduce
the opportunity and minimize the risk of re-offense by protecting children
where they congregate or play in public places in addition to the protections
afforded by state law near schools and other places children frequent.
§ 401-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROHIBITED ACTIVITY — Distributing candy or other items to children or
otherwise participating in trick or treat activities on Halloween, if the sex
offender is not the parent or guardian of such children.
RESIDENCE — A place where a person sleeps, abides, lodges, or resides
on a permanent or temporary basis. For purposes of this definition, a
"permanent basis" means 14 or more consecutive days and a "temporary
basis" means 14 or more aggregate days during any calendar year or four
or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month. A person may
have more than one residence, and may be mobile or transitory.
SEX OFFENDER — Any person who is required to register under § 301.45,
Wis. Stats., for any sexual offense against a child, or any person who
is required to register under § 301.45, Wis. Stats., and who has been
designated a special bulletin (SBN) sex offender pursuant to § 301.46(2) and
(2m), Wis. Stats.
SEXUALLY VIOLENT OFFENSE — Shall have the meaning set forth in
§ 980.01(6), Wis. Stats.
§ 401-4. Residency restriction.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a sex offender may not
establish a permanent or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any
real property upon which there exists any of the following uses:
(1) A school for children.
(2) A public park, parkway, parkland, park facility, recreational trail or
property zoned P-1 Park and Recreation District.
(3) A day care licensed by the State of Wisconsin.
(4) A public library.
(5) A public playground.
(6) A public athletic field used by children.
(7) A residential care center for children.
(8) A public swimming pool.
(9) A public community center.
§ 401-2 SLINGER CODE § 401-4
1:242
§ 401-5. Residency restriction exceptions.
A sex offender residing within an area otherwise prohibited by § 401-4 or
401-9 does not commit an offense if any of the following apply:
(10) An aquatic facility open to the public.
(11) A movie theater.
(12) Any specialized school for children, including, but not limited to, a
gymnastics academy, dance academy, theater academy or music
school.
(13) A youth and/or teen center.
B. For purposes of this section, distance is to be measured in a straight
line from the closest boundary line of the real property upon which the
residence is located to the closest boundary line of the real property of
the applicable use. If any portion of a tax parcel contains a prohibited
location, the entire tax parcel shall be considered a prohibited location.
If any portion of a tax parcel would constitute a prohibited location of
residence under Subsection A, the entire tax parcel shall be considered
a prohibited location of residence.
C. The Village Administrator shall maintain an Official Map showing the
prohibited locations and safety zones within the Village. The Village
Administrator shall update the map at least annually to reflect any
changes in the prohibited locations and safety zones. The map shall be
available in the office of the Village Clerk and posted on the Village
website.
A. The sex offender established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to
§ 301.45, Wis. Stats., before the initial effective date of the relevant
provision of this chapter, and the sex offender has resided in such
permanent residence or temporary residence continuously since the
effective date of this chapter, except for temporary absences of no more
than 30 consecutive days.
B. The sex offender had established the permanent residence prior to the
date of the relevant offense, and maintained continuous ownership or
leasehold of the permanent residence during any jail, prison or other
sentence served for the offense.
C. The prohibited location situated within 1,000 feet of the person's
permanent residence was opened or established after the sex offender
established the permanent residence and reported and registered the
residence pursuant to § 301.45, Wis. Stats.
D. The residence is also the primary residence of the sex offender's
parents, grandparents, siblings, spouse or children, provided that such
parent, grandparent, sibling, spouse or child established the residence
§ 401-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 401-5
1:243
§ 401-6. Safety zones.
No sex offender may enter or be present on any real property upon which
there exists any facility used for or which supports the use of:
at least one year before the sex offender established residence at that
location, subject to the following. The sex offender is prohibited from
residing in such location if a victim of an offense giving rise to the
sex offender's designation also resides in the residence and is a minor,
unless the sex offender is on probation or parole and residing with the
victim is approved in writing by the probation or parole officer; and if
not on probation or parole, such location is prohibited unless approved
in writing by the Slinger Chief of Police, based upon a finding that
the circumstances of the offense, the sex offender, the victim, and all
relevant information in the matter substantially eliminates the risk of
re-offense against the victim.
E. The sex offender is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison,
juvenile facility, or other facility located at the otherwise prohibited
location.
F. The sex offender is a minor or ward under guardianship and is not
required to register under §§ 301.48 and 301.46, Wis. Stats.
G. The sex offender is temporarily hospitalized.
A. A school for children.
B. A public park, parkway, parkland, park facility, recreational trail or
property zoned P-1 Park and Recreation District.
C. A day care licensed by the State of Wisconsin.
D. A public library.
E. A public playground.
F. A public athletic field used by children.
G. A residential care center for children.
H. A public swimming pool.
I. A public community center.
J. An aquatic facility open to the public.
K. A movie theater.
L. Any specialized school for children, including, but not limited to a
gymnastics academy, dance academy, theater academy or music school.
M. A youth and/or teen center.
§ 401-5 SLINGER CODE § 401-7
1:244
§ 401-7. Safety zone exceptions.
A sex offender present in an area otherwise prohibited by § 401-6 does not
commit an offense if any of the following apply:
§ 401-8. Prohibited activity.
It is unlawful for a sex offender to participate in a prohibited activity.
A. The property supporting a use enumerated in § 401-6 also supports a
church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other house of religious
worship, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The sex offender does not enter the portion of the building devoted
to uses enumerated in § 401-6; and
(2) The person may not participate in any religious education
programs that include individuals under the age of 18.
B. The property supporting a use enumerated in § 401-6 also supports a
use lawfully attended by the sex offender's natural or adopted child or
children, which child's use reasonably requires the attendance of the
sex offender, provided that entrance and presence on the property
occurs only during hours of activity related to the use by the child or
children and only as reasonably necessary in connection with such
activity.
C. The property supporting a use enumerated in § 401-6 also supports a
polling location in a local, state, or federal election, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) The sex offender is eligible to vote.
(2) The polling location is the designated polling location for the sex
offender.
(3) The sex offender casts his or her ballot with whatever usual and
customary assistance is available and vacates the property
immediately after voting.
D. The property supporting a use enumerated in § 401-6 also supports a
school lawfully attended by the sex offender as a student, provided that
the sex offender may only remain on the property at such times that are
reasonably required for his or her educational purposes.
E. The property supporting a use enumerated in § 401-6 also supports a
police station, Village Hall, or other governmental building, provided
that the sex offender vacates the property immediately after completing
the activity that required his or her presence at the property.
§ 401-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 401-9
1:245
§ 401-9. Original residency restriction.
Except as described in § 401-5D, above, no sex offender may establish a
residence in the Village of Slinger unless he or she was a resident of the
Village of Slinger at the time of the most recent offense that qualifies for
designation as a sex offender. This restriction does not apply if 10 years
have passed since the date on which the person was released from prison
or placed on parole, probation, extended supervision or other supervised
release for the sex offence, provided the sex offender has not been convicted
of a Class A felony against a child.
§ 401-10. Loss of exemption or original residency.
§ 401-11. Sale or rental of property for use by sex offenders.
A. Any sex offender maintaining a residence within the Village of Slinger
that is exempted from the restrictions of this chapter pursuant to
§ 401-5A, B or C shall lose the exemption if the sex offender's ownership
or leasehold of the property ceases at any point in time, at which time
the sex offender shall be subject to the restrictions of § 401-4. This shall
not be interpreted to prohibit renewal of an existing lease.
B. Any sex offender maintaining a residence within the Village of Slinger
who ceases to maintain a permanent residence within the Village shall
be subject to the terms of § 401-9.
A. No person may sell or rent any place, structure, or part thereof with
knowledge that it will be used as a residence by any sex offender that is
prohibited from establishing residence therein by this chapter.
B. Notice to Chief of Police. A sex offender, and any property owner who
leases or rents any place, structure, mobile home, trailer or any part
thereof, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent
residence or temporary residence by any person who is a sex offender,
must each notify the Village Police Chief in writing a minimum of 28
days prior to establishing either a permanent residence or temporary
residence within the Village. In addition, any property owner who has
leased or rented any place, structure, mobile home, trailer or any part
thereof as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any
person who is a sex offender, at any time during a calendar year, shall
report in writing to the Village Police Chief as to the status of the
leasing or renting by the sex offender, including without limitation, the
names of all sex offenders who lease or rent any portion of such place,
structure, mobile home, trailer or any part thereof as of December 1 of
such calendar year, the remaining lease term under the current lease
for each sex offender, and if a sex offender no longer leases or rents
such place, structure, mobile home, trailer or any part thereof, the date
said sex offender no longer leased or rented such place. All such
information shall be provided in writing to the Village Police Chief on or
before December 31 of each calendar year.
§ 401-9 SLINGER CODE § 401-11
1:246
§ 401-12. Exception for placements under Wisconsin Statutes.
To the extent required by § 980.135, Wis. Stats., and notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions of this chapter, the Village of Slinger hereby exempts
and may not enforce any portion thereof that restricts or prohibits a sex
offender from residing at a certain location or that restricts or prohibits a
person from providing housing to a sex offender against an individual who
is released under § 980.08, Wis. Stats., or against a person who provides
housing to such individual, so long as the individual is subject to supervised
release under Ch. 980, Wis. Stats., the individual is residing where he or
she is ordered to reside under § 980.08, Wis. Stats., and the individual is in
compliance with all court orders issued under Ch. 980, Wis. Stats.
§ 401-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 404
SMOKING
C. Notice to property owner. A sex offender shall tell any property owner
from whom the sex offender intends to lease or rent any place,
structure, mobile home, trailer or any part thereof, that the sex offender
is a sex offender as defined in § 401-3A, prior to entering into any lease
or rental arrangement.
A. Injunction. If a sex offender or property owner violates any provision of
this chapter the Village may, in addition to all other rights and remedies
allowed by law or this chapter, refer the matter to the Village Attorney
to bring an action in the name of the Village in circuit court to seek a
temporary restraining order, temporary injunction or permanent
injunction against such sex offender or property owner to prevent them
from violating the terms of this chapter or to take any action, or prevent
any action, necessary for compliance with the terms of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person, firm or entity who violates any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture not to
exceed $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment thereof, shall be committed to jail for a period not to exceed 90
days. Each violation and each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Neither the issuance of a citation nor the
imposition of a forfeiture hereunder shall preclude the Village from
seeking or obtaining any and all legal and equitable remedies available
by law or this chapter.
§ 401-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 401-13
1:247

ARTICLE I
Prohibited in Certain Premises
[Adopted as Sec. 9.18 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 404-1. Statutory authority; adoption by reference.
Section 101.123, Wis. Stats., including such amendments, renumbering and
recodification as may be made thereto from time to time, is hereby adopted
by reference, with the exception of the maximum penalties for violation
described therein.
§ 404-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this section or the state laws incorporated herein,
shall be subject to the penalties and remedies as provided in § 1-2 of the
Village Code, provided that any forfeiture imposed shall not be less than the
minimum forfeiture described in § 101.123(8), Wis. Stats.
§ 404-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-2
1:249
Chapter 412
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 307.
§ 404-2 SLINGER CODE § 404-2
1:250
ARTICLE I
Collection and Storage
[Adopted as Sec. 7.06 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 412-1. Purpose.193
The purpose of this article is to promote the safe and proper disposal
of household solid waste generated by single- and two-family properties.
Multiple-family and commercial/industrial properties receiving collection
January 1, 1997, in the Village of Slinger are also included, provided there
has been no change in ownership since that time.
§ 412-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED GARBAGE CONTAINER — The Village of Slinger ninety-gallon
container purchased by the property owner from the Village.
BULKY WASTE — Any item whose large size precludes the item from being
placed in the approved container. Items include, but are not limited to:
chairs, tables, mattresses, sofas, other furniture type items, carpet, etc.194
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any substance or combination of substances
including any waste of a solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous form which may
cause or significantly contribute to any increase in mortality or an increase
in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible hazard to human health
or the environment because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics. This term includes, but is not limited
to, substances which are toxic, corrosive, flammable, irritants, strong
sensitizers or explosives as determined by the Department of Natural
Resources.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner, boiler,
clothes dryer, clothes washer, dehumidifier, dishwasher, freezer, furnace,
microwave oven, oven, refrigerator or stove.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, and institutional facilities and properties. This term includes
multiple-family dwellings greater than two units per building/property.
Refuse collection for these properties shall not be provided by the Village.195
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
local governmental unit, as defined in § 66.0131(1)(a), Wis. Stats., state
agency or authority or federal agency.
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
194. Editor's Note: The definition of "curb tender system," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 412-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 412-2
1:251
POST-CONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in § 291.01(7)
Wis. Stats., waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high volume industrial waste, as defined in § 289.01(17),
Wis. Stats.
SOLID WASTE — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(33), Wis. Stats.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(35), Wis.
Stats.
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
STORAGE — The interim containment of solid waste in an approved manner
after generation and prior to collection and ultimate disposal.
STORAGE AREA — The area where persons place containers during noncollection
days as well as areas where containers are set out on collection
day.
§ 412-3. Separation of recyclable materials.
Participants in the Village of Slinger refuse collection program shall
separate those materials required by Article II of this chapter of the Village
of Slinger Code.
§ 412-4. Refuse storage areas.
Storage areas shall be kept in a nuisance- and odor-free condition. Litter
shall not be allowed to accumulate. Collection crews will not be responsible
for cleaning up loose materials from any containers which have become
ruptured or broken due to wet conditions, animals, vandalism or other
cause. The occupant and/or owner shall be responsible for cleaning any
litter caused by their solid waste.
§ 412-5. Collection of refuse.
A. Placement for collection. Residential solid waste in the approved
container shall be placed immediately behind the curb of the public
street or adjacent thereto and must be accessible.196
B. Winter collection. During winter months, solid waste shall neither be
placed on top of the snow bank, nor shall solid waste be placed in the
roadway. The owner shall either shovel out an area behind the curb in
which to place the solid waste or shall place the solid waste in their
driveway.
C. Multiple-family units, commercial and industrial properties shall make
the container accessible to the collection crews.197
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 412-2 SLINGER CODE § 412-5
1:252
§ 412-6. Weight limits.
The approved ninety-gallon container shall not exceed 200 pounds.
§ 412-7. Restriction on time of placement.
§ 412-8. Recyclable material prohibited from garbage and refuse.200
Recyclable items as defined in Article II of this chapter are prohibited from
being placed in regular garbage containers.
§ 412-9. Noncollectable materials.
D. At no time shall collection crews be expected to exit the vehicle to move
containers to allow collection. It shall be the responsibility of all
persons, firms or corporations to ensure that containers are accessible
by collection crews.198
A. All solid waste garbage and recyclables shall be placed at the curb no
earlier than 24 hours prior to or by 7:00 a.m. on the day of pickup.
B. All containers that are tagged for violation of this article shall be
removed from the curbside collection point within 24 hours after the
regular collection time.
C. Village employees or employees of licensed contractors shall not enter
any structures to remove solid waste.199
A. Dead animals, except animal parts from food preparation for human
consumption.
B. Undrained food wastes.
C. Hot ashes.
D. Hazardous waste.
E. Toxic waste.
F. Explosives or ammunition.
G. Drain or waste oil.
H. Flammable liquids.
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II); said ordinance also repealed original Sec. 7.06F, Collection of bulky waste, which
immediately followed.
199. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (4), concerning white goods, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 412-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 412-9
1:253
§ 412-10. Refuse from outside the municipality.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, deposit,
or cause to be deposited, for collection, any waste or refuse not generated
within the corporate limits of the Village. This provision shall apply to
building/construction waste brought into the Village by businesses who
receive Village refuse services.
§ 412-11. Illegal dumping and disposal prohibited.201
The Public Works Department shall together with the Village of Slinger
Police Department be responsible for investigating illegal dumping
violations in compliance with this section, and shall work with the
contractor and Director of Public Works and assure the effect of the solid
waste/recycling program in the Village of Slinger.
I. Tires.
J. Biohazard wastes (medical waste).
K. Building/construction waste.
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 412-9 SLINGER CODE § 412-11
1:254
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted as Sec. 7.07 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 412-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote recycling, composting, and
resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling
program, as provided in § 287.11, Wis. Stats., and Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm.
Code.
§ 412-13. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted as authorized under § 287.09(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
§ 412-14. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall apply.
§ 412-15. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where
any terms or requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting,
the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a
provision of this article is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard
in Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the ordinance provision is
unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin Statutes
and the Ch. NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this
article or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
article.
§ 412-16. Applicability.
The requirements of this article apply to all persons within the Village of
Slinger.
§ 412-17. Administration.
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Village of Slinger
Department of Public Works.
§ 412-18. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
§ 412-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 412-18
1:255
BIMETAL CONTAINER — A container for carbonated or malt beverages that
is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfied one of the following criteria:
HDPE — High-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code No. 2.
LDPE — Low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code No. 4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven,
refrigerator or stove.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A property containing three or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.202
NEWSPAPER — A newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This
term does not include multiple-family dwellings.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
OTHER RESINS OR MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins labeled by the SPI
code No. 7.
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
local governmental unit, as defined in § 66.0131(1)(a), Wis. Stats., state
agency or authority of federal agency.
PETE — Polyethylene terephalate, labeled by the SPI code No. 1.
PLASTIC CONTAINER — An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a retail sale.
POST-CONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in § 291.01(07),
A. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
B.
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
C.
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 412-18 SLINGER CODE § 412-18
1:256
Wis. Stats., waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in § 289.01(17),
Wis. Stats.
PP — Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code No. 5.
PS — Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code No. 6.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code No. 3.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes lead acid batteries; major
appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper
or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers;
magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including
those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple
resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bimetal containers.
SOLID WASTE — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(33), Wis. Stats.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(35), Wis.
Stats.
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact
root balls.203
§ 412-19. Separation of recyclable materials.
Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the
following materials from post-consumer waste:
A. Lead acid batteries.
B. Major appliances.
C. Waste oil.
D. Yard waste.
E. Aluminum containers.
F. Bimetal containers.
G. Corrugated paper or other container board.
203. Editor's Note: Original Subsections K, Separation requirements exempted; L, Care of
separated recyclable materials; M, Management of lead acid batteries, major appliances,
waste tires, waste oil and yard waste, which followed this section, were repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 412-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 412-19
1:257
§ 412-20. Preparation and collection of recyclable materials.204
Except as otherwise directed by the Director of Public Works, occupants
of single-family and multifamily residences shall place commingled
recyclables in the provided container. Recyclable materials shall be stored
in a manner which protects them from wind, rain and other inclement
weather conditions.
§ 412-21. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings.
H. Foam polystyrene packaging.
I. Glass containers.
J. Magazines.
K. Newspaper
L. Office paper.
M. Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and
other resins or multiple resins.
N. Steel containers.
O. Waste tires.
A. Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of
the following to recycle the materials specified in §§ 412-15 through
412-20:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semiannually thereafter about the established
recycling program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
(4) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to
meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites,
locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company,
including a name, address and telephone number.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if the post-consumer
waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 412-19 SLINGER CODE § 412-21
1:258
§ 412-22. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
nonresidential facilities and properties.
§ 412-23. Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials separated
for recycling.
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid
waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in §§ 412-15 through
412-20 which have been separated for recycling, except waste tires may be
burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
§ 412-24. Enforcement.
licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for
recycling the materials specified in §§ 412-15 through 412-20 from solid
waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
A. Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties
shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in
§§ 412-15 through 412-20:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the established recycling
program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties if the
post-consumer waste generated within the facility or property is
treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural
Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in
§§ 412-15 and 412-20 from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
article, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the Village
of Slinger may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling,
post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites
and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records
relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when
necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse
access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized representative
of the Village of Slinger who requests access for purposes of inspection,
and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct,
hamper or interfere with such an inspection.
§ 412-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 412-24
1:259
B. Any person who violates a provision of this article may be issued a
citation by a Village of Slinger police officer. The issuance of a citation
shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law
relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other
ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not
preclude the issuance of a citation under this subsection.
C. Any person who violates § 412-23 shall be punishable as set forth on the
Schedule of Deposits; see also § 1-2 of the Code for the general
penalty.205
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 412-24 SLINGER CODE § 412-24
1:260
ARTICLE III
Scavenging
[Adopted as Sec. 9.24 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 412-25. Scavenging of garbage or recyclables prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than authorized Village employees
or a person(s) having written authorization from the Director of Public
Works or Police Chief to go through, sort or take anything from any garbage,
refuse or recyclable materials that have been set out in bags or other
approved containers for the purpose of being picked up by Village
contracted collection personnel or contractors.
§ 412-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 412-25
1:261
Chapter 419
STORMWATER UTILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 526.
§ 419-1. Findings and declaration of policy.
The Village of Slinger finds that the management of stormwater and other
surface water discharges within and beyond the Village of Slinger is a
matter that affects the health, safety and welfare of the Village, its citizens
and businesses and others in the surrounding area. Failure to effectively
manage stormwater affects the sanitary sewer utility operations of the
Village by, among other things, increasing infiltration to the sanitary sewer.
In addition, surface water runoff causes erosion of lands, damages to
businesses and residences, sedimentation, and other environmental
damage in the Village of Slinger. In order to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public, the Village of Slinger is exercising its authority to
establish a Stormwater Utility for stormwater management services. The
Village is acting under the authority of §§ 61.34, 61.36, 62.04, 62.11, 62.16,
62.175, 62.18, 66.0621, 66.0627, 66.0809, 66.0811 and 66.0821, Wis. Stats.
§ 419-2. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Stormwater Utility in the Village of Slinger.
The operation of the stormwater utility shall be managed by the Director of
Public Works, under the supervision and control of the Village Board.
§ 419-3. Authority.
The Village, acting through the stormwater utility, may acquire, construct,
lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge,
repair, conduct, manage and finance such facilities, operations and
activities, as are deemed by the Village to be proper and reasonably
necessary for a system of storm and surface water management. These
facilities may include, without limitation due to enumeration, surface and
underground drainage facilities, watercourses, retaining walls, ponds,
streets, roads, ditches and such other facilities as will support a stormwater
management system.
§ 419-4. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be interpreted liberally to secure the ends sought hereby and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes.
§ 412-25 SLINGER CODE § 419-5
1:262
§ 419-5. Definitions.
The following terms, whenever they occur in this chapter, are defined as
follows:
CHARGE — The fee imposed under this chapter for the rendering of
stormwater utility services by the Village.
DEVELOPED PROPERTY — Property that has been altered from its natural
state by the addition of any improvements such as a building, structure, or
impervious surface.206
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The person appointed by the Village
Board to manage the Stormwater Utility.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit or apartment providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EQUIVALENT RUNOFF UNIT or ERU — The basic unit by which the
stormwater utility charge is calculated under this section. It is the statistical
average horizontal impervious area ("impervious area") of all single-family
residential parcels within the Village of Slinger on the date of the
establishment of the Stormwater Utility. The impervious area includes,
but is not limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions,
patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, pavement, gravel, compacted clay,
and loading docks.
IMPERVIOUS AREA — A surface that has been compacted or covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by rainwater. The
term includes, without limitation due to enumeration, all areas covered by
structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, parking
lots, pavement, gravel, compacted clay, and loading docks, all as measured
on a horizontal plane.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A lot or parcel of land, with
improvements such as a building, structure, other impervious areas as
defined in this § 419-5, grading or substantial landscaping, which is not
specifically zoned residential as shown on the Village's Official Zoning Map,
including, but not limited to, commercial, industrial, institutional, mixeduse,
mobile home parks and governmental property, and excluding publicly
owned rights-of-way.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A lot or parcel of land developed exclusively
for residential purposes and specifically shown as residential zoning on the
Village's Official Zoning Map.
STORMWATER UTILITY — The utility established under this chapter for the
purpose of managing stormwater and imposing charges for the recovery of
costs connected with such stormwater management.
206. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 419-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-5
1:263
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY — Property that is not developed by the
addition of an improvement such as a building, structure, other impervious
area, as defined in this § 419-5, grading or substantial landscaping which
increases stormwater runoff.
§ 419-6. Basis of charge.
§ 419-7. Customer classification.
§ 419-8. Charge formulas.
A. By this chapter, the Village Board is establishing the customer
classification and basis for computation of charge for stormwater
services for each lot and parcel within the Village of Slinger. The actual
charges to be imposed pursuant to these rate classifications and any
future changes in those rates shall be made by resolution. A schedule of
current rates, following approval by the Village Board shall be
maintained and on file in the Clerk's office.207
B. The rate classifications used to distribute the costs of the stormwater
program among utility customers shall be based on the equivalent
runoff unit (ERU). The number of ERUs assigned to each parcel shall be
assessed based upon the impervious area or dwelling units as
reasonably determined by the Director of Public Works, except for
undeveloped properties and public right-of-way, which shall be exempt
from the utility charge.
A. Customer classes. For the purposes of imposing the stormwater
charges, all lots and parcels within the Village are classified into the
following customer classes:
(1) Residential. Lots or parcels within the Village specifically zoned as
residential in accordance with the zoning set forth by ordinance
shall be assigned one ERU for every dwelling unit on each lot or
parcel.
(2) Nonresidential. Lots or parcels within the Village not specifically
zoned as described above shall be considered as nonresidential by
this chapter. Said lots or parcels shall be assigned one ERU for
every 4,300 square feet of impervious surface area.
B. Parcel classification. The Director of Public Works shall assign a
customer classification to each lot and parcel within the Village of
Slinger.
C. ERU. The ERU is established to be 4,300 square feet.
A. Residential. The charges imposed for single family properties shall be
one ERU for every dwelling unit on each lot or parcel, i.e.:
207. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 419-5 SLINGER CODE § 419-8
1:264
§ 419-9. Fees.208
The Village Board shall, by resolution, set or adjust the ERU fee to reflect
the costs of the stormwater management program.209
§ 419-10. Budget-excess revenues.
The Village shall separately account for the Stormwater Utility finances.
The Director of Public Works shall prepare an annual budget, which is to
include all operation and maintenance costs, costs of borrowing and other
costs related to the operation of the utility. The budget is subject to approval
by the Village Board. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year
will be deposited in a stormwater maintenance fund, which will be used to
defer the costs of capital improvements or to retire debt.
§ 419-11. Billing.
Residential parcel charge = (Number of dwelling units) x ERU fee
B. Nonresidential. The charges imposed for nonresidential properties
shall be one ERU for every 4,300 square feet of impervious surface area
on each lot or parcel, i.e.:
Nonresidential parcel charge = (impervious surface area/4,300
square feet) x ERU fee
C. Right-of-way. Public highway, road and rail right-of-way shall be exempt
from the stormwater utility fee.
D. Impervious area measurement. The Director of Public Works shall be
responsible for determining the impervious area of nonresidential
parcels based on the reasonably available information, including, but
not limited to, data supplied by the Village Assessor, Director of Public
Works, aerial photography, property owner, tenant, or developer or site
plan approved by the Village Plan Commission. The Director of Public
Works may require additional information as necessary to make the
determination. The number of ERUs on any lot or parcel shall be
updated by the Director of Public Works based on any additions to the
impervious area as approved through the building permit process.
A. Bills. Stormwater utility charges shall be billed to the owner/occupant
of each property as set forth by resolution. The property owner/
occupant shall be responsible for payment of the Stormwater Utility
charge.
208. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
209. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 15.11, Credits and adjustments, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 419-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-11
1:265
§ 419-12. Review and appeals.
B. Late payment. Failure to pay the charges when due will be subject to a
late payment charge of 1% per month that will be added to bills not paid
within 20 days of issuance.
C. Unpaid charges. In addition to any other method of collection allowed
by law, unpaid charges may be assessed as a lien against the property
pursuant to § 66.0821, Wis. Stats.
A. Adjustments. A customer may be eligible to have the number of ERUs
assigned to its property adjusted under the conditions described
below:210
(1) Undeveloped property. Undeveloped properties may be eligible to
reduce the number of ERUs assigned to the property.
(2) Nonresidential property. Nonresidential customers who believe the
number of ERUs allocated to their property to be incorrect may
submit an adjustment request to the Director of Public Works. The
allocated ERUs may be adjusted if the owner can provide
information showing the square footage calculation for all
impervious surface area located on the lot or parcel.
B. Review and appeal procedure.
(1) Within 30 days of a properly submitted request to the Director of
Public Works for a review of the number of ERUs allocated to the
property, the Director of Public Works shall issue a written decision
as to whether the request for adjustment should be granted, denied
or granted in part. The written decision shall also set forth the
reason or reasons for such decision. The decision shall be sent to
the customer by certified mail and shall be provided to the Village
Board.
(2) Within 30 days of receipt of the written decision from the Director
of Public Works, an appeal of the determination rendered by the
Director of Public Works may be submitted by the property owner
to the Village Clerk. The Village Board shall review the decision and
hold a hearing thereon. The customer shall be notified of the date
of the hearing by certified mail.
(3) Upon review, the Village Board shall determine whether the
decision rendered by the Director of Public Works should be
upheld, rejected, or modified. The customer shall be allowed to
present evidence at the hearing. The final determination made by
the Village Board shall be made in writing and set forth, in detail,
the reasons for its decision and shall inform the customer by
210. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 419-11 SLINGER CODE § 419-12
1:266
Chapter 425
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
certified mail. The Village Board may, at its discretion, require
access to the property to assist in its determination.
(4) In reviewing a decision, the Village Board shall apply the
considerations set forth in § 66.0821(4)(c), Wis. Stats.
C. Effective date. Any ERU adjustment or reduced multiplier granted shall
thereafter be used to calculate the customer's user charges. The
reduction shall only apply for the period of time subsequent to the filing
of the request for adjustment. There shall be no retroactive adjustment
for user charges imposed prior to the filing of the request.
§ 419-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-12
1:267

ARTICLE I
Grades
[Adopted as Sec. 8.01 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 425-1. Establishment.
The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established and
described by the Board and shall be recorded by the Village Clerk in his
office. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked on until the grade
thereof is established.
§ 425-2. Altering grade prohibited.
No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley or sidewalk or public
ground or any part thereof, unless authorized or instructed to do so by the
Board.
§ 425-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-2
1:269

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction and Repair
[Adopted as Sec. 8.02 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 425-3. Authority of Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works may from time to time determine where
sidewalks shall be constructed and establish the width, determine the
materials, prescribe the methods of construction of standard sidewalks and
set the standards for different streets.
§ 425-4. Permit required.211
No public sidewalks shall hereafter be constructed without first obtaining
a permit from the Village. The application for a permit shall be made in
writing upon a form furnished by the Village Clerk.
§ 425-5. Inspections.212
Upon the laying of a sidewalk, the permit holder shall notify the Director
of Public Works or Building Inspector, who shall inspect the sidewalk to
determine whether it conforms with the requirements of the permit. If the
sidewalk does not conform, the Director of Public Works shall order the
work to be removed and replaced in accordance with specifications on file
with the Village Clerk within 20 days after the service of a written notice
ordering such removal. If the owner refuses to replace such construction
within 20 days after the service of the notice therefor, the Village may
perform the work and assess the cost of such work against the owner.
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 425-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-5
1:271

ARTICLE III
Curb and Gutter Construction
[Adopted as Sec. 8.03 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 425-6. Initial construction.
Initial installation of curb and gutter in new subdivisions shall be the
responsibility of the developer.
§ 425-7. Cost.
§ 425-8. Corner lots.
Owners of corner properties shall pay for the initial costs of curb and gutter
as described in § 425-7.
A. The cost of the initial curb and gutter shall be borne by the abutting
property owner or developer.
B. The cost of replacing curb and gutter shall be borne by the Village
unless damaged by others.213
213. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 425-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-8
1:273

ARTICLE IV
Street Excavations
[Adopted as Sec. 8.04 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 425-9. Permit required.
No person shall excavate in any street, alley or public ground without a
permit therefor from the Village Clerk.
§ 425-10. Protection of public.
No permit shall be issued unless the method of construction and location
of the work to be performed shall be such that the public safety and
convenience will not be impaired. The person seeking the permit shall
erect such barriers, warning lights and signs as to adequately inform the
traveling public of the nature and location of the work being performed.
§ 425-11. Repair or street opening.
The person to whom a permit is issued under this section shall complete
the work involved as soon as possible and shall immediately repair all
pavements, gutters and sidewalks in as good a condition as before the
opening and as may be directed by the Building Inspector.
§ 425-12. Bond.
A. Performance bond. A performance bond may be required to pay for the
cost of filling excavations and properly replacing the street surface.214
B. Indemnity bond or certificate of insurance. In addition, the applicant
shall file with the Village Clerk an indemnity bond or certificate of
insurance, conditioned that the application will indemnify and save
harmless the Village, its officers and agents against all injuries and
property damage resulting or arising from any negligence on the part of
the applicant or his agents, employees or subcontractors and that such
applicant or his insurer shall notify the Village in writing 10 days prior
to the cancellation of any certificate of insurance afforded hereunder.
C. Annual bond. An annual bond may be given under this section covering
all street excavation work done by the principal for one year beginning
January 1, which shall be conditioned as specified herein and in an
amount determined by the Village Board as necessary to adequately
protect the public and the Village.
214. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 425-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-12
1:275

ARTICLE V
Street Use; Obstructions and Encroachments
[Adopted as Secs. 8.08, 9.04 and 8.05 of the former Municipal
Code]
§ 425-13. Use of sidewalks.
§ 425-14. Obstructing streets and sidewalks.216
A. For pedestrian travel. All sidewalks within the Village shall be used for
pedestrian and nonmotorized travel.215
B. For horses and motorized vehicles. No sidewalk within the Village shall
be used by horses or any motorized vehicle except for snow removal or
crossing with a lawn mower.
A. No person shall stand, sit, loaf or loiter or engage in any sport or
exercise on any public street, alley, sidewalk, bridge or public ground
within the Village in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free
passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or
hinder free ingress or egress. No person shall encroach upon or in any
way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds
land dedicated to public use, or any part thereof, or permit such
encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public
way adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or occupant,
except as provided in Subsection B.
B. Exceptions. The prohibition of Subsection A shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Signs and clocks attached to buildings which project not more than
six feet from the face of such building and which do not extend
below any point 10 feet above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(2) Awnings which do not extend below any point seven feet above the
sidewalk, street or alley.
(3) Public utility encroachments authorized by the Village.
(4) Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded
which do not extend more than three feet on a sidewalk, provided
such goods, wares, etc., do not remain thereon for more than three
hours.
(5) Building materials when placed upon the street, alley or sidewalk
upon conditions prescribed by the Building Inspector. He may
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 425-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-14
1:277
require such materials to be protected by barricades or appropriate
lights.
§ 425-14 SLINGER CODE § 425-14
1:278
ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted as Secs. 8.06 and 9.07(B) of the former Municipal Code]
§ 425-15. Duty of owner or occupant.217
The owner or occupant of any lot or lands within the Village abutting upon
a public street along the line of which sidewalk shall have been constructed
shall, whenever such sidewalk shall become encumbered with snow or ice,
clear the entire width of the same therefrom within 24 hours after the
cessation of each storm. In case it is impossible or impractical to remove
the ice and snow therefrom, the owner or occupant shall treat the same
with sand, salt or some other substance continuously until removed so that
such sidewalk will not be slippery or dangerous to pedestrians. In case of
the failure of any such owner or occupant to remove snow and ice from the
entire width of the sidewalk or to treat the ice as described above within
the time aforesaid, if the Director of Public Works determines to do so, the
expense of such removal or treatment shall become a special tax or charge
against the property, to be collected in the manner hereinafter specified.
§ 425-16. Assessment of cost.218
After clearing or treating any such sidewalk as provided in this section,
the Director of Public Works shall file with the Village a written report
containing a description of such lot or tract charged and the amount of
expense chargeable to the same. The Clerk shall thereupon make out and
mail to the owner of such lot or tract, at his last known address, an itemized
statement of the cost, and when paid, the amount of bill shall be credited to
the Village General Fund. If not paid within 30 days, such charges shall be
placed on the tax roll pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
§ 425-17. Exceptions.
The Village Board may, at its sole discretion, recognizing unusual
topographical and geographical circumstances, provide sidewalk ice and
snow removal on properties having rear lot sidewalks.
§ 425-18. Deposit of snow and ice; discharge of water.
A. Snow or ice removed from private property shall not be deposited or
stored in any manner that will interfere, obstruct or limit vehicle or
pedestrian vision, movement upon or access to any public right-of-way
in the Village of Slinger, or in any other way make the Village right-ofway
unsafe.219
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 425-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-18
1:279
(1) The subsection does not apply to Village employees in the course of
their employment by the Village.
(2) Persons cleaning snow or ice from sidewalks, as required by
§ 425-18A above, where the sidewalk abuts the paved portion of a
street on one side and abuts a building on the other may deposit the
snow or ice on the street as near as possible to the curb.
B. Discharge of water. No person shall cause or permit water to be
discharged from a sump pump, downspout, or other source in such a
manner that it causes ice to form on any sidewalk, street, alley or other
public way.
C. Removal by Village. If snow or ice is not removed from sidewalks or
treated as required by § 425-15 above, or if snow or ice is deposited on
any sidewalk, alley, parkway, public place or street in the Village in
violation of Subsection A or B above, the Village may remove or cause to
be removed all such snow or ice and the person in charge of the
premises from which the snow or ice accumulated or from which the
snow or ice was removed and so deposited or from which the water was
discharged shall be charged for the cost of such removal. If not paid
within 30 days, such charges shall be placed on the tax roll pursuant to
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
§ 425-18 SLINGER CODE § 425-18
1:280
ARTICLE VII
Culvert Installation and Roadway Access
[Adopted as Sec. 8.09 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 425-19. Permit required.
No person shall make any excavation or fill or install any culvert or make
any other alteration in any Village street or in any manner disturb any street
without an access permit therefor from the Village.
§ 425-20. Application.
Every application for a permit for excavation or fill, installation of a culvert,
or any other alteration in any Village street shall be upon forms provided
by the Village and shall be accompanied by such surveys, drawings or other
materials and information as may be required by the Village Engineer in
the filing of the application. Any requests for a permit for excavation or fill,
installation of a culvert or any other alteration on other than Village streets
shall be obtained from the highway authority maintaining the highway.
§ 425-21. Limitations and standards.
A. No access to a roadway shall be permitted within 100 feet of the
intersection of the right-of-way lines of an arterial street intersecting
with another arterial street, or within 50 feet of the intersection of the
right-of-way lines of any other street intersecting with an arterial street.
B. In acting upon applications for access permits the Village Engineer
shall, giving due regard to road surfaces, topography, visual
obstructions, road grades, speed limits, traffic patterns and the
development of nearby areas, determine whether the proposed access
location is consistent with public safety, sound planning principles and
the logical extension of roads and public services.
C. Culvert size. All culverts, drain pipes, or other similar conduits placed
on, in and along the public right-of-way of a Village street to provide
private drive-way access shall be constructed in such a manner and of
such materials as to provide adequate provision for the flowage of
water naturally accumulating or flowing along the ditches and rights-ofway
of such roads. Such culverts shall not be less than 12 inches in
diameter (unless a greater size is required by state or county
authorities) and shall be of sufficient length so as to prevent injury to
persons or property in the use of the roadways or the entrances to or
exits from the roadways over across such culverts provided that no
culvert shall be less than 20 feet nor more than 35 feet in length. The
Village Engineer is vested with the authority to determine the size of
the culvert required in excess of the minimums here in prescribed. End
culvert pieces or sections, when required, shall be the type designated
by the Village Engineer.220
§ 425-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-22
1:281
§ 425-22. Fees.221
Every application for an access permit shall be accompanied by a fee as
set by the Village Board to cover administrative expenses including an
inspection of the location of the proposed access.
§ 425-23. Culvert installation.222
The applicant or his authorized agent shall provide and install each culvert
placed in the right-of-way of a public street as required by the Village. The
ditch shall be properly prepared to accept the placement of the culvert
along the abutting property line. The culvert shall be installed in
accordance with the access permit and with standard construction
practices, including sufficient gravel placed thereon to afford safe ingress
and egress prior to the use thereof.
§ 425-24. Repairs and replacement of existing culverts.
The Village Engineer shall investigate existing culverts or other drain pipes
placed within the rights-of-way of Village streets and if he determines that
an existing culvert is not properly maintained so as to provide for the proper
flow of water, he may order the abutting property owner to repair the
same or to remove such culvert and replace it with a culvert meeting the
requirements of this article.
§ 425-25. Street damage.223
The permit approved by the Village shall be subject to the condition that
the work shall be performed and completed to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer.
§ 425-26. Removal of debris required; violation; special assessment
collected as tax.
All debris carried onto any Village street shall be removed by the
responsible party immediately or be subject to the provisions of § 86.07,
Wis. Stats. If any culvert is installed or any excavation or fill or any other
alteration is made in violation of this ordinance, the street may be restored
to its former condition by the Village and cost of materials, labor and
equipment incurred by the Village shall be billed to the abutting property
owner and, if not paid within 30 days, shall be a special assessment to be
collected as a tax against the real estate property.
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 425-22 SLINGER CODE § 425-26
1:282
ARTICLE VIII
Assessments for Public Works
[Adopted as Sec. 8.10 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 425-27. Assessment philosophy.
§ 425-28. Method of calculating assessments.
A. All new infrastructure installed in new development may be the
responsibility of the developer.224
B. All new infrastructure installed in existing developments will be
assessed against the benefiting properties.
C. The replacement and/or repair of existing infrastructure will be paid for
by the Village of Slinger.
D. Repair or replacement of infrastructure damaged due to negligence,
neglect, or accident will be the sole responsibility of the negligent
party.225
A. The standard method of calculating an assessment for the initial
installation of infrastructure is as follows:
Assessable Cost
Assessable
Frontage
= Per-foot assessment
B. While the above-referenced assessment methodology will be the
standard assessment method for all infrastructure construction, the
Village Board at its sole discretion may also consider the following
methods based on the specific project:
(1) Front-foot basis.
(2) Per-parcel basis.
(3) Area-wide basis.
(4) Square-footage basis.
(5) Impervious surface (hydraulic acre) basis.
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 425-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-29
1:283
§ 425-29. Payment of assessment.226
The owner of property being assessed for the initial construction of any
infrastructure will be allowed to pay his assessment in terms determined by
the Village Board.
§ 425-30. Special considerations.
A. Multi-fronted lots. Assessment shall be adjusted for multi-fronted lots in
the following manner:
(1) Frontage on any constructed side in excess of 100 feet shall receive
a 75% forgiveness, up to a maximum of 100 feet.
B. Prohibited access. Any lot with frontage on a road where access to said
road is prohibited by a governing body shall have the assessment for
said infrastructure deferred until such time as the property is permitted
access to said road. At that time the property owner will be required to
pay the assessment as described in Subsection C.
C. Irregularly shaped lots. Irregularly shaped lots shall be assessed on the
following basis:
(1) When special assessments are based on a front-foot basis the
calculation for irregularly shaped lots (including triangular-shaped
lots) shall be as follows:
(a) When the actual front footage of an irregularly shaped lot is
greater than or less than the average width of all lots being
assessed (measured by dividing the total lot area being
assessed by the average lot width being assessed) the
assessable footage will be based on the average lot width. In no
event shall the assessment be for less than 75 feet of frontage.
[1] If a multi-fronted lot is split in two or more parcels prior to
completion of construction and assessment, the
assessment shall be calculated for the original lot and split
equally between the newly created lots.
[2] Nothing in this article shall be deemed a waiver of the
Village's ability to impose assessments in a manner
consistent with Wisconsin law or other applicable law,
including but not restricted to the Village's ability to
exercise police powers under Chs. 61 and 66, Wis. Stats.227
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 425-29 SLINGER CODE § 425-31
1:284
§ 425-31. Infrastructure replacement.
The Village shall, at its sole discretion and expense, replace and/or repair
infrastructure after the initial construction.
§ 425-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-31
1:285
Chapter 432
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 432-1. Private swimming pools regulated.
No person shall construct, install or enlarge a residential swimming pool
not enclosed in a permanent building in the Village of Slinger, except in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 432-2. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SWIMMING POOL — Any depression in the ground, either temporary or
permanent, or a container of water, either temporary or permanent, and
either above or below the ground, in which water of more than 18 inches in
depth is contained and which is used primarily for the purpose of bathing or
swimming, and such pools shall be constructed to be accessory structures.
§ 432-3. Permit required.
No person shall construct, install, enlarge or alter any private swimming
pool unless a building permit has first been obtained from the Building
Inspector. Application shall be on forms provided by the Building Inspector,
and shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale showing the following:
A. Location of pool on lot, distance from lot lines and distance from
structure.
B. Location of septic tank, filter bed and sewer lines.
C. Pool dimensions and volume of water in gallons.
D. Location of fence, type, size and gate location.
E. Site plan shall clearly indicate existent overhead and underground
wiring relative to proposed pool.228
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 425-31 SLINGER CODE § 432-4
1:286
§ 432-4. Temporary swimming pools.
A temporary swimming pool is defined as any container of water which is
used primarily for the purpose of bathing or swimming and is intended to be
erected during the summer months and removed during the winter months.
§ 432-5. Permit fee.
A schedule of permit fees for building, electric and plumbing shall be set by
the Village Board of the Village of Slinger by a duly enacted resolution and
may be changed from time to time.
§ 432-6. Construction and maintenance requirements.
A. No temporary swimming pool shall be erected without first obtaining a
pool permit from the Building Inspector. The one-time permit fee will
apply. Reinspection is required at no additional cost, provided the
swimming pool is installed in the same location, is of the same size and
depth, and same material as specified on the original permit.
B. A temporary swimming pool with a depth greater than 18 inches shall
be enclosed by a fence as provided in § 432-7, unless covered with a full
cover that is secured with a draw string or locking mechanism.
C. A receptacle that provides power for a recirculating pump motor shall
be connected to a GFCI outlet that is no closer than six feet from the
pool.229
D. The location of a temporary pool will follow the provisions of §§ 432-3,
432-6 and 432-7.
A. No pool shall be located, erected or constructed unless it is done in
accordance with this chapter.
B. No connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer or septic system.
C. Gaseous chlorination system shall not be made use of as a disinfection
method for pool water.
D. No aboveground pool shall be located less than 15 feet from any septic
system.
E. No lighting installed around swimming pools shall throw rays onto
adjacent properties.230
F. Swimming pools and pool decks shall comply with the yard
requirements for principal structures in the district in which they are
located.231
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
230. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
231. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 432-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-7
1:287
§ 432-7. Fences and gates.
§ 432-8. Electrical requirements.233
All electrical installations shall require separate permits and shall be
governed by the Village of Slinger Electrical Code or Wisconsin Electrical
Code. If overhead flood or other artificial lights are used to illuminate the
pool at night, such lights shall be shielded to direct light only on the pool.
Swimming pools shall not be constructed directly over or under electric
transmission lines. All electrical connections to a swimming pool shall be
properly grounded so that no electrical current can be discharged into any
part of the swimming pool or the surrounding fence pursuant to NEC Article
680.
§ 432-9. General.
No pool shall be so operated as to create a nuisance, a hazard, an eyesore,
or otherwise result in a substantial adverse effect on neighboring
properties.
A. Pools within the scope of the ordinance not enclosed within a
permanent building shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less
than four feet not more than six feet in height and of sufficient strength
to prevent access to the pool. Sidewalls of aboveground pools four feet
high may be used in lieu of fence. Such fence shall not be able to pass a
sphere larger than four inches in diameter through any part of the
fence. Gates or doors shall be equipped with a self-closing and selflatching
device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times
when not in actual use.232
B. Aboveground pools with self-providing fencing to prevent unguarded
entry will be allowed without separate additional fencing, provided the
self-provided fence is of minimum required height and design as
heretofore specified.
C. Permanent access from grade to above ground pools having stationary
ladders, stairs or ramps shall have not less than equal safe guard
fencing and gates.
D. Location of fencing required shall be subject to all other applicable
ordinances. In any case:
(1) No fence shall be located, erected, constructed or maintained
closer to a pool than three feet.
(2) The wall of the house or building faced to a pool may be
incorporated as a portion of such fence.
232. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 432-7 SLINGER CODE § 432-10
1:288
§ 432-10. Violations and penalties.234
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as set forth in § 1-2 of the Code. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 441
TREES AND SHRUBS
§ 441-1. Purpose.
It is the policy of the Village of Slinger to regulate and control the planting,
pruning, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in or
upon all public and terrace areas of the Village of Slinger; to eliminate and
guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons
using the streets, sidewalks or other public areas; to promote and enhance
the beauty and general welfare of the Village; to prohibit the undesirable
and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance of trees and
shrubs located in public areas; and to guard all trees and shrubs, both
public and private, within the Village against the spread of disease, insects
and pests.
§ 441-2. Authority and power.
A. Control over public property.
(1) The Parks, Public Works and Forestry Superintendent, under the
control of the Parks, Recreation and Forestry Board, shall direct the
purchase, planting, maintenance, trimming, pruning and removal
of all trees and shrubs in any public area of the Village of Slinger.
No person shall plant, maintain, prune or remove any tree or shrub
on or from any public land without permission from the Village.
(2) The terms "public property," "public area" and "public land" shall
include all land within the Village of Slinger and not privately
owned or not controlled by any other political subdivision.
(3) The Parks, Recreation and Forestry Department shall utilize
various species of trees and shrubs, with consideration given to
length of life, beauty, freedom from disease, care requirements,
growth habits and future effect of roots on adjacent sidewalks and
structures, cleanliness and other pertinent characteristics. Only
such species as are approved by the Parks, Recreation and Forestry
Department shall be planted on public lands.235
B. Control over private property.236
234. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
235. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 432-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-2
1:289
§ 441-3. Planting.
(1) Any tree or shrub which overhangs any public land of the Village,
and which, in the opinion of the Village Parks, Public Works and
Forestry Superintendent and the Parks, Recreation and Forestry
Department, endangers the life, health, safety or property of the
public, may be declared a public nuisance. The owner shall be
notified in writing of the existence of the nuisance and given a
reasonable time for its correction or removal. If not corrected,
action may be taken by the Village to abate the nuisance, and the
cost assessed to the owner.
(2) The owner of property abutting upon any street or sidewalk shall
trim branches of all trees standing along such street or sidewalk so
that the branches shall not obstruct the passage of light from any
streetlight to the adjacent street or sidewalk, and shall also trim all
branches which overhang any street, alley or sidewalk so that there
shall be a clear height of 15 feet above the street and sidewalk. The
owner shall remove all dead, decayed or broken trees, limbs or
branches which overhang any street or sidewalk.
A. Purpose. The planting, care and protection of the trees within the
Village of Slinger is desirable for the purposes of beauty, shade,
comfort, noise abatement and economic betterment.
B. Tree planting program. The Village Parks, Public Works and Forestry
Superintendent shall recommend to the Board a program for tree
planting, care and protection of trees and shrubs on public areas within
the Village.
C. Planting.
(1) Any person proposing to plant trees or shrubs in public areas shall
first have the size, species and variety of trees and shrubs, and the
manner of planting submitted to the Village for approval before
beginning such work.
(2) There shall be a recommended distance of 30 feet to 50 feet
between terrace area trees depending upon the size of the tree and
other factors, as determined by the Village Parks, Public Works and
Forestry Superintendent. Parkway trees shall be planted equal
distance between the sidewalk and back of the curb or proposed
back of curb. In terrace areas less than three feet wide, planting
will not be permitted. Terrace area trees shall be a minimum of 35
feet from an intersection.
(3) Evergreen trees shall not be planted in a terrace area.
D. Unlawfully planted trees.
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 441-2 SLINGER CODE § 441-3
1:290
§ 441-4. Pruning.
§ 441-5. Removal.
(1) No trees, plants or shrubs shall be planted within any terrace or
public area without the authorization and approval of the Village
Parks, Public Works and Forestry Superintendent and Village
Board.
(2) The Parks, Public Works and Forestry Superintendent shall notify
the abutting owner, in writing, listing the unlawfully planted trees,
plants or shrubs, ordering their removal, and establishing a
reasonable time within which such removal shall be accomplished.
In the event that removal is not accomplished within the time
specified, the Village may remove such trees, plants or shrubs and
assess the costs thereof to the owner.
A. Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any terrace, public area or upon
any private premises adjacent to any public right-of-way or public areas
shall be kept pruned so that the lowest branches projecting over the
public street provide a clearance of not less than 15 feet. The Village
Parks, Public Works and Forestry Superintendent may waive the
provision of this section for newly planted trees if determined that they
do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight
or endanger public safety.
B. The necessity of the pruning may be determined by the Village Parks,
Public Works and Forestry Superintendent.
C. Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches of any tree shall not be less
than 15 feet. No tree shall be permitted to grow in such a manner as to
obstruct the proper diffusion of light from any public lamp. All trees and
shrubs shall be pruned to prevent their branches from encroaching on
any public sidewalk.237
A. No person shall cut down or in any manner destroy or injure any living
tree or planting upon any public street, terrace, highway or other public
ground in the Village of Slinger.238
B. Hazardous, obstructive and infected trees. Any tree or part thereof,
whether alive or dead, which the Village Parks, Public Works and
Forestry Superintendent shall find to be infected with Dutch elm
disease, emerald ash borer or found to be hazardous so as to endanger
the public or other trees growing within the Village of Slinger, or to be
injurious to sidewalks or other public improvements, shall be removed.
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
238. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 441-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-5
1:291
Chapter 453
VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED
§ 453-1. Abandoned vehicles.
No person shall abandon any vehicle unattended within the Village of
Slinger for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle
to reasonably appear to be abandoned.
C. Public utilities, under the supervision and direction of the Village Parks,
Public Works and Forestry Superintendent, are authorized to prune
trees upon and overhanging the streets, avenues, highways, sidewalks
and other public lands in the Village of Slinger, to prevent the branches
of such trees from coming in contact with wires and cables. Such
utilities are authorized to cut roots of trees and shrubs under the
streets, avenues, highways, sidewalks and other public lands in the
Village of Slinger in order to construct, maintain and operate their
facilities in and about the Village.239
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home, as
defined in § 340.01, Wis. Stats., whether or not vehicle is registered
under Ch. 341, Wis. Stats.240
B. Presumption of abandonment. Any vehicle left unattended for more
than 24 hours on any public street or grounds or on private property is
deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance, provided that the
vehicle shall not be deemed abandoned under this section if left
unattended on private property out of public view by permission of the
owner or lessee.241
C. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed
building; a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner authorized by the Village; or a
vehicle parked in a metered or paid lot or parking space where the
required fee has been paid or meter activated.
D. Exemption.
(1) Any owner or person operating a registered vehicle which shall
become disabled or inoperative for any reason, and who should be
unable to cause removal of such vehicle from any street, alley,
239. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
240. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
241. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 441-5 SLINGER CODE § 453-1
1:292
§ 453-2. Removal and impoundment.
highway or public place, not otherwise regulated as a restricted
parking, stopping or standing zone, shall, within 12 hours of such
occurrence, notify the Police Department of the location of the
vehicle and shall transfer and deliver clear title for said vehicle to
the Village together with a fee as set by the Village Board to offset
the cost of towing and junking charges and shall be exempt from
the provisions of this chapter.
(2) When so requested by the owner or person in charge of a vehicle,
the Police Department shall be authorized to order such vehicle
removed and junked directly from the scene of disablement by the
Village or contractor engaged by the Village for towing of disabled
vehicles. The provisions of § 453-2H shall apply to any vehicle
removed under this subsection.
E. Inoperable, wrecked or discarded vehicles. No person owning or having
custody of any partially dismantled, nonoperable, wrecked, junked or
discarded motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to remain on any
public highway, parking lot or ramp longer than 24 hours after
notification thereof by the Police Department. Notification shall be
accomplished by placing in a conspicuous place on the vehicle and by
mailing or serving upon the owner or occupant in charge of the
premises a written notice setting forth briefly the applicable provisions
of this section and the date of the notice. Any vehicle so tagged which is
not removed within 24 hours after notice is declared to be a public
nuisance and may be removed and disposed of as provided in this
Code.242
(1) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a motor vehicle in an
appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner authorized by the Village.
A. Removal and impoundment for sale. Any vehicle found abandoned in
violation of this chapter shall be impounded by the Police Department
until lawfully claimed or disposed of as provided in this section. If the
Chief of Police or his duly authorized representative determines that
towing costs and storage charges for the minimum period of 10 days'
impoundment after certified mail notice has been sent to the owner and
lienholders of record, as required by § 342.40(3)(c), Wis. Stats., would
exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked or sold prior
to the expiration of the impoundment period upon determination by the
Chief of Police that the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or any other
reason, provided that vehicles in excess of 19 model years of age shall
be sold or disposed of only by auction, sale or sealed bid in accordance
with Subsection D of this section.243
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 453-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-2
1:293
B. Minimum impoundment period. The minimum period of impoundment
or storage of a vehicle found in violation of this chapter shall be 10
days.244
C. Notice to owner. The police department removing or causing the
removal of any vehicle found in violation of this section shall within 10
days thereafter notify the owner and lien holders of record, by certified
mail, of the impoundment and of their right to reclaim the vehicle. The
notice shall set forth the information contained in § 342.40(3) Wis.
Stats., and shall state that the failure of the owner or lien holders to
exercise their rights to reclaim the vehicle shall be deemed a waiver of
all right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to sale of the
vehicle.
D. Sale. Each retained vehicle not reclaimed by the owner or lien holder
may be disposed of by sealed bid or auction sales as provided in
§ 342.40(3) Wis. Stats.
E. Sale to bar claims against vehicle. The sale of a motor vehicle under the
provisions of this section shall forever bar all prior claims thereto and
interest therein except as hereinafter provided.
F. Purchaser to remove vehicle. The purchaser of any vehicle in sealed bid
or auction sale under Subsection D shall have 10 days to remove the
vehicle from the storage area upon payment of a storage fee per the fee
schedule approved by the Village Board for each day the vehicle has
remained in storage after the second business day subsequent to the
sale date. Ten days after the sale, the purchaser shall forfeit all interest
in the vehicle and the vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned and may
be again sold.245
G. Request for list. Any listing of vehicles to be sold pursuant to this
section shall be made available by the Village Clerk to any interested
person or organization who makes a written request therefor, for a fee
per the fee schedule approved by the Village Board.246
H. Notice to Department. Within five days after sale or disposition of a
vehicle under this section, the Clerk shall advise the Department of
Transportation of such sale or disposition on a form supplied by the
Department.247
243. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
244. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
245. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
246. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
247. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 6.06L, Owner may file, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 453-2 SLINGER CODE § 453-3
1:294
§ 453-3. Storage of junked, unlicensed or inoperable vehicles.
A. Vehicle abandonment prohibited.
(1) No person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall accumulate or
store any junked, unlicensed, or inoperable motor vehicle, trailer,
semi-trailer, mobile home, or parts thereof, outside of any building
on any real estate, either public or private, located within the
corporate limits of the Village, except upon a permit issued by the
Village Planning Commission in accordance with Chapter 550,
Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Slinger. When any motor
vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, mobile home, or parts thereof, have
been left unattended in the Village for more than 24 continuous
hours, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public
nuisance.
(2) Penalty. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating the
provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, of the Code of the Village of Slinger
for each offense. Each day that the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer,
mobile home, or parts thereof shall be stored contrary to the
provisions hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.248
B. Removal of abandoned vehicles. In addition to issuing citations as
provided herein, the Chief of Police may cause the abandoned motor
vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, mobile home, or parts thereof, to be
removed to a suitable place of impoundment within five days of the date
of notice to remove said vehicle. The cost of such removal will be
charged to the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the property from
which it is removed.
C. Administrative review. Within five days of receipt of the notice to
remove the vehicle, a notified party may request a hearing before the
Village Clerk on the issue of whether the vehicle may be towed by the
Village.
D. Disposition of impounded vehicles. Any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer,
mobile home, or parts thereof, shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of as provided in this section except if it is deemed
by a duly authorized Village representative that the cost of towing and
storage charges for the impoundment would exceed the value of the
property impounded, the property may be junked or sold by the Village
prior to expiration of the impoundment period upon determination by
the Chief of Police having jurisdiction that the property is not stolen or
otherwise wanted for evidence or any other reason. All substantially
complete vehicles in excess of 19 model years of age shall be disposed
of in accordance with § 342.40(3)(c), Wis. Stats.
248. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 453-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-3
1:295
Chapter 460
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 460-1. Provisions of state laws adopted by reference.
E. Cost. The owner of any abandoned motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer,
mobile home, or parts thereof, except stolen property, is responsible for
abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle.
If the owner of any abandoned vehicle cannot be ascertained, the cost
of such removal will be charged to the owner of the property from
which such items are removed. Costs not recovered from the sale may
be recovered in a civil action by the Village against the owner of the
vehicle or placed on the tax roll as special assessment against the
property pursuant to Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Chs. 85, 110, 305 and 340 through 348, Wis. Stats.,
together with all related orders, rules and regulations of the
Department of Transportation contained within the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, describing and defining regulations with respect
to vehicles and traffic, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to
penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the
statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment are hereby adopted
and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute
incorporated in this section by reference is required or prohibited by
this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the
Wisconsin Statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of
this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic
on the highways, streets and alleys of the State of Wisconsin.
(1) Section 340.01, Words and phrases defined.
(2) Section 341.11(4), Display of registration certificate.
(3) Section 341.15, Display of registration plates.
(4) Section 341.16(4), Issuance of duplicate plates.
(5) Section 341.52(4), Reciprocity permits.
(6) Section 341.55, Penalty for misuse of plates.
(7) Section 341.57, Registration of finance companies and banks.
(8) Section 341.63, When registration is to be suspended.
(9) Section 342.05(4), Certificate of title required.
(10) Section 342.15(5),(6),(7)., Transfer of interest in vehicle.
(11) Section 342.23, Secured party's and owner's duties.
§ 453-3 SLINGER CODE § 460-1
1:296
(12) Section 342.30, 31, 34, Anti-theft and anti-fraud provisions.
(13) Section 343.01, Words and phrases defined.
(14) Section 343.305, Implied consent.
(15) Section 343.35, Surrender of licenses upon cancellations,
revocation or Suspension.
(16) Sections 342.45 to 343.46, Unlawful practices relative to licenses.
(17) Sections 343.60 to 343.72, Licensing of driver schools and
instructors.
(18) Section 343.73, Penalty.
(19) Section 344.01, Words and phrases defined.
(20) Sections 344.45 to 344.47, Penalties for violation of chapter.
(21) Section 344.51, Financial responsibility for domestic rented
vehicles.
(22) Section 345.01, Words and phrases defined.
(23) Sections 345.20 to 345.53, General provisions in traffic forfeiture
actions.
(24) Section 345.55, Traffic officers not to profit from arrests.
(25) Section 346.01, Words and phrases defined.
(26) Section 346.02, Applicability of this chapter.
(27) Section 346.03, Applicability of rules of the road to authorized
emergency vehicles.
(28) Section 346.04(1), (2).
(29) Sections 346.05 to 346.16, Driving, meeting, overtaking and
passing.
(30) Section 346.17, Penalty for violating §§ 346.04 to 346.16.
(31) Sections 346.18 to 346.21, Right-of-way.
(32) Section 346.22, Penalty for violating §§ 346.18 to 346.21.
(33) Sections 346.23 to 346.29, Drivers and pedestrians.
(34) Section 346.30, Penalty for violating §§ 346.23 to 346.29.
(35) Section 346.31 to § 346.35, Turning and stopping and required
signals.
(36) Section 346.36, Penalty for violating §§ 346.31 to 346.35.
§ 460-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-1
1:297
(37) Section 346.37 to § 346.42, Traffic signs, signals and markings.
(38) Section 346.43, Penalty for violating §§ 346.37 to 346.42.
(39) Sections 346.44 to 346.48, Required stops.
(40) Section 346.49, Penalty for violating §§ 346.44 to 346.48.
(41) Section 346.57(2), (3), (4)(A) to (C), Speed restrictions – first
offense in year.
(42) Sections 346.57(4)(D), (5), (6) to 346.595, Speed restrictions.
(43) Section 346.60, Penalty for violating §§ 346.57 to 346.595.
(44) Section 346.61, Applicability of sections relating to reckless and
drunken driving.
(45) Section 346.62(1), (3), Reckless driving – first offense in four years.
(46) Section 346.63(1), (3), (4), Operating under the influence of an
intoxicant – first offense in five years.
(47) Section 346.64, Employment of drunk operators – first offense.
(48) Section 346.65(1), (2), Penalty for violating §§ 346.62 to 346.64.
(49) Section 346.66, Applicability of sections relating to accident and
accident reporting.
(50) Sections 346.68 and 346.69, Duty upon striking unattended vehicle
– upon striking property or adjacent to highway – first offense
within a year.
(51) Sections 346.71, 346.72, 346.73, Duty to report accidents, etc.
(52) Section 346.70(4), Police and traffic agencies to report.
(53) Section 346.70(5), Falsifying reports – first offense within a year.
(54) Sections 346.77 to 346.81, Bicycles and play vehicles.
(55) Section 346.82, Penalty for violating §§ 346.77 to 346.81.
(56) Sections 346.87 to 346.94, Miscellaneous rules.
(57) Section 346.95, Penalty for violating §§ 346.87 to 346.94.
(58) Sections 347.01 to 347.05, General provisions.
(59) Sections 347.06 to 347.29, Lighting equipment.
(60) Section 347.30, Penalty for violating lighting equipment
requirements.
(61) Sections 347.35 to 347.49, Other Equipment.
§ 460-1 SLINGER CODE § 460-1
1:298
§ 460-2. Official Traffic Manual established.
The Village Board of the Village of Slinger shall establish the traffic limits
and regulations applicable to Village streets and portions thereof under
authority granted by § 349.06, Wis. Stats., as documented in the Village's
Official Traffic Manual.249
§ 460-3. Non-highway operation of motorcycles.
§ 460-4. Official traffic signs and signals.
The Village of Slinger is hereby authorized and directed to procure, erect
and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings
conforming to the rules of the State Department of Transportation as
required by state law. Signs shall be erected in such locations and manner
(62) Section 347.50, Penalty for violating §§ 347.35 to 347.49.
(63) Sections 348.01 to 348.02, Size, weight, load – general provisions.
(64) Section 348.05, Size and load.
(65) Section 348.11, Penalty for violating size and load limitations.
(66) Sections 348.15 to 348.20, Weight.
(67) Section 348.21, Penalty for violating weight limitations.
(68) Sections 348.25 to 348.27, Permits.
(69) Section 348.28, Permits to be carried – penalty.
(70) Section 349.21, Authority to regulate school bus warning lights.
B. Other laws adopted. There are also hereby adopted by reference the
following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, but the prosecution of
such offenses under this chapter shall be as provided in Chs. 305 and
340 to 350, Wis. Stats., and the penalty for violation thereof shall be
limited to a forfeiture as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I, of this Code: Chapters 84 and 110, Wis. Stats.
A. No person shall operate any nonlicensed motor bike, minibike, moped,
or other nonlicensed vehicle within the corporate limits of the Village of
Slinger. This chapter shall not apply to agricultural vehicles or
recreational vehicles registered by the State of Wisconsin.
B. This chapter is not intended to prohibit the lawful use of motorcycles on
the streets of the Village of Slinger, Wisconsin, or on private property
within the Village limits, which operation is incidental to lawful street
operation.
249. Editor's Note: The Official Traffic Manual is on file in the Police Department and the
Village offices.
§ 460-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-4
1:299
as the Village of Slinger shall determine will best effect the purpose of this
chapter and give adequate warning to users of the street or highway.
§ 460-5. No motorized or self-propelled vehicles.
No motorized or self-propelled vehicle, except those properly licensed by
the State of Wisconsin, shall be operated on Village streets, except for snow
removal or crossing with a lawn mower.
§ 460-6. Restrictions on heavy traffic.
The Village may place restrictions on use of certain streets by heavy traffic.
Streets with weight restrictions are enumerated in the Village's Official
Traffic Manual.
A. Removal of unofficial signs and signal. The Village of Slinger shall have
the authority granted by § 349.09, Wis. Stats., and is hereby directed to
order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed,
maintained, or displayed in violation of this chapter or § 346.41, Wis.
Stats., in any Village or state right-of-way. Any charge imposed on a
premises for the removal of such an illegal sign, signal or device shall
be reported to the Village Board at its next regular meeting for review
and certification.
A. Conditions for use. Only vehicles designed for and used by handicapped
persons, either self-propelled or power-driven, may be operated on
public sidewalks under the following conditions:
(1) The vehicle to be operated on public sidewalks by a handicapped
person must be inspected by the Chief of Police and determined to
be in good operating condition and an appropriate vehicle for safe
operation on a public sidewalk in the view of pedestrian traffic that
will be on sidewalks at the same time the handicapped vehicle will
be operated on the sidewalks.
(2) The person requesting to operate a vehicle on the public sidewalks
shall furnish to the Police Department a statement from a physician
licensed to practice medicine in any state, from a chiropractor
licensed to practice chiropractic medicine in any state, or from a
Christian Science practitioner residing in this state and listed in the
Christian Science Journal that the person is physically disabled by
any physical condition which renders the person unable to walk or
unable to walk without great difficulty. The physician's,
chiropractor's or practitioner's statement shall state whether the
disability is permanent or temporary and, if temporary, the opinion
of the physician, chiropractor or practitioner as to the duration of
the disability.
(3) No other vehicles of any description may be operated on public
sidewalks.
§ 460-4 SLINGER CODE § 460-6
1:300
§ 460-7. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture
as hereinafter provided, together with the cost of prosecution imposed as
provided in §§ 345.20 to 345.53, Wis. Stats.
§ 460-8. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 345.20 to 345.53, Ch. 800 and § 66.0114, Wis. Stats.
A. Suspension of operation. The Chief of Police or Village Engineer may
order the owner of any vehicle being operated on a street to suspend
operation if, in his judgment, such vehicle is causing or likely to cause
injury to streets or the public investment therein, except when § 84.20,
Wis. Stats., is applicable or when the vehicle is being operated pursuant
to a contract which provides that the Village shall be reimbursed for
any damage done to the street.
B. Special weight limitations. The Chief of Police or Village Engineer may
impose special weight limitations, in addition to existing standards, on
any street or portion thereof which, because of weakness of the
roadbed due to deterioration, climatic conditions, or other special or
temporary condition, would likely be seriously damaged or destroyed in
the absence of such special limitations.
A. Uniform offenses. Except as provided in § 460-7C for nonmoving traffic
offenses, forfeitures for violation of any provision of Chs. 341 to 348,
Wis. Stats., adopted by reference in § 460-1 of this chapter, shall
conform to the forfeitures for violation of the comparable state offense,
including any variations or increases for second offenses.
B. Miscellaneous. The forfeiture for violation of any provision of § 460-1B
of this chapter shall be per the forfeiture schedule approved by the
Village Board.
C. Parking. The forfeiture for violation of parking regulations shall be per
the schedule of forfeitures approved by the Village Board.250 The
forfeitures for offenses described in §§ 346.52 and 346.55, Wis. Stats.,
adopted by reference in § 460-1, shall be per the Village's schedule of
forfeitures approved by the Village Board.
A. Uniform citations. The uniform traffic citation promulgated under
§ 345.11, Wis. Stats., shall be used for all moving traffic violations
under this chapter.
B. Parking citations. Citations for all nonmoving traffic violations under
this chapter shall conform to § 345.28, Wis. Stats., and shall permit
direct mail payment of the applicable minimum forfeiture to the Village
250. Editor's Note: See Ch. 23, Citations.
§ 460-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-8
1:301
§ 460-9. Reference to statutes.
Reference to specific statutory sections wherever used in this chapter shall
mean the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 460-10. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All ordinances regulating traffic upon the streets, alleys and highways of the
Village of Slinger, Wisconsin, and all ordinance heretofore enacted by the
Village Board of the Village of Slinger, Wisconsin, are hereby repealed.
Chapter 468
WATER
within five days of the issuance of the citation in lieu of court
appearance.
C. Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited
penalty or money deposit under this chapter shall receipt therefor as
provided in § 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats. Every officer accepting a
stipulation under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the
provisions of §§ 343.27, 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2), Wis. Stats.
D. Forfeitures in treasury. Officer to post bond, qualify. Any officer
accepting deposits or forfeited penalties under this chapter shall
deliver them to the Village Treasurer within 20 days after receipt. Any
officer authorized to accept deposits under § 345.26, Wis. Stats., or this
chapter shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by § 19.01, Wis.
Stats., and filing an official bond in the sum of $1,000, as described by
§ 19.01.
§ 460-8 SLINGER CODE § 460-10
1:302
ARTICLE I
Administration of Municipal Utilities
[Adopted as Secs. 14.01 to 14.04, 14.06 and 14.07 of the former
Municipal Code]
§ 468-1. Management of utilities.
The Village Board is responsible. The Village Board shall manage, operate
and control the municipal utilities.
§ 468-2. Collection of utility receipts and expenditures.251
§ 468-3. Construction and maintenance of public utilities.252
The construction and maintenance of water facilities of the Village shall
conform to the "Standard Specifications for Sewer, Water and Electric
Construction in Wisconsin," which is adopted by reference and made part of
this article.
§ 468-4. Rates, rules and regulations.
The rates, rules and regulations of the Village water and electric utility and
all other rules and regulations or ordinances contained herein or hereafter
adopted shall be on file with and approved by the State Public Service
Commission.
§ 468-5. Management.253
A. Utility receipts shall be collected by the Village.
B. The Village Treasurer shall pay all utility expenditures as provided in
Wisconsin statutes.
A. The operation, management and control of the utility is hereby vested
in the Village Board of the Village of Slinger, hereinafter referred to as
the "approving agency." All records of the utility shall be kept in the
Village Hall or other officially designated place.
B. The rules, regulations and rates hereinafter set forth shall be
considered part of the contract with every individual or entity
connected to the water system. Said rules, regulations and rates may be
changed from time to time as determined by the Village Board and the
right is reserved to make special rates and contracts in all proper cases.
251. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
252. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
253. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-5
1:303
§ 468-6. Application.
The application of this article, its rules, regulations and rates shall apply to
all individuals, firms and corporations residing within the corporate limits
of the Village of Slinger and any person, firm or corporation by attachment
or otherwise coming in to locate within the Village of Slinger subsequent to
the effective date thereof.
C. The Village Board shall cause an annual audit of the books of the utility
made by certified public accountants and shall make the books and
records relating to the utility available for inspection during regular
business hours.
§ 468-5 SLINGER CODE § 468-6
1:304
ARTICLE II
Mandatory Connection
[Adopted as Secs. 14.05 and 14.12 of the former Municipal Code;
amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 468-7. Compliance required; mandatory connection.
Water connection.
§ 468-8. Water mains and valves, hydrants.
A. The owner of each house, building or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other habitation situated within
the Village presently occupied and capable of being serviced by the
municipal water system shall be hooked up to such water system within
30 days after notification from the Village Board or its designee. If
unoccupied, connection shall be completed before occupancy.
B. If any person fails to comply with Subsection A above, the Village, at its
option, may take any or all of the following actions, which are not
mutually exclusive, and which shall be in addition to other applicable
penalties and remedies:
(1) Impose damages, penalties and remedies pursuant to § 398-16,
Violations and penalties.
(2) Impose a standby charge for the period of time in violation of
Subsection A above, after providing at least 10 days' written notice
to any owner failing to make a connection to the water system, for
an amount equal to 100% of the water use charge of the required
size, payable monthly for the period in which the failure to connect
continues. Upon failure to make such payment, said charge shall be
imposed against the lot or parcel as a special charge pursuant to
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
(3) Any person who does not connect within such one-year period shall
be guilty of a separate violation for each and every day connection
to the service is not made. In addition, the Village may enforce the
provisions of this section through injunction. Any person who shall
violate the provisions of this section shall be subject to the
penalties as provided for in this Code.
A. Water mains and valves.
(1) Eight-inch and smaller: 100% assessable.
(2) Over eight inches: The Village shall pay the additional material
(pipe, valves and related apparatus) cost between the eight-inch
and that of a larger size pipe.
§ 468-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-8
1:305
(3) Laterals shall be 100% assessable, except as provided by Public
Service Commission Rules and Regulations.
B. Hydrants. Hydrants are 100% assessable.
§ 468-8 SLINGER CODE § 468-8
1:306
ARTICLE III
Protection of Public Water System
[Adopted as Sec. 14.08 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 468-9. Cross-connections.
A cross-connection shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which
contains potable water from the Village of Slinger water system, and the
other water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety,
or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system
to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential
between the two systems.
§ 468-10. Prohibition.
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the Village of Slinger may enter the supply or distribution system
of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have
been approved by the Village of Slinger and by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 468-11. Inspections; reinspections.254
It shall be the duty of the Village of Slinger to cause inspections to be made
of all properties served by the public water system where cross-connections
with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of the
inspections and reinspections, based on potential health hazards involved,
shall be as established by the Village of Slinger and as approved by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
§ 468-12. Right of entry.255
Upon presentation of credentials, the representatives of the Village of
Slinger shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to
examine any property served by a connection to the public water system
of the Village of Slinger for cross-connections. If entry is refused, such
representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under § 66.0119,
Wis. Stats. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so
served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on such property.
254. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
255. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-13
1:307
§ 468-13. Connections in violation; discontinuance of service.256
The Village of Slinger is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this
article exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice
and opportunity for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., except as provided
in § 468-14. Water services to such property shall not be restored until the
cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions
of this article.
§ 468-14. Emergency discontinuances.
If it is determined by the Village of Slinger that a cross-connection or
any emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires
immediate action and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Clerk
of the Village of Slinger and delivered to the customer's premises, service
may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity
for a hearing under Wisconsin Statutes within 10 days of such emergency
discontinuance.
§ 468-15. Adoption of State Plumbing Code by reference.
The Village of Slinger adopts by reference the State Plumbing Code of
Wisconsin.
§ 468-16. Article to supplement State Plumbing Code.257
This article does not supersede the State Plumbing Code but is
supplementary to it.
256. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-13 SLINGER CODE § 468-16
1:308
ARTICLE IV
Private Wells
[Adopted as Sec. 14.09 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 468-17. Purpose.
To protect public health, safety and welfare and to prevent contamination
of groundwater by assuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells, or
wells which may act as conduits for contamination of groundwater, or wells
which may be illegally cross-connected to the municipal water system, are
properly maintained or abandoned.
§ 468-18. Applicability.
This article applies to all wells located on premises served by the Village of
Slinger Municipal Water System. Utility customers outside the jurisdiction
of the municipal system may be required under contract agreement or
utility rule to adopt and enforce equivalent ordinances within their
jurisdictions for the purpose stated in § 468-17 above.
§ 468-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM — A community water system owned by a city,
village, county, town, town sanitary district or utility district, or a privately
owned water utility serving the foregoing.258
NONCOMPLYING — A well or pump installation which does not comply
with Wisconsin Administrative Code, Standards for Existing Installations,
and which has not been granted a variance pursuant to Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
PUMP INSTALLATION — The pump and related equipment used for
withdrawing water from a well including the discharge piping, the
underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling
faucets and well seals or caps.
UNSAFE — A well or pump installation which produces water which is
bacteriological contaminated or exceeds the drinking water standards of
Wisconsin Administrative Code, or for which a health advisory has been
issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
UNUSED — A well or pump installation which is not used or does not have
a functional pumping system.
WELL — An excavation or opening into the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving, or other methods for the purpose of obtaining groundwater
for consumption or other use.
258. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-19
1:309
WELL ABANDONMENT — The proper filling and sealing of a well according
to the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 468-20. Abandonment required.259
All wells on premises served by the municipal water system shall be
properly abandoned in accordance with § 468-22 of this article no later than
90 days to one year from the date of connection to the municipal water
system, unless a valid well operation permit has been issued under terms of
§ 468-21 of this article.
§ 468-21. Well operation permit.260
Owners of wells on premises served by the municipal water system wishing
to retain their wells for any use shall make application for a well operation
permit for each well no later than 60 days after connection to the municipal
water system. The Village may grant a permit to a well owner to operate
a well for a period not to exceed five years, providing all conditions of this
article are met. A well operation permit may be renewed by submitting an
application verifying that the conditions of this article are met. The Village,
or its agent, may conduct inspections and water quality tests or require
inspections and water quality tests to be conducted at the applicant's
expense using independent certified contractors to obtain or verify
information necessary for consideration of a permit application or renewal.
Permit applications and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the
Village Engineer. The following conditions must be met for issuance or
renewal of a well operation permit:
A. The well and pump installation shall meet or may be upgraded to meet
the Standards for Existing Installations described in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
B. The well and pump shall have a history of producing safe water
evidenced by at least one coliform bacteria sample taken. In areas
where the Department of Natural Resources has determined that
groundwater aquifers are contaminated with substances other than
bacteria, additional chemical tests may be required to evidence safety
of the water.
C. There shall be no cross-connections between the well's pump
installation or distribution piping and the municipal water system.
D. The well water shall not discharge into a drain leading directly to a
public sewer utility unless properly metered and authorized by the
sewer utility.
259. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
260. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-19 SLINGER CODE § 468-21
1:310
§ 468-22. Abandonment procedures.
§ 468-23. Violations and penalties.261
Any well owner violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished as set forth in § 1-2 of the Code. Each day of violation is a
separate offense. If any person fails to comply with this article for more than
30 days after receiving written notice of the violation, the municipality may
impose a penalty and cause the well abandonment to be performed and the
expense to be assessed as a special tax against the property.
E. The well shall have a functional pumping system and the proposed use
of the well water can be justified as reasonable in addition to water
provided by the municipal water system.
A. All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this article shall be done
according to the procedures and methods of Wisconsin Administrative
Code. All debris, pumps, piping, unsealed liners and any other
obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations shall be
removed prior to abandonment.
B. The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, may be required to obtain a
well abandonment permit prior to any well abandonment and notify the
Village Engineer in advance of any well abandonment activities. The
abandonment of the well may be observed or verified by inspection of
the municipal system.
C. An abandonment report form, supplied by the Department of Natural
Resources, shall be submitted by the owner to the Village Engineer and
the Department of Natural Resources within 30 days of the completion
of the well abandonment.
261. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-23
1:311

ARTICLE V
Water Emergencies
[Adopted as Sec. 14.13 of the former Municipal Code]
§ 468-24. Authority.
The Administrator or designee is hereby authorized to declare a water
emergency whenever, in the opinion of said issuing authority, conditions
exist which make it necessary in the interest of the public health, safety or
welfare to conserve or otherwise restrict the use of water supplied by the
Village.
§ 468-25. Declaration of emergency.
Notice of a water emergency shall be proclaimed by the issuing authority.
Once an emergency has been declared, said emergency and any rules or
regulations issued in conjunction therewith shall continue to exist until such
time as terminated by the issuing authority in the same manner as initially
proclaimed.
§ 468-26. Compliance with rules and regulations required.
Except as provided in § 468-27 below, it shall be unlawful for any person
to use or allow water to be used in any fashion contrary to the rules and
regulations issued under this article.
§ 468-27. Exception.262
Persons may apply to the Village Board for an exception from the provisions
of this article.
§ 468-28. Violations and penalties.263
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to
a penalty as set forth in § 1-2 of the Code.
262. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
263. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-28
1:313
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 481
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land division and development — See Ch.
495.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 526.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 468-28 SLINGER CODE § 468-28
1:314
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Finding of Fact, Statement of Purpose,
Title and General Provisions
§ 481-1. Statutory authorization.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in §§ 61.35 and 62.23,
Wis. Stats., for villages and cities; and the requirements in § 87.30, Wis.
Stats.
§ 481-2. Findings.
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this
municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general
welfare and tax base.
§ 481-3. Purpose.
This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
§ 481-4. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for the
Village of Slinger, Wisconsin."
§ 481-5. General provisions.
A. Protect life, health and property;
B. Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
C. Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
D. Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
F. Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
G. Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
H. Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and
result in conflicts between property owners; and
I. Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
A. Areas to be regulated. This chapter regulates all areas that would be
covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved by the Department
of Natural Resources. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood
§ 481-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-5
1:315
profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30,
and AH Zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A
and AO Zones. Regional Flood Elevations (RFEs) may be derived from
other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most
restrictive information shall apply.
B. Official maps and revisions.
(1) The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE,
AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or
any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the
FIS or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed
and approved by the DNR and FEMA through the Letter of Map
Change process (see Article VIII, Amendments) before it is
effective. No changes to RFEs on non-FEMA maps shall be effective
until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in
the office of the Village Zoning Administrator, Village of Slinger. If
more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive
information shall apply.
(2) Official Maps.
(a) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) numbers as follows:
55131C0232D and 55131C0253D dated November 20, 2013
and 55131C0227E, 55131C0229E, 55131C0231E,
55131C0233E, 55131C0234E, 55131C0261E dated October
16, 2015; with corresponding profiles that are based on the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated October 16, 2015, for
Washington County, Wisconsin, and incorporated areas,
including Volume 1 FIS No. 55131CV001B, Volume 2 FIS No.
55131CV002B, and Volume 3 FIS No. 55131CV003B.
(b) Flood Storage Map, Panel number 3, dated October 16, 2015,
approved by the WI DNR.
C. Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. The regional floodplain
areas are divided into four districts, as follows:
(1) The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to
carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE Zones
as shown on the FIRM.
(2) The Flood-Fringe District (FF) is that portion between the regional
flood limits and the floodway and displayed as AE Zones on the
FIRM.
(3) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that may be
covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does not have
a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH and AO
Zones on the FIRM.
§ 481-5 SLINGER CODE § 481-5
1:316
(4) The Flood Storage District (FSD) is that area of the floodplain
where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional
flood discharge.
D. Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on
the Official Floodplain Zoning Map and actual field conditions shall be
resolved using the criteria in Subsection D(1) or (2) below. If a
significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to
Article VIII, Amendments. The Zoning Administrator can rely on a
boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use
permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual
predevelopment field conditions and the basis upon which the district
boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments
required under this section. Disputes between the Zoning
Administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be
settled according to § 481-28C and the criteria in Subsection D(1) and
(2) below. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood
elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment or
revision pursuant to Article VIII, Amendments.
(1) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall
determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood
elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(2) Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, the location of the
boundary shall be determined by the map scale.
E. Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain
unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood
elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the
map is amended pursuant to Article VIII, Amendments.
F. Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this
chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable local, state and federal regulations.
G. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to
comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13),Wis. Stats., applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt
when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
H. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(1) This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under § 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694, Wis. Stats., for
counties; § 62.23, Wis. Stats., for cities; § 61.35, Wis. Stats., for
villages; or § 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate to floodplains. A more
§ 481-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-5
1:317
restrictive ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the
extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(2) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail.
I. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor
of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other
powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this chapter,
required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall
be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the
adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this chapter.
J. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in
this chapter are based on engineering experience and research. Larger
floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply or guarantee that nonfloodplain
areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding
and flood damages. This chapter does not create liability on the part of,
or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this
chapter.
K. Severability. Should any portion of this chapter be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected.
L. Annexed areas for cities and villages. The Washington County
floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall
remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all
annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance
which meets the requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, and 44
CFR 59-72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed
lands are described on the municipality's Official Zoning Map. County
floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the
purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the
municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall
show the regional flood elevation and the floodway location.
§ 481-5 SLINGER CODE § 481-5
1:318
ARTICLE II
General Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts
§ 481-6. General development standards.
§ 481-7. Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
§ 481-8. Watercourse alterations.
A. The community shall review all permit applications to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed
with flood-resistant materials; be constructed to minimize flood
damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding.
B. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above
standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home
parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any
development that meets the subdivision definition of this chapter and
all other requirements in § 481-26B. Adequate drainage shall be
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, are located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
A. No floodplain development shall:
(1) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development,
causing any increase in the regional flood height; or
(2) Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain
storage area lost.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the
proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the
regional flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other
adopted map, unless the provisions of Article VIII, Amendments, are
met.
A. No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped
floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing
all adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices,
and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal
permits. The standards of § 481-7 must be met and the flood-carrying
capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
§ 481-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-8
1:319
§ 481-9. Chapters 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., development.
Development which requires a permit from the Department, under Chs. 30
and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams
and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained
and amendments to the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to
Article VIII, Amendments.
§ 481-10. Public or private campgrounds.
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall meet the following provisions:
B. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of
the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to Article VIII,
Amendments, the community shall apply for a Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and
approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process.
A. The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services;
B. A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator;
C. The character of the river system and the campground elevation are
such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an impending flood can be
given to all campground occupants;
D. There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that
offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in
the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement
between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government
coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the
flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible
for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used
and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and
personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation;
E. This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which
time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the officials
identified in Subsection D to remain in compliance with all applicable
regulations, including those of the State Department of Health Services
and all other applicable regulations;
F. Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for
highway use are allowed;
G. The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for more
than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be
removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours;
§ 481-8 SLINGER CODE § 481-10
1:320
H. All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be
issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written
copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization
shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180
days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section;
I. The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the
campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this
section;
J. All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive
days must meet the applicable requirements in either Article III, IV or V
for the floodplain district in which the structure is located;
K. The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a
flood warning is issued; and
L. All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection,
electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells,
shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation.
§ 481-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-10
1:321

ARTICLE III
Floodway District (FW)
§ 481-11. Applicability.
This article applies to all floodway areas on the Floodplain Zoning Maps and
those identified pursuant to § 481-19D.
§ 481-12. Permitted uses.
The following open space uses are allowed in the Floodway District and the
floodway areas of the General Floodplain District if they are not prohibited
by any other ordinance; they meet the standards in §§ 481-13 and 481-14;
and all permits or certificates have been issued according to § 481-26:
§ 481-13. Standards for developments in floodway.
A. Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
B. Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas,
parking areas and airport landing strips.
C. Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting,
trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and
horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of § 481-13D.
D. Uses or structures accessory to open space uses or classified as historic
structures that comply with §§ 481-13 and 481-14.
E. Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with
§ 481-13D.
F. Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves,
dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of
transmission lines and pipelines, that comply with Chs. 30 and 31, Wis.
Stats.
G. Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with § 481-13C.
A. General.
(1) Any development in the floodway shall comply with Article II and
have a low flood damage potential.
(2) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects
of the proposal according to §§ 481-7 and 481-26B(3):
(a) A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular
to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will
obstruct flow; or
§ 481-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-13
1:323
(b) An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional
flood height.
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if the
project will cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or
downstream, based on the data submitted for Subsection A(2)
above.
B. Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or
functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by
permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
(1) Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood
damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage;
(2) Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a
total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area and the bottom of all such openings being no higher
than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with
screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
(4) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed
to or above the flood protection elevation; and
(5) It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
C. Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges
may be allowed by permit, if:
(1) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
(2) Construction meets the development standards of § 481-7.
D. Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be
allowed by permit, if:
(1) The requirements of § 481-7 are met;
(2) No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is
issued by the Department pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a
permit pursuant to § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, has been issued, if
applicable, and all other requirements have been met;
(3) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
(4) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
§ 481-13 SLINGER CODE § 481-14
1:324
§ 481-14. Prohibited uses.
All uses not listed as permitted uses in § 481-12 are prohibited, including
the following uses:
A. Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or
those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
B. Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to
property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic
life;
C. Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
D. Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are
removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational
areas and Department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable
provisions of local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code;
E. Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local
ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
F. Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
G. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted
under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code; and
H. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which
complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
§ 481-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-14
1:325

ARTICLE IV
Flood-Fringe District (FF)
§ 481-15. Applicability.
This article applies to all flood-fringe areas shown on the Floodplain Zoning
Maps and those identified pursuant to § 481-19D.
§ 481-16. Permitted uses.
Any structure, land use or development is allowed in the Flood-Fringe
District if the standards in § 481-17 are met, the use is not prohibited by
this or any other ordinance or regulation, and all permits or certificates
specified in § 480-26 have been issued.
§ 481-17. Standards for development in flood-fringe.
Section 481-7 shall apply in addition to the following requirements,
according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the flood-fringe
must meet the requirements of Article VI, Nonconforming Uses.
A. Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which
is to be newly constructed or moved into the flood-fringe shall meet or
exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in the floodfringe
must meet the requirements of Article VI, Nonconforming Uses.
(1) The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of § 481-17A(2)
can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional
flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the
structure.
(2) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood
elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood
elevation.
(3) Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure to
land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in Subsection
A(4).
(4) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection A(3) impractical, the
municipality may permit new development and substantial
improvements where roads are below the regional flood elevation,
if:
(a) The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to
the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood
event; or
§ 481-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-17
1:327
(b) The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation
plan.
B. Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed
on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation.
C. Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered
or moved into the flood-fringe shall meet the requirements of
§ 481-17A. Subject to the requirements of § 481-17E, storage yards,
surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and
property.
D. Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial
structure which is erected, altered or moved into the flood-fringe shall
have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation
or meet the floodproofing standards in § 481-30. Subject to the
requirements of § 481-17E, storage yards, surface parking lots and
other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate
warning system exists to protect life and property.
E. Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive,
or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or
aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or
floodproofed in compliance with § 481-30. Adequate measures shall be
taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during
flooding.
F. Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans, and:
(1) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger
public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed
essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be
permitted if they are designed to comply with § 481-30.
(2) Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower
elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the
regional flood elevation.
G. Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system,
pursuant to § 481-30C, to the flood protection elevation and meet the
provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
H. Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system, pursuant to § 481-30C, to the flood
protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Chs. NR 811 and
NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 481-17 SLINGER CODE § 481-17
1:328
I. Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood-fringe areas.
J. Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this chapter.
K. Manufactured homes.
(1) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize
flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation
plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local
emergency management authorities.
(2) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement
homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation; and
(b) Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood
(3) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing
parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved
manufactured homes shall meet the residential development
standards for the flood-fringe in § 481-17A.
L. Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are
on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and
ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring
requirements in § 481-17K(2) and (3). A mobile recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions.
§ 481-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-17
1:329

ARTICLE V
Other Floodplain Districts
§ 481-18. Establishment of other districts.
Other floodplain districts may be established under the ordinance and
reflected on the Floodplain Zoning Map. These districts may include general
floodplain districts and flood storage districts.
§ 481-19. General Floodplain District (GFP).
A. Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains
mapped as A, AO or AH Zones.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Pursuant to § 481-19D, it shall be determined whether the
proposed use is located within the floodway or flood-fringe.
(2) Those uses permitted in the Floodway (§ 481-12) and Flood-Fringe
(§ 481-16) Districts are allowed within the General Floodplain
District, according to the standards of § 481-19C, provided that all
permits or certificates required under § 481-26 have been issued.
C. Standards for development. Article III applies to floodway areas; Article
IV applies to flood-fringe areas; the rest of this chapter applies to either
district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones, the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the
conditions listed below, whichever is higher:
(a) At or above the flood protection elevation;
(b) Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the
structure; or
(c) The depth as shown on the FIRM.
(2) In AO/AH Zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to
guide floodwaters around structures.
D. Determining floodway and flood-fringe limits. Upon receiving an
application for development within the general floodplain district, the
Zoning Administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph
or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to
the general floodplain district limits; stream channel; and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the
property; fill limits and elevations; building floor elevations and
floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the
§ 481-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-19
1:331
§ 481-20. Flood storage district.
The flood storage district delineates that portion of the floodplain where
storage of floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to
reduce the regional flood discharge. The district protects the flood storage
areas and assures that any development in the storage areas will not
decrease the effective flood storage capacity which would cause higher
flood elevations.
proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation
and to determine floodway boundaries.
(a) A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in § 481-26B(3).
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on
the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
(c) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this article apply to all areas within the
Flood Storage District (FSD), as shown on the official Floodplain Zoning
Maps.
B. Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a flood storage
district must meet the applicable requirements in § 481-17.
C. Standards for development in flood storage districts.
(1) Development in a flood storage district shall not cause an increase
equal or greater than 0.00 of a foot in the height of the regional
flood.
(2) No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage
volume unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the
predevelopment ground surface and the regional flood elevation
shall be provided in the immediate area of the proposed
development to compensate for the volume of storage which is lost
(compensatory storage). Excavation below the groundwater table
is not considered to provide an equal volume of storage.
(3) If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be
developed unless the entire area zoned as flood storage district, on
this waterway, is rezoned to the Flood-Fringe District. This must
include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the
waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge
calculated without floodplain storage, as per Article VIII,
Amendments, of this chapter.
§ 481-19 SLINGER CODE § 481-20
1:332
(4) No area may be removed from the Flood Storage District unless it
can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the
floodplain.
§ 481-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-20
1:333

ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Uses
§ 481-21. General.
A. Applicability. These standards shall apply to all modifications or
additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any
structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this
chapter or any amendment thereto.
B. The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue, subject to
the following conditions:
(1) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure
shall be permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The words
"modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any
alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or
replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory
structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this
includes painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural
components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of
existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to
public utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged
structure are not considered maintenance. The construction of a
deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to
the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension,
modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over
a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to
the principal structure.
(2) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted,
and any future use of the property and any structure or building
thereon shall conform to the applicable requirements of this
chapter.
(3) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming
uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized
assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have
been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current
value those modifications represent.
(4) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the
structure would equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized
assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is
permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming
use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with § 481-17A. The costs of
§ 481-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-21
1:335
elevating the lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a building
with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are
excluded from the fifty-percent provisions of this subsection.
(5) No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed
50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed
unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming
structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be
provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with
§ 481-17A.
(6) If on a per-event basis the total value of the work being done under
Subsection B(4) and (5) equals or exceeds 50% of the present
equalized assessed value, the work shall not be permitted unless
the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming
structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be
provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with
§ 481-17A.
(7) Except as provided in Subsection B(8), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed
or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or
rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance
requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if
the total cost to restore the structure to its predamaged condition
equals or exceeds 50% of the structure's present equalized
assessed value.
(8) For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of
any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to
restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event,
provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are
met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of
construction.
(a) Residential structures.
[1] Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings,
columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must
meet the requirements of § 481-30B.
[2] Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy,
and shall be constructed with methods and materials
resistant to flood damage.
§ 481-21 SLINGER CODE § 481-21
1:336
§ 481-22. Floodway District.
[3] Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
[4] In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
[5] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in
§ 481-19C.
[6] In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from the structure.
(b) Nonresidential structures.
[1] Shall meet the requirements of § 481-21B(8)(a)[1] through
[6].
[2] Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
meet the standards in § 481-30A or B.
[3] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in
§ 481-19C.
C. A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure; the alteration will comply with § 481-13A; flood-resistant
materials are used; and construction practices and floodproofing
methods that comply with § 481-30 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of
§ 481-21B(8)(a) if it is determined that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the floodway
district, unless such modification or addition:
(1) Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance
requirements;
(2) Meets the requirements of § 481-21;
§ 481-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-22
1:337
§ 481-23. Flood-Fringe District.
(3) Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood
height;
(4) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed
pursuant to § 481-30, by means other than the use of fill, to the
flood protection elevation; and
(5) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is
enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
(a) The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect
or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of
floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two
openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least
one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area.
The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches
above the adjacent grade;
(b) The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
(c) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
(d) The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited
storage.
B. No new on-site sewage disposal system or addition to an existing on-site
sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by
a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be
allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair or
maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a
floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal
ordinances, § 481-30C and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable
water shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair
or maintenance of an existing well in the floodway district shall meet
the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, § 481-30C and
Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the
municipality and meets the requirements of § 481-17, except where
§ 481-23B is applicable.
B. Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection A would result in
unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for
human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential,
§ 481-22 SLINGER CODE § 481-23
1:338
§ 481-24. Flood storage district.
No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure in a flood storage area unless the standards outlined in § 481-20C
are met.
the Zoning Board of Appeals, using the procedures established in
§ 481-28, may grant a variance from those provisions of Subsection
A for modifications or additions using the criteria listed below.
Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than
the flood protection elevation may be permitted, if:
(1) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential
or commercial structures;
(2) Human lives are not endangered;
(3) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed;
(4) Flood depths shall not exceed two feet;
(5) Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and
(6) The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as
described in § 481-17E.
C. All new private sewage disposal systems or addition to, replacement,
repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet
all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, § 481-30C and Ch.
SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
D. All new well, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a
well shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter, § 481-30C and
Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 481-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-24
1:339

ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 481-25. Authority.
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/
appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance
adopted under § 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7),Wis. Stats., these officials shall
also administer this chapter.
§ 481-26. Zoning Administrator.
A. Duties and powers. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing
permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood
elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit
applications.
(2) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this chapter and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate.
(3) Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine
if substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
(4) Keep records of all official actions such as:
(a) All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved.
(b) Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations;
(c) Floodproofing certificates.
(d) Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances,
nonconforming uses and structures, including changes,
appeals, variances and amendments.
(e) All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
(f) List of nonconforming structures and uses.
(5) Submit copies of the following items to the Department regional
office:
(a) Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or
text amendments.
§ 481-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-26
1:341
(b) Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required
information including an annual summary of floodplain zoning
actions taken.
(c) Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments.
(6) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter
to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution.
Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the Department regional
office.
(7) Submit copies of amendments to the FEMA regional office.
B. Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new
development; repair, modification or addition to an existing structure;
or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and
water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the Zoning
Administrator shall include:
(1) General information.
(a) Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor.
(b) Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification.
(2) Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
(a) Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
(b) Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
(c) Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and street center lines;
(d) Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
(e) Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
(f) Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps;
(g) The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study, either
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD);
(h) Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to
§ 481-26 SLINGER CODE § 481-26
1:342
determine whether or not the requirements of Article III or IV
are met; and
(i) Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to § 481-7. This may include any of the
information noted in § 481-13A.
(3) Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All
hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the
state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical
adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved
by the Department.
(a) Zone A floodplains:
[1] Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the
standards in § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
[a] Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic
model shall be based on detailed study information for
downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to
determine adequate starting WSEL for the study.
[b] Channel sections must be surveyed.
[c] Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall
be used for the development of cross-section overbank
and floodplain mapping.
[d] A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross
sections is allowed in developed areas with additional
intermediate cross sections required at transitions in
channel bottom slope, including a survey of the
channel at each location.
[e] The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used.
[f] A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of
road is required at each structure.
[g] Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if greater
than 500 feet.
§ 481-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-26
1:343
[h] Standard accepted engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters for the base model
such as flow, Manning's 'n' values, expansion and
contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The
base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data
such as high-water marks to determine the
reasonableness of the model results. If no historical
data is available, adequate justification shall be
provided for any parameters outside standard
accepted engineering practices.
[i] The model must extend past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles
in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The
height difference between the proposed flood profile
and the existing study profiles shall be no more than
0.00 feet.
[3] Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross-section locations, floodway/
floodplain limits based on best available topographic data,
geographic limits of the proposed development and
whether the proposed development is located in the
floodway.
[a] If the proposed development is located outside of the
floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on
the regional flood elevation.
[b] If any part of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to show
the difference between existing and proposed
conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients
remain the same as in the existing model, unless
adequate justification based on standard accepted
engineering practices is provided.
(b) Zone AE floodplains.
[1] Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be
based on § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
[a] Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be
reproduced to ensure correct transference of the
model data and to allow integration of the revised data
§ 481-26 SLINGER CODE § 481-26
1:344
to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised reach. If data from the
effective model is available, models shall be generated
that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to
within 0.1 foot.
[b] Corrected effective model. The corrected effective
model shall not include any man-made physical
changes since the effective model date, but shall
import the model into the most current version of
HEC-RAS for Department review.
[c] Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The existing
model shall be required to support conclusions about
the actual impacts of the project associated with the
revised (post-project) model or to establish more upto-
date models on which to base the revised (postproject)
model.
[d] Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised
(post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the
existing model and any proposed changes to the
topography caused by the proposed development. This
model shall reflect proposed conditions.
[e] All changes to the duplicate effective model and
subsequent models must be supported by certified
topographic information, bridge plans, construction
plans and survey notes.
[f] Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to
the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream
of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the
effective model and result in water surface elevations
and top widths computed by the revised models
matching those in the effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised reach as required. The
effective model shall not be truncated.
[3] Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be
submitted to the Department for review which meets the
following conditions:
[a] Consistency between the revised hydraulic models,
the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the
revised flood profiles, topographic work map,
annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway
Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans.
§ 481-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-26
1:345
[b] Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour
interval, and a planimetric map showing the
applicable items. If a digital version of the map is
available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM
may be more easily revised.
[c] Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and
0.2% annual chance floodplains and floodway
boundaries.
[d] If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all
supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission along with the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and
State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with
FEMA mapping specifications.
[e] The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the
effective floodplain boundaries.
[f] All cross sections from the effective model shall be
labeled in accordance with the effective map and a
cross-section lookup table shall be included to relate
to the model input numbering scheme.
[g] Both the current and proposed floodways shall be
shown on the map.
[h] The stream center line or profile baseline used to
measure stream distances in the model shall be visible
on the map.
(4) Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter
shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may
be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient
cause.
C. Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used and no
building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified,
repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of
compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, except where no
permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises, or part thereof, and the proposed use conform to the
provisions of this chapter;
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit;
§ 481-26 SLINGER CODE § 481-26
1:346
§ 481-27. Zoning agency.
§ 481-28. Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, created under § 62.23(7)(e),Wis. Stats., for
cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the
purposes of this chapter. The Board shall exercise the powers conferred by
Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The Zoning
Administrator shall not be the secretary of the Board.
(3) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance
shall be issued within 10 days after written notification that the
permitted work is completed;
(4) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill,
lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with
the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the requirements of § 481-30 are met.
D. Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit, the
applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state and
local agencies, including but not limited to those required by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers under § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
A. The Planning Commission shall:
(1) Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator; and
(2) Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments
to this chapter, maps and text.
B. The Planning Commission shall not:
(1) Grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by
the Zoning Board of Appeals; or
(2) Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the
governing body.
A. Powers and duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
(1) Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter;
(2) Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map;
and
§ 481-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-28
1:347
(3) Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
ordinance standards.
B. Appeals to the Board.
(1) Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by
any officer or department of the municipality affected by any
decision of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise
provided by the rules of the Board by filing with the official whose
decision is in question and with the Board a notice of appeal
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is
in question shall transmit to the Board all records regarding the
matter appealed.
(2) Notice and hearing for appeals including variances.
(a) Notice. The Board shall:
[1] Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
[2] Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing;
and
[3] Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the Department regional office at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing.
(b) Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Board shall:
[1] Resolve boundary disputes according to § 481-28C;
[2] Decide variance applications according to § 481-28D;and
[3] Decide appeals of permit denials according to § 481-29.
(3) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
(a) Be made within a reasonable time;
(b) Be sent to the Department regional office within 10 days of the
decision;
(c) Be a written determination signed by the chairman or
secretary of the Board;
(d) State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's
decision;
(e) Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part,
§ 481-28 SLINGER CODE § 481-28
1:348
dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the
variance application; and
(f) Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Board
proceedings.
C. Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board
in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries:
(1) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or
detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall
prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may
be examined;
(2) The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical
evidence to the Board; and
(3) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the
zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location
to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to
Article VIII, Amendments.
D. Variance.
(1) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards
of this chapter if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
(a) Literal enforcement of the ordinance will cause unnecessary
hardship;
(b) The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and
unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or
premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be
amended;
(c) The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
(d) The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter in
§ 481-3.
(2) In addition to the criteria in Subsection D(1), to qualify for a
variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be
met:
(a) The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
(b) Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than 1/2
acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed
below the RFE; and
§ 481-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-28
1:349
§ 481-29. To review appeals of permit denials.
(c) Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall
not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall
not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts, and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of the chapter.
(3) A variance shall not:
(a) Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district;
(b) Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or
loss;
(c) Be granted for a hardship which is self-created;
(d) Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the
area;
(e) Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or
map(s) required in Article VIII, Amendments; and
(f) Allow any alteration of a historic structure, including its use,
which would preclude its continued designation as a historic
structure.
(4) When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and property
and that flood insurance premiums could increase up to $25 per
$100 of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance
record.
A. The Planning Commission (§ 481-27) or Board shall review all data
related to the appeal. This may include:
(1) Permit application data listed in § 481-26B;
(2) Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 481-19D;
(3) Data listed in § 481-13A(2) where the applicant has not submitted
this information to the Zoning Administrator; and
(4) Other data submitted with the application or submitted to the
Board with the appeal.
B. For appeals of all denied permits, the Board shall:
(1) Follow the procedures of § 481-28;
(2) Consider zoning agency recommendations; and
(3) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
§ 481-28 SLINGER CODE § 481-29
1:350
§ 481-30. Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or
uses.
C. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the Board
shall:
(1) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing
an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after
amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal
arrangements are made with all adversely affected property
owners as per the requirements of Article VIII, Amendments; and
(2) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly
demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase, provided
no other reasons for denial exist.
A. No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the
applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure
or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA
floodproofing certificate.
B. For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or
variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
(1) Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(2) Meets or exceeds the following standards:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(1) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces, and other regional flood factors;
(2) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(3) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement;
(4) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and
(5) Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters.
§ 481-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-31
1:351
§ 481-31. Public information.
A. Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
B. All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
C. Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real
property is in.
§ 481-31 SLINGER CODE § 481-31
1:352
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ 481-32. Obstructions or increases; when allowed.
Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made
to this chapter, the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and
water surface profiles, in accordance with § 481-33.
§ 481-33. General.
The governing body shall change or supplement the floodplain zoning
district boundaries and this chapter in the manner outlined in § 481-34
below. Actions which require an amendment to the ordinance and/or
submittal of a Letter of Map Change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to,
the following:
A. In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall
be permitted unless the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the
Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and water surface
profiles, in accordance with § 481-33. Any such alterations must be
reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
B. In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the Official
Floodplain Maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in
accordance with § 481-33.
A. Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any
increase in the regional flood height;
B. Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations
on the FIRM;
C. Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in
§ 481-5B(2);
D. Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height
at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying
outside the floodplain;
E. Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
floodplain maps;
F. Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by § NR
116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by
the municipality; and
G. All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines
or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood-fringe that is based
on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
§ 481-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-34
1:353
§ 481-34. Procedures.
Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any party according
to the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats., for cities and villages. The petitions
shall include all data required by §§ 481-19D and 481-26B. The land use
permit shall not be issued until a Letter of Map Revision is issued by FEMA
for the proposed changes.
A. The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a
public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The
amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the
Department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The
amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of § 62.23, Wis.
Stats., for cities and villages or § 59.69, Wis. Stats., for counties.
B. No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by
the Department.
C. All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow
causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding
easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely
affected property owners and notify local units of government before
the amendment can be approved by the governing body.
§ 481-34 SLINGER CODE § 481-34
1:354
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 481-35. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be
unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall
expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction,
forfeit to the municipality a penalty not to exceed a maximum of $50 per
day per violation, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of
continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of
this chapter is a public nuisance, and the creation may be enjoined and the
maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state
or any citizen thereof pursuant to § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 481-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-35
1:355

ARTICLE X
Terminology
§ 481-36. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this chapter shall have
their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their
common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary.
§ 481-37. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given
area.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A facility, structure, building or use
which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure
or building.
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
ALTERATION — An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or
modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a
structure.
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or
VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a onepercent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and
depicted on a FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade,
i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited filling
§ 481-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-37
1:357
between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this
chapter.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in
area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping
trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if
required, and ready for highway use.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction and
the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAYS or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first usable
floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has
a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of
any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of
buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the
storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the
installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems
or water supply facilities.
DRY LAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land
outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood
elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in
the floodway.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which is
determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood
§ 481-37 SLINGER CODE § 481-37
1:358
event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified
number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate flood
hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones
and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map
forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood
Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be
amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides
maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides
both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide
floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that accompany the
Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the
following conditions:
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of
land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of freeboard
above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood.
(Also see "freeboard.")
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters
has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
A. The overflow or rise of inland waters;
B. The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior; or
C.
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
D.
§ 481-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-37
1:359
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated
with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOODPLAIN — Land which has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood-fringe and
may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to insure wise use
of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education,
and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number
of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any
factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice
jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas
due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements
of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at
least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning
ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice published twice, once each
week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing.
Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice exceeding these
minimums.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is either:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
§ 481-37 SLINGER CODE § 481-37
1:360
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise in
the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison
of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable
to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of
mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and
contraction coefficients and discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real
estate. (Also see "development.")
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — Elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original soundness,
including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the
replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent
fixtures, systems or structures.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does
not include a "mobile recreational vehicle."
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by
a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is
required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land,
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by
an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
D.
§ 481-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-37
1:361
but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model
homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles."
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING —
A parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this
would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING —
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This
includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site
grading, or the pouring of concrete pads.
MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model that
corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any
additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates
more detailed topographic information than that used in the current
effective model.
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis used
in the effective FIS and referred to as the effective model.
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was used to
produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) — A modification of the duplicate
effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the
effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the
revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date
of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected
effective model or duplicate effective model.
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the existing or preproject
conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective
model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL — The county, city or borough governmental
units enacting, administering and enforcing this chapter.
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations referenced
to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations
adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it
§ 481-37 SLINGER CODE § 481-37
1:362
includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
(For example, an existing residential structure in the flood-fringe district
is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood
protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use or accessory use of a
structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence
in the floodway.)
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future
development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — That map adopted and made part
of this chapter, as described in § 481-5B, which has been approved by the
Department and FEMA.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
PERSON — An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located
on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage
system approved by the Department of Safety and Professional Services,
including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding
tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a
different parcel than the structure.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm
sewer.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Means base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain
§ 481-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-37
1:363
and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage
existing or proposed buildings.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if
depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement
of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning given in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure
has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the work performed. The term does not,
however, include either any project for the improvement of a building
required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations
identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or
§ 481-37 SLINGER CODE § 481-37
1:364
density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes
of the chapter.
VARIANCE — An authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the
construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which
is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without
required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a
reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of
the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater, regardless of its
intended use.
§ 481-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-37
1:365
Chapter 486
IMPACT FEES
§ 486-1. Purpose.
This chapter hereby imposes impact fees in order to regulate the effect
of new development on Village infrastructure and services, the demand
for which is generated by new development or any improvements made to
existing development. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use
and development of land so as to assure that new development bears a
proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide
essential facilities in the Village of Slinger.
§ 486-2. Authority.
The Village Board of the Village of Slinger has the authority to adopt this
chapter pursuant to § 66.0617, Wis. Stats.
§ 486-3. Definitions.
As applied in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be used:
BUILDING PERMIT — Any permit required for new construction and
additions pursuant to Chapters 215, 279 and 432 of the Code.
CAPITAL BUDGET — A plan for capital expenditures, including
commitments, to be incurred during the budget year.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM (CIP) — A plan for capital
expenditures, including commitments, to be incurred during the budget
year and four years into the future.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
property, the use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity
that requires the issuance of a building permit.
IMPACT FEE — A fee to be collected at the time of issuance of building
permit.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — The local use of land involving both
residential and nonresidential development.
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any local use of land for primarily
industrial or commercial purposes, or which does not fall within the
definition of residential development.
PUBLIC FACILITIES — Any or all of the facilities as stated in the 2019
impact fee study by Ruekert & Mielke, Inc., and/or any ancillary item
associated with said study.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENCY CHARGE — The charge as established
pursuant to § 398-7K(5)(b) of this Code.
§ 481-37 SLINGER CODE § 486-3
1:366
SERVICE AREA — A geographic area delineated by a municipality within
which there are public facilities.
SERVICE STANDARD — A certain quantity or quality of public facilities
relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land, or other appropriate
measure, as specified by the municipality.
VILLAGE — The Village of Slinger, Washington County, Wisconsin.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Slinger,
Washington County, Wisconsin.
§ 486-4. Applicability of impact fee.
This chapter will be uniformly applicable to development which occurs
within the Village of Slinger.
§ 486-5. Imposition of impact fee.
A. Any person who, after the effective date of this chapter, seeks to create,
subdivide, and/or otherwise develop a residential, commercial, or
industrial unit, or the property owner, is hereby required to pay an
impact fee segregated as follows:
Summary of Proposed Impact Fees
Development
Parks
Facilities
Administrative
Services
Facilities
Department
of Public
Works
Facilities
Library
Facilities
Police
Facilities
Sanitary
Sewer
Facilitiesa Total
Residential
(per
dwelling
except
sanitary
sewer)
$1,208 $547 $1,508 $931 $1,604 $2,652 $8,450
Nonresidential
(per acre
except
sanitary
sewer)
N/A $1,625 $4,476 N/A $4,762 $2,652 $13,514
NOTES:
a Sanitary sewer charges are per REC.
B. Any development that is classified as mixed-use will pay impact fees as
the Village concludes is appropriate based on how the Village
anticipates the development will make use of public facilities.
§ 486-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 486-6
1:367
§ 486-6. Payment of fee.
The impact fees will be assessed and become due at issuance of the building
permit by the municipality, subject to the following. Except as provided in
this section, if the total amount of impact fees due for a development will be
more than $75,000, a developer may defer payment of the impact fees for
a period of four years from the date of the issuance of the building permit
or until six months before the municipality incurs the costs to construct,
expand, or improve the public facilities related to the development for
which the fee was imposed, whichever is earlier. If the developer elects
to defer payment under this section, the developer shall maintain in force
a bond or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the unpaid fees
executed in the name of the municipality. A developer may not defer
payment of impact fees for projects that have been previously approved.
§ 486-7. Segregation and use.
A. All fees except the sanitary sewerage facilities impact fee will be
collected under this chapter, placed in a segregated, interest-bearing
account and will be accounted for separately from other funds of the
Village. The fees and any interest on the fees will be spent only in
accordance with this chapter.
B. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for
advanced provision of capital facilities for which the impact fee may be
expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds
or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are
of the type described in Subsection A above.
C. At least once each fiscal year, the Village Administrator shall present to
the Village Board a proposed capital improvement program assigning
funds, including any accrued interest, to fund improvements associated
with each segregated fund for impact fees. Funds, including any
accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal year shall be retained in the
same impact fee trust fund until the next fiscal year, except as provided
by the refund provisions of this chapter.
D. The following collection and spending scenarios shall govern the use of
any impact fees collected by the Village:
Collection Date Collection Period Spending Deadline
After 1-1-2019 Since effective date
of chapter
Within 8 years of collection,
except sanitary sewer fee
funds, which is within 10
years of collection, unless
extended as provided by
§ 66.0617(9), Wis. Stats.
E. The impact fee trust fund may be used to provide refunds as described
in § 486-8.
§ 486-6 SLINGER CODE § 486-8
1:368
§ 486-8. Refund of fees paid.
Any funds not expended or encumbered in accordance with § 486-7D shall
be returned to such landowner, along with interest that was earned on those
funds.
§ 486-9. Exemptions.
§ 486-10. Appeal.
Any property owner upon whom an impact fee is imposed shall have the
right to contest the amount, collection or use of the impact fee to the Village
Board, provided that the property owner files a written notice of appeal in
the Village Clerk's office within 90 days of when the fee is due and payable.
Such notice of appeal shall be entitled "Notice of Appeal of Impact Fee" and
shall state the property owner's name, address, telephone number, address
(if available) and legal description of the land development upon which the
impact fee is imposed, and a statement of the nature of and reasons for the
appeal. The Village Clerk shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the
Village Board at a regular meeting as soon as reasonably practicable under
the circumstances and shall notify the property owner of the time, date and
place of such meeting, in writing, by regular mail, deposited in the mail no
later than at least three days before the date of such meeting. Upon review
of such appeal, the Village Board may adjust the amount, collection or use
of the impact fee upon just and reasonable cause shown.
§ 486-11. Prosecution for violations.
A violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties and remedies
described in § 1-2 of this Code; however, in addition to or in lieu of such
penalties and remedies, the Village of Slinger shall have the power to sue in
civil court to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A. The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee:
(1) Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no additional
residential units or sewer connections are requested and where the
use is not changed.
(2) The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or
structure of the same size where number of dwelling units and/or
number of sewer connections remains unchanged.
B. Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of
application for creation or subdivision of the lot. Any claim not so made
shall be deemed waived.
C. The Village Board may exempt or reduce the impact fees for low-income
housing, provided that no amount of an impact fee for which an
exemption or reduction is provided is shifted to any other development
in the land development in which the low-cost housing is located or to
any other land development in the municipality.
§ 486-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 486-11
1:369
Chapter 495
LAND DIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT
§ 486-11 SLINGER CODE § 486-11
1:370
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 495-1. Title.
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Land Division Ordinance of the
Village of Slinger," or as "Chapter 495 of the Village of Slinger Code of
Ordinances."
§ 495-2. Statutory authorization.
These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Section
236.45 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 495-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate and control all land divisions
within the corporate limits of the Village of Slinger and within the
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the Village in order to promote
and protect the public health, safety, aesthetics, and general welfare of the
community. More particularly, and without limitation, it is the purpose of
this Ordinance to:
A. Implement the Village's Comprehensive Plan and components thereof
and facilitate enforcement of community development standards as set
forth in the zoning code, building code, and Official Map.
B. Promote the Wise Use, development, conservation, and protection of
the soil, water, wetland, woodland, and wildlife resources in the Village
and its area of extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction, and to achieve
a balanced relationship between land use and development and the
supporting and sustaining natural resource base.
C. Further the Orderly Layout and appropriate use of land.
D. Avoid the Harmful Effects of premature division or development of land.
E. Lessen Congestion in the streets and highways.
F. Provide for Proper Ingress to and egress from development sites.
G. Secure Safety from fire, flooding, water pollution, and other hazards
and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects.
H. Prevent and Control Erosion, sedimentation, and other pollution of
surface and subsurface waters.
I. Preserve Natural Vegetation and cover and protect the natural beauty
of the Village.
J. Provide Adequate Light and Air.
K. Prevent the Overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of
population.
§ 495-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-3
1:371
§ 495-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not the intent of this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair,
or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, agreements, rules,
regulations, permits, or approvals previously adopted or issued pursuant to
law. However, where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, and such
restrictions do not contravene rights vested under law, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall govern.
§ 495-5. Interpretation.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be interpreted to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village, and
shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by
the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 495-6. Disclaimer of liability.
The Village does not guarantee, warrant, or represent that only those
areas delineated as floodplains on plats and certified survey maps will be
subject to periodic inundation, nor does the Village guarantee, warrant, or
represent that the soils shown to be unsuited for a given land use from tests
required by the Ordinance are the only unsuited soils within the jurisdiction
of this Ordinance; and thereby asserts that there is no liability on the
part of the Village Board, its agencies or agents, or employees for flooding
problems, sanitation problems, or structural damages that may occur as a
result of reliance upon, and conformance with, this Ordinance.
L. Facilitate the Division of land into smaller parcels.
M. Facilitate and Ensure the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, stormwater management, schools, parks, playgrounds, and
other public facilities and services.
N. Ensure Adequate Legal Description and proper survey monumentation
of divided land.
O. Provide Adequate, Affordable Housing.
P. Restrict Building in areas of unsuitable soils.
Q. Provide for the Administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
§ 495-3 SLINGER CODE § 495-6
1:372
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 495-7. Area of jurisdiction.
This Ordinance shall apply to all lands within the corporate limits of the
Village of Slinger and to all lands within the extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction of the Village.
§ 495-8. Applicability.
A. Subdivision. Any division of land within the Village or the
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the Village that results in a
subdivision as defined in Article XI shall be, and any other division of
land may be, surveyed and a plat thereof approved and recorded
pursuant to the provisions of Article V of this chapter and Chapter 236
of the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Minor land division. Any division of land within the Village or the
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the Village that results in a
minor land division as defined in Article XI shall be surveyed and a
certified survey map of such division approved and recorded as
required by Article VI of this chapter and Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
C. It is the Express Intent of this Ordinance to regulate condominiums
having one or more principal structures on any parcel, except for
condominium conversions of existing structures where no additional
units are being created. In no case shall the maximum number of units
in a condominium exceed the maximum number of lots the same parcel
could have accommodated under the Village Zoning Ordinance if the
parcel had been conventionally divided.
D. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to:
(1) Cemetery plats made under Section 157.07 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(2) Assessors' plats made under Section 70.27 of the Wisconsin
Statutes; however, Assessors' plats shall comply with Sections
236.15(1)(a) through (g), and 236.20(1), and (2)(a) through (e) of
the Wisconsin Statutes unless waived under Section 236.20(2)(L).
(3) Sale or exchange of parcels of public utilities or railway rights-ofway
to adjoining property owners if the Village Board and the
county planning agency approve such sale or exchange on the basis
of applicable local ordinances or the provisions of Chapter 236 of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
(4) Transfers of Interests in land by will or pursuant to court order.
§ 495-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-8
1:373
§ 495-9. Compliance.
No person shall divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits of
the Village which results in a subdivision, minor land division, replat, or
condominium as defined herein; and no such subdivision, minor subdivision,
replat, or condominium shall be entitled to record without compliance with:
§ 495-10. Land suitability.
No land shall be divided which is held unsuitable for such use by the
Village Plan Commission, upon recommendation of the Village Engineer
or other agency as determined by the Plan Commission, for reason of
flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable
topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or
welfare of the future residents or occupants of the proposed land division,
or the Village, or poses an imminent harm to the environment. In addition:
(5) Sale or Exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots
resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by
these regulations the zoning ordinances, or other applicable laws
or ordinances.
A. All requirements of this Ordinance.
B. The Village Comprehensive Plan or any component thereof, the zoning
ordinance, and Official Map ordinance.
C. The Provisions of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
D. The Provisions of Chapter 703 of the Wisconsin Statutes for all
proposed condominiums.
E. The Rules of the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional
Services regulating lot size and lot elevation necessary for proper
sanitary conditions if any lot or unit is not served by a public sewer and
provisions for such service have not been made.
F. The Rules of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation relating to
provision for the safety of entrance upon and departure from state
trunk highways or connecting highways and for the preservation of the
public interest and investment in such highways.
G. The Rules of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources setting
water quality standards preventing and abating pollution, and
regulating development within floodplain, wetland, and shoreland
areas.
H. All Other applicable ordinances.
A. Floodplains. No lot served by public sanitary sewerage facilities shall
have less than 50% of its required lot area, or 4,200 square feet,
whichever is greater, above the elevation of the one-hundred-year
§ 495-8 SLINGER CODE § 495-10
1:374
recurrence interval flood, or where such data are not available, five
feet above the maximum flood of record. No lot one acre or less in
area served by an onsite sanitary sewage disposal system shall include
floodplains. All lots more than one acre in area served by an onsite
sanitary sewage disposal system shall contain not less than 40,000
square feet of land which is at least two feet above the elevation
of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood, as determined by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission. Where such flood stage data
are not available, the regulatory flood elevation shall be determined
by a registered professional engineer and the sealed report of the
engineer setting forth the regulatory flood stage and the method of its
determination shall be approved by the Village Engineer.
B. Lands Made, Altered, or Filled with Non-earth Materials within the
preceding 20 years shall not be divided into building sites which are to
be served by onsite sanitary sewage disposal systems except where soil
tests by a licensed soil scientist clearly show that the soils are suited to
such use. Soil reports shall include, but need not be limited to, an
evaluation of soil permeability, depth to groundwater, depth to bedrock,
soil bearing capacity, and soil compaction. To accomplish this purpose,
a minimum of one test per acre shall be made initially. The Village does
not guarantee, warrant, or represent that the required samples
represent conditions on an entire property and thereby asserts that
there is no liability on the part of the Village Board, its agencies, agents,
or employees for sanitary problems or structural damages that may
occur as a result of reliance upon such tests.
C. Lands Made, Altered, or Filled with Earth within the preceding seven
years shall not be divided into building sites which are to be served by
onsite sanitary sewage disposal systems except where soil tests by a
licensed soil scientist clearly show that the soils are suited to such use.
Soil reports shall include, but need not be limited to, an evaluation of
soil permeability, depth to groundwater, depth to bedrock, soil bearing
capacity, and soil compaction. To accomplish this purpose, a minimum
of one test per acre shall be made initially. The Village does not
guarantee, warrant, or represent that the required samples represent
conditions on an entire property and thereby asserts that there is no
liability on the part of the Village Board, its agencies, agents, or
employees for sanitary problems or structural damages that may occur
as a result of reliance upon such tests.
D. Lands Having a Slope of 12% or more may be required by the Plan
Commission to be maintained in natural open uses. No lot shall have
more than 50% of its minimum required area in slopes of 12% or more.
E. Lands Having Bedrock within 10 feet of the natural undisturbed surface
shall not be divided into building sites to be served by private onsite
waste treatment systems, unless the sites are compliant with standards
set forth in Chapters SPS 383 and 385 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code. The minimum depth of suitable soil over bedrock must comply
§ 495-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-10
1:375
§ 495-11. Dedication and reservation of lands.
with the specifications set forth in Table 383.44-3 of Ch. SPS 383.
The depth of soil required over bedrock will be dependent on soil
texture, soil structure, and the quality of the influent entering the
proposed soil dispersal area. The subdivision layout shall permit the
infiltrative surfaces of dispersal cells to be located at least 24 inches
above bedrock.
F. Lands Having Seasonal and/or Permanent Groundwater within 10 feet
of the natural undisturbed surface shall not be divided into building
sites to be served by private onsite waste treatment systems unless the
sites are compliant with standards set forth in Chapters SPS 383 and
385 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. The minimum depth of
unsaturated soil above seasonal groundwater must comply with the
specifications set forth in Table 383.44-3 of Ch. SPS 383. The
subdivision layout shall permit the infiltrative surfaces of the dispersal
cells to be located at least 24 inches above the highest groundwater
elevation as estimated utilizing soil redoximorphic features. At least six
of the 24 inches of soil separation required shall be comprised of an in
situ soil type for which soil treatment capability is credited under the
aforereferenced table. Seasonal soil saturation shall be assumed to
reach the ground surface where redoximorphic features are present
within four inches of the bottom of the A horizon.
G. Lands Covered by Soils Having Coarse Textures such as loamy coarse
sand with 60% or more coarse fragment content shall not be divided
into building sites to be served by private onsite waste treatment
systems unless compliance with Chapters SPS 383 and 385 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code can be demonstrated.
H. Land Drained by Farm Drainage Tile or Farm Ditch Systems shall not be
divided into building sites to be served by private onsite waste
treatment systems unless compliance with Chapters SPS 383 and 385
of the Wisconsin Administrative Code can be demonstrated.
I. The Village Plan Commission, in applying the provisions of this section,
shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it based its
conclusion that the land is not suitable for the intended use and afford
the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such
unsuitability, if so desired. The Plan Commission may thereafter affirm,
modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
A. Streets, highways, and drainageways. Whenever a proposed
subdivision, minor land division, or condominium plat encompasses all
or any part of an arterial street, drainageway, or other public way which
has been designated in the Comprehensive Plan or component thereof
or the Official Map of the Village, said public way shall be made a part
of the plat or certified survey map and dedicated or reserved, as
determined by the Village, by the subdivider in the locations and
dimensions indicated on said plan or map and as set forth in Article VII.
§ 495-10 SLINGER CODE § 495-11
1:376
§ 495-12. Homeowner or condominium associations.
Common areas or facilities within a land division or condominium shall
be held in common ownership as undivided proportionate interests by the
members of a homeowners or condominium association, subject to the
provisions set forth herein. The homeowners or condominium association
shall be governed according to the following:
B. Park, open space, and school sites. Park and school sites shall be
dedicated or reserved as provided in § 495-59.
C. Proposed Public Lands Lying Outside the corporate limits of the Village
but within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdictional area of these
regulations shall be reserved for acquisition by the Village.
A. The Subdivider shall provide the Village with a description of the
homeowners or condominium association, including its bylaws, and all
documents governing maintenance requirements and use restrictions
for common areas and facilities. These documents shall be subject to
review as to form by the Village Attorney at the subdivider's expense.
B. The Association shall be established by the owner or applicant and shall
be operating prior to the sale of any lots or units in the subdivision or
condominium.
C. Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all purchasers of
lots or units therein and their successors and assigns.
D. The Association shall be responsible for maintenance and insurance of
common areas and facilities.
E. A Land Stewardship Plan for any common open space to be retained in
a natural state shall be included in the submittal of association
documents.
F. The Members of the association shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining, insuring, and operating common areas and facilities.
G. The Association shall have or hire adequate staff to administer,
maintain, and operate common areas and facilities.
H. The Subdivider shall arrange with the Village Assessor a method of
assessment of any common areas and facilities, which will allocate to
each lot, parcel, or unit within the land division or condominium a share
of the total assessment for such common areas and facilities.
I. The Village may require that it receive written notice of any proposed
transfer of common areas or facilities by the association or the
assumption of maintenance of common areas or facilities. Such notice
shall be given to all members of the association and to the Village at
least 30 days prior to such transfer.
§ 495-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-12
1:377
§ 495-13. Improvements.
Before approval of any final plat located within the corporate limits of
the Village, the subdivider shall install street and other improvements
as hereinafter provided. In the alternative, if such improvements are not
installed at the time the final plat is submitted for approval, the subdivider
shall, before the recording of the plat, enter into a development agreement
with the Village agreeing to install the required improvements, and shall
file with said agreement a bond or letter of credit with good and sufficient
surety meeting the approval of the Village Attorney or a certified check in
the amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvements. Said estimate
shall be made by the Village Engineer, as a guarantee that such
improvements will be completed by the subdivider or his or her
subcontractors not later than one year from the date the plat is recorded
and as a further guarantee that all obligations to subcontractors for work on
the subdivision are satisfied. If the subdivider's project will be constructed
in phases, the amount of the certified check, surety bond or letter of credit
shall be limited to the phase of the project currently being constructed.
J. In the Event that the association established to own and maintain
common areas and facilities, or any successor organization thereto,
fails to properly maintain all or any portion of the aforesaid common
areas or facilities, the Village may serve written notice upon such
association setting forth the manner in which the association has failed
to maintain the aforesaid common areas and facilities. Such notice shall
set forth the nature of corrections required and the time within which
the corrections shall be made. Upon failure to comply within the time
specified, the association, or any successor association, shall be
considered in violation of this Ordinance, in which case the Village shall
have the right to enter the premises and take the needed corrective
actions. The costs of corrective actions by the Village shall be assessed
against the properties that have the right of enjoyment of the common
areas and facilities.
A. Contracts and contract specifications for the construction of street and
utility improvements within public street rights-of-way, as well as
contractors and subcontractors providing such work, shall be subject to
approval of the Village Engineer.
B. Governmental Units to which these bond and contract provisions apply
may file, in lieu of said contract and bond, a letter from officers
authorized to act on their behalf agreeing to comply with the provisions
of this section.
C. Survey monuments. Before final approval of any plat within the
corporate limits of the Village, the subdivider shall cause survey
monuments to be installed as required by and placed in accordance
with the requirements of Section 236.15 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and
as may be required by the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer may
waive the placing of monuments, as provided in Section 236.15(1)(h) of
the Wisconsin Statutes, for a reasonable time, not to exceed one year,
§ 495-12 SLINGER CODE § 495-13
1:378
§ 495-14. Development agreement.
Before or as a condition of receiving final approval from the Village Board
of any final plat, condominium plat, or certified survey map for which
public improvements are required by this Ordinance; or for which public
improvements, dedications, or fees are being deferred under this
Ordinance; or for which phasing approval is being granted under § 495-78
of this chapter, the subdivider shall sign and file with the Village Board a
development agreement. The development agreement shall be approved as
to form by the Village Attorney, and shall be approved by the Village Board
prior to approval of the final plat, condominium plat, or certified survey
map.
§ 495-15. Exceptions and modifications.
Where, in the judgment of the Village Plan Commission, it would be
inappropriate to apply literally the provisions of Articles VII and VIII of
this chapter because exceptional or undue hardship would result, the Plan
Commission may waive or modify any requirement to the extent deemed
just and proper. Such relief shall be granted without detriment to the
public good, without impairing the intent and purpose of this Ordinance or
the desirable general development of the community in accordance with
an adopted Comprehensive Plan or component thereof. No exception or
modification shall be granted unless the Plan Commission finds that all the
following facts and conditions exist and so indicates in the minutes of its
proceedings:
on condition that the subdivider provide a letter of credit, certified
check, or surety bond equal to the estimated cost of installing the
monuments to ensure the placing of such monuments within the time
required by statute. Additional time may be granted upon show of
cause.
D. Plats outside corporate limits. Before final approval by the Village of
any plat located outside the corporate limits of the Village but within
the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the Village, the
subdivider shall give evidence that he or she has complied with all
street and utility improvement requirements of the Town in which of the
land being platted is located.
A. Exceptional circumstances. There are exceptional, extraordinary, or
unusual circumstances or conditions where a literal enforcement of the
requirements of this Ordinance would result in severe hardship. Such
hardships should not apply generally to other properties or be of such a
recurrent nature as to suggest that this Ordinance should be changed.
B. Preservation of property rights. That such exception or modification is
necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property
rights possessed by other properties in the same vicinity.
§ 495-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-15
1:379
§ 495-16. Violations.
No person, firm, or corporation shall build upon, divide, convey, record or
place monuments on any land in violation of this Ordinance or the Wisconsin
Statutes. No person, firm, or corporation shall be issued a building permit
by the Village authorizing the building on, or improvement of, any
subdivision, minor land division, replat, or condominium within the
jurisdiction of this Ordinance not of record as of the effective date of this
Ordinance, until the provisions and requirements of this Ordinance have
been fully met. The Village may institute appropriate action or proceedings
to enjoin violations of this Ordinance.
§ 495-17. Penalties and remedies.
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions
of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100
plus any additional applicable costs incurred by the Village for each offense,
and the penalty for default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be
imprisonment in the County Jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding six
months. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Violations and concomitant penalties shall include the following:
§ 495-18. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve a plat
may appeal such objection or failure to approve, as provided in Sections
236.13(5) and 62.23(7)(e) of the Wisconsin Statutes, within 30 days of
notification of the rejection of the plat. Where failure to approve is based
on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection shall be made
C. Absence of detriment. That the exception or modification will not create
substantial detriment to adjacent property and will not materially
impair or be contrary to the purpose and spirit of this Ordinance or the
public interest.
D. A Simple Majority Vote of the full membership of the Plan Commission
shall be required to grant any exception or modification of this
Ordinance, and the reasons shall be entered into the minutes of the
Commission.
A. Recordation improperly made carries penalties as provided in Section
236.30 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats carries penalties as provided for
in Section 236.31 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
C. Monuments disturbed or not placed carries penalties as provided for in
Section 236.32 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
D. An Assessor's Plat made under Section 70.27 of the Wisconsin Statutes
may be ordered as a remedy by the Village, at the expense of the
subdivider, when a subdivision is created by successive divisions.
§ 495-15 SLINGER CODE § 495-18
1:380
a party to the action. The court shall direct that the plat be approved if
it finds that the action of the approving or objecting agency is arbitrary,
unreasonable, or discriminatory.
§ 495-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-18
1:381

ARTICLE III
Land Division Procedures
§ 495-19. Pre-application staff conference.
It is recommended that, prior to the filing of an application for the approval
of a preliminary plat, condominium plat, or certified survey map, the
subdivider consult with the Plan Commission and/or its staff in order to
obtain their advice and assistance. It is recommended that a conceptual
plan of the proposed subdivision, condominium, or certified survey map be
brought by the applicant to the meeting, but such conceptual plan is not
required. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory, but is intended
to inform the subdivider of the purpose and objectives of these regulations,
the Comprehensive Plan, and duly adopted plan implementation devices
of the Village and to otherwise assist the subdivider in planning the
development. In so doing, both the subdivider and Plan Commission may
reach mutual conclusions regarding the general program and objectives
of the proposed development and its possible effects on the neighborhood
and community. The subdivider will gain a better understanding of the
subsequent required procedures.
§ 495-20. Preliminary plat review within Village.
Before submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall prepare
a preliminary plat and complete an application and review checklist. The
preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with this Ordinance and
the subdivider shall file an adequate number of copies of the plat for
distribution in accordance with this section; the completed application and
checklist; and the preliminary plat review fee with the Village Clerk at least
60 days prior to the meeting of the Village Board at which action is desired.
A. The Village Clerk shall, within two normal working days after filing,
transmit:
(1) Four copies to the County Planning Agency;
(2) Two copies to the Director of Plat Review, Wisconsin Department of
Administration;
(3) Additional copies to the Director of Plat Review, Wisconsin
Department of Administration, for re-transmission as follows:
(a) Two copies to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation
(WisDOT) if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk
highway or a connecting highway;
(b) Two copies to the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services if the subdivision is not served by a
public sewer and provision for such service has not been made;
and
§ 495-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-20
1:383
§ 495-21. Approval of preliminary plat located within Village.
(c) Two copies to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
(WDNR) if lands included in the plat lie within 500 feet of the
ordinary high water mark of any navigable stream, lake, or
other navigable body of water, or if any shoreland areas are
located within the plat.
B. In Lieu of the Procedure Set Forth Above, the subdivider may, pursuant
to Section 236.12(6) of the Wisconsin Statutes, submit the original of
the preliminary plat directly to the plat review section of the Wisconsin
Department of Administration, who will prepare and forward copies of
the plat at the subdivider's expense to the objecting agencies. When the
subdivider elects to use this alternative procedure, it shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider to submit to the Village Clerk the
additional copies required for the reviews required below.
C. The Village Clerk shall also transmit, within two normal working days
after filing, eight copies of the preliminary plat to the Village Plan
Commission and one copy each to the Village Engineer, Director of
Public Works, Village Planner, Fire Chief, Parks Director, and Land
Information Officer for review and recommendations concerning
matters within their jurisdiction. The recommendations of Village
officials shall be transmitted to the Plan Commission within 20 days
from the date the plat is received. The preliminary plat shall then be
reviewed by the Plan Commission for conformance with this Ordinance,
and all other Village ordinances, rules, regulations and the
Comprehensive Plan and components thereof.
D. The Village Clerk shall also transmit, within two normal working days
after filing, one copy each of the preliminary plat to the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission, affected public and private
utility companies, and the affected school district or districts for their
review and recommendation concerning matters within their
jurisdiction. Their recommendations shall be transmitted to the Plan
Commission within 20 days from the date the plat is received.
A. The Objecting Agencies shall, within 20 days of the date of receiving
their copies of the preliminary plat, notify the subdivider and all other
approving and objecting agencies of any objections. If there are no
objections, they shall so certify on the face of the copy of the plat and
shall return that copy to the Village Clerk. If an objecting agency fails to
act within 20 days, it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat.
B. The Village Plan Commission shall promptly review the preliminary
plat, after objections and comments have been received by the
objecting and reviewing agencies and officials, for conformance with
this Ordinance and all applicable laws, ordinances, and Comprehensive
Plans and components of such plans. The Plan Commission shall
comment and recommend action on the preliminary plat to the Village
Board.
§ 495-20 SLINGER CODE § 495-21
1:384
§ 495-22. Final plat review within Village.
A final plat shall be prepared in accordance with this Ordinance and the
subdivider shall file an adequate number of copies of the plat for
distribution in accordance with this section; the completed application; and
the final plat review fee with the Village Clerk at least 25 days prior to the
meeting of the Village Board at which action is desired.
C. The Village Board shall, within 90 days of the date of filing of the
preliminary plat with the Village Clerk, approve, approve conditionally,
or reject such plat. One copy of the plat shall thereupon be returned to
the subdivider with the date and action endorsed thereon; and if
approved conditionally or rejected, a letter setting forth the conditions
of approval or the reasons for rejection shall accompany the plat. One
copy each of the plat and letter shall be placed in the Plan Commission's
permanent file.
D. Failure of the Village Board to act within 90 days shall constitute an
approval of the plat as filed, unless the review period is extended by
mutual consent.
E. Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not
constitute automatic approval of the final plat, except that if the final
plat is submitted within 36 months after the last required approval of
the preliminary plat and conforms substantially to the preliminary plat,
including any conditions of that approval, and to local plans and
ordinances, the final plat shall be entitled to approval as provided in
Section 236.11(1)(b) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
A. The Village Clerk shall, within two normal working days after filing,
transmit:
(1) Four copies to the County Planning Agency;
(2) Two copies to the Director of Plat Review, Wisconsin Department of
Administration;
(3) Additional copies to the Director of Plat Review, Wisconsin
Department of Administration, for re-transmission as follows:
(a) Two copies to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation
(WisDOT) if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk
highway or a connecting highway;
(b) Two copies to the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services if the subdivision is not served by a
public sewer and provision for such service has not been made;
and
(c) Two copies to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
(WDNR) if lands included in the plat lie within 500 feet of the
ordinary high water mark of any navigable stream, lake, or
§ 495-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-22
1:385
§ 495-23. Approval of final plat located within Village.
The objecting agencies, shall, within 20 days of the date of receiving their
copies of the final plat, notify the subdivider and all other approving and
objecting agencies of any objections. If there are no objections, they shall
so certify on the face of the copy of the plat and shall return that copy to the
Village Plan Commission. If an objecting agency fails to act within 20 days,
it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat.
other navigable body of water, or if any shoreland areas are
located within the plat.
B. In Lieu of the Procedure Set Forth Above, the subdivider may, pursuant
to Section 236.12(6) of the Wisconsin Statutes, submit the original of
the final plat directly to the plat review section of the Wisconsin
Department of Administration, who will prepare and forward copies of
the plat at the subdivider's expense to the objecting agencies. When the
subdivider elects to use this alternative procedure, it shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider to submit to the Village Clerk the
additional copies required for the reviews required below.
C. The Village Clerk shall also transmit, within two normal working days
after filing, eight copies of the final plat to the Village Plan Commission
and one copy to each of the affected public or private utilities.
D. The Village Plan Commission shall examine the final plat as to its
conformance with the approved preliminary plat; conditions of approval
of the preliminary plat; this Ordinance and all ordinances, rules,
regulations, Comprehensive Plans or components thereof which may
affect it; and shall recommend approval or rejection of the plat to the
Village Board.
E. Partial platting. The final plat may, if permitted by the Plan Commission,
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record at that time; however, it is required that
each phase be final platted and designated as a phase of the approved
preliminary plat.
A. Submission. If the final plat is not submitted within 36 months of the
last required approval of the preliminary plat, the Village Board may
refuse to approve the final plat or may extend the time for submission of
the final plat.
B. The Village Plan Commission shall, within 45 days of the date of filing of
the final plat with the Village Clerk, recommend approval or rejection of
the plat and shall transmit the final plat and application along with its
recommendation to the Village Board.
C. Notification. The Village Plan Commission shall, when it determines to
recommend approval or rejection of a plat to the Village Board, give at
least 10 days' prior written notice of its recommendation to the Clerk of
any municipality within 1,000 feet of the plat.
§ 495-22 SLINGER CODE § 495-23
1:386
§ 495-24. Plats within extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of
Village.
D. The Village Engineer shall determine whether the final plat conforms
substantially to the preliminary plat and shall recommend approval,
approval with conditions or denial or approval explaining the basis or
reasons for the recommendation. Such conclusions and
recommendations shall be made part of the proceedings when the final
plat is being considered by the Village Board.
E. The Village Board shall, in accordance with Section 236.12 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, within 60 days of the date of filing the original final
plat with the Village Clerk, approve or reject such plat. The Village
Board may act on the plat at the same meeting at which the Plan
Commission makes its recommendation. One copy of the plat shall
thereupon be returned to the subdivider with the date and action
endorsed thereon. If the plat is rejected, the reasons shall be stated in
the minutes of the meeting and a written statement of the reasons
forwarded to the subdivider. One copy each of the plat and letter shall
be placed in the Village Clerk's permanent file. The Village Board shall
not inscribe its approval on the final plat unless the Village Clerk
certifies on the face of the plat that the copies were forwarded to
objecting agencies as required herein, with the date they were
forwarded, and that no objections have been filed within 20 days or, if
filed, that they have been met.
F. Failure of the Village Board to act within 60 days, the time having not
been extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed, and all
fees payable by the subdivider having been paid, shall constitute
approval of the final plat.
G. Recordation. After the final plat has been approved by the Village Board
and required improvements either installed or a contract and sureties
insuring their installation is filed, the Village Clerk shall cause the
certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting to such approval to be duly
executed and the plat returned to the subdivider for recording with the
County Register of Deeds. The Register of Deeds shall not record the
plat unless it is offered for recording within 12 months after the date of
the last approval and within 36 months after the first approval, as
required in Section 236.25(2)(b) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
H. Copies. The subdivider shall file 10 copies of the recorded final plat with
the Village Clerk. The Clerk shall distribute copies of the plat to the
Village Engineer, Building Inspector, Assessor, Land Information
Officer, Planning Director, and other affected Village and County
departments for their files.
A. When the Land to be Subdivided lies within the extraterritorial plat
approval jurisdiction of the Village, the subdivider shall proceed as
specified in §§ 495-19 through 495-23 except:
§ 495-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-24
1:387
§ 495-25. Minor land division.
When it is proposed to divide land into more than one, but less than five,
parcels or building sites, inclusive of the original remnant parcel, any one
of which is five acres or less in area, by a division or by successive divisions
of any part of the original parcel within a five-year period; or when it is
proposed to divide a block, lot, or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat
into more than one, but less than five, parcels or building sites, inclusive
of the original remnant parcel, without changing the exterior boundaries
of the subdivision plat, or the exterior boundaries of blocks within the
subdivision plat, and the division does not result in a subdivision, the
subdivider may effect the division by use of a certified survey map. The
subdivider shall prepare the certified survey map in accordance with this
Ordinance and shall file sufficient copies of the map and the completed
application with the Village Clerk at least 10 days prior to the meeting
of the Plan Commission at which action is desired. The Plan Commission
may for good reason, such reason being set forth in the minutes of the
meeting concerned, accept for review and approval certified survey maps
that consist of a single parcel.
(1) If the subdivider elects to initially submit the proposed plat to a
local municipality, the plat shall, as a matter of courtesy, be first
submitted to the town clerk concerned. The Town Clerk shall then
assume the responsibility for transmitting the plat to the objecting
agencies and other approving authorities, including the Village.
(2) Approving agencies include the Village Board, Town Board, and
County Planning Agency; and the subdivider must comply with the
land subdivision ordinances of the Village, Town, and County.
B. The Subdivider may proceed with the installation of such improvements
and under such regulations as the Town Board of the Town within
whose limits the plat lies may require. Wherever connection to any
Village utility is desired, permission for such connection shall be at the
discretion of the Village Board.
C. All Improvement Requirements specified by the Town Board or any
special improvement district in matters over which they have
jurisdiction shall be met before the final plat is filed.
D. The Village may not deny approval of any extraterritorial land division
on the basis of the proposed land use resulting from the land division
unless the denial is based on a plan or regulations, or amendments
thereto, adopted by the Village under § 62.23(7a)(c), Wis. Stats.
A. A Pre-Application Staff Conference similar to the consultation
suggested in § 495-19 of this chapter is recommended.
B. The Village Clerk shall, within two normal working days after filing,
transmit the copies of the map and letter of application to the Village
Plan Commission.
§ 495-24 SLINGER CODE § 495-25
1:388
§ 495-26. Replats.
C. The Village Plan Commission shall transmit a copy of the map to all
affected Village Boards and commissions for their review and
recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction. Copies
may also be transmitted to the County Planning Agency and to the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission for review and
comment. Their recommendations shall be transmitted to the Village
Plan Commission within 20 days from the date the map is received. The
map shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission for conformance to this
Ordinance, and all other ordinances, rules, regulations, and
Comprehensive Plans and components thereof as may be applicable.
D. The Village Plan Commission shall, within 45 days from the date of
filing of the map, recommend approval, conditional approval or
rejection of the map, and shall transmit the map along with its
recommendations to the Village Board.
E. The Village Board shall approve, approve conditionally and thereby
require resubmission of a corrected map, or reject such map within 90
days from the date of filing of the map unless the time is extended by
agreement with the subdivider. If the map is rejected, the reason shall
be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement
forwarded to the subdivider. If the map is approved, the Village Board
shall cause the Village Clerk to so certify on the face of the original
map.
F. Recordation. After the certified survey map has been approved by the
Village Board; the Village Clerk shall cause the certification inscribed
upon the map attesting to such approval to be duly executed and the
map returned to the subdivider for recording with the County Register
of Deeds. The Register of Deeds shall not record the map unless it is
offered for recording within six months after the date of the last
approval and within 24 months after the first approval.
G. Copies. The subdivider shall file 10 copies of the recorded certified
survey map with the Village Clerk. The Clerk shall distribute copies of
the map to the Village Engineer, Village Planner, Building Inspector,
Assessor, Land Information Officer, and other affected Village and
County officials for their files.
A. When It Is Proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so
as to vacate or alter areas within a plat dedicated to the public, or to
change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, the
subdivider or person wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded
plat as provided in Sections 236.40 through 236.44 of the Wisconsin
Statutes. If the replat is proposing to change the boundaries of a
recorded subdivision, or part thereof, the subdivider or person wishing
to replat shall then proceed as specified in §§ 495-19 through 495-24.
§ 495-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-26
1:389
§ 495-27. Condominium plats.
A condominium plat prepared by a land surveyor registered in Wisconsin
is required for all condominium plats or any amendments or expansions
thereof. Such plat shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
Section 703.11 of the Wisconsin Statutes and shall be reviewed and
approved or denied in the same manner as a subdivision plat as set forth
in §§ 495-19 through 495-24 of this chapter. Such plat shall comply with
the design standards, improvements, and all other requirements of this
Ordinance that would otherwise apply to subdivision plats, including, but
not limited to, those set forth in Articles VII and VIII of this chapter.
B. The Village Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the Plan
Commission when a preliminary plat of a replat of lands within the
Village is filed, and shall cause notices of the proposed replat and public
hearing to be published and mailed to the owners of record of all
properties within the limits of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
replat and to the owners of all properties within 200 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the proposed replat.
§ 495-26 SLINGER CODE § 495-27
1:390
ARTICLE IV
Preliminary plat
§ 495-28. General requirements.
A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions and condominiums
and shall be based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor and the plat
prepared on tracing cloth or paper of good quality at a scale no smaller than
one inch equals 100 feet and shall show correctly on its face the following
information:
§ 495-29. Site analysis information.
In the absence of an adopted neighborhood unit development plan, the
following site analysis information shall be inventoried and mapped at a
scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet in sufficient detail, with brief
descriptions if necessary, to allow for the proper evaluation of a preliminary
plat. The site analysis map and accompanying descriptions shall be included
with the submittal of the preliminary plat. The map shall include:
A. Title or Name under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded.
Such title shall not be the same or similar to a previously approved and
recorded plat, unless it is an addition to a previously recorded plat and
is so stated on the plat.
B. Location of proposed subdivision by quarter section, township, range,
county, and state.
C. Date, graphic scale, and north arrow.
D. Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, and land surveyor
preparing the plat.
E. The Entire Area Contiguous to the proposed plat owned or controlled by
the subdivider shall be included on the preliminary plat even though
only a portion of said area is proposed for immediate development. The
Plan Commission may waive this requirement where it is unnecessary
to fulfill the purposes and intent of this Ordinance and undue hardship
would result from strict application thereof.
A. Topographic Features, with two-foot intervals for slopes less than 12%
and at no more than five-foot intervals for slopes 12% and greater.
Elevations shall be marked on such contours, referenced to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929. Any rock outcrops, slopes of
12% or greater, ridge lines, and hilltops shall be noted.
B. Hydrologic Characteristics, including lakes, ponds, rivers, streams,
creeks, drainage ditches, wetlands, floodplains, shoreland areas, and
surface drainage patterns. The boundaries of wetlands shall be as
delineated and mapped by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional
Planning Commission. The boundaries of the one-hundred-year
recurrence interval floodplain, as determined by the Federal
§ 495-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-29
1:391
§ 495-30. Plat data.
All preliminary plats shall show the following:
Emergency Management Agency or the Southeastern Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission, shall be shown. Where such floodplain
data are not available, the floodplain boundaries and related stages
shall be determined by a registered professional engineer retained by
the subdivider and the engineer's report providing the required data
shall be subject to review and approved by the Village Engineer.
C. Delineations of Natural Resource Areas, including the boundaries of
primary and secondary environmental corridors and isolated natural
resource areas as identified by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional
Planning Commission, and the location and type of any rare or
endangered species habitat.
D. Soil Types, as shown on the soil survey maps prepared by the U.S. Soil
Conservation Service (now known as the Natural Resources
Conservation Service).
E. Existing Vegetation, including the boundaries and characteristics of
woodlands, hedgerows, and prairies. Predominant species of
hedgerows and woodlands shall be identified. Unless located within an
area proposed to be maintained in open space, specimen trees shall be
located and identified by species, size, and health.
F. Historic, Cultural, and Archaeological Features, with a brief description
of the historic character of buildings, structures, ruins, and burial sites.
G. Scenic Vistas, both into the proposed subdivision from adjacent roads
and public areas and views from within the proposed subdivision.
H. The Location and Classification of existing streets and highways within
or adjacent to the proposed subdivision and desirable or undesirable
entry points into the subdivision.
I. Existing Land Uses within the proposed subdivision and within 200 feet
therefrom, including cultivated and non-cultivated fields, paved areas,
buildings, structures, and all encumbrances, such as easements or
covenants.
J. Public Parks and Open Space Areas within or adjacent to the proposed
subdivision, and potential open space connections between the
proposed subdivision and adjacent lands.
K. Existing and Proposed Zoning on and adjacent to the proposed
subdivision.
A. Length and Bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
subdivision referenced to two corners established in the U. S. Public
Land Survey and the total acreage encompassed thereby. The lengths of
lines shall be given to the nearest 0.01 foot and bearings to the nearest
§ 495-29 SLINGER CODE § 495-30
1:392
one second of arc. The arc length, chord length, radius length, and
bearing shall be given for all curved lines.
B. Topographic Features, including existing contours, with two-foot
intervals for slopes less than 12% and at no more than five-foot
intervals for slopes 12% and greater. Elevations shall be marked on
such contours, referenced to National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)
of 1929.
C. Boundaries of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval floodplain and
related regulatory stages, as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission. Where such data are not available, the floodplain
boundaries and related stages shall be determined by a registered
professional engineer retained by the subdivider and the engineer's
report providing the required data shall be submitted with the plat for
review and approval by the Village Engineer.
D. Location and Water Elevations at the date of the survey of all lakes,
ponds, rivers, streams, creeks, and drainage ditches within the plat and
within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the plat. Approximate high
and low water elevations and the ordinary high water mark referenced
to NGVD 1929 shall also be shown. The status of navigability of the
lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, creeks, and drainage ditches shall be
indicated based upon a determination by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources.
E. Lake and Stream Meander Lines proposed to be established.
F. Boundaries of Primary and Secondary Environmental Corridors and
isolated natural resource areas, as delineated and mapped by the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission. The
boundaries of wetlands shall also be shown. The wetland boundaries
shall be determined on the basis of a field survey made to identify,
delineate, and map those boundaries; and the name of the person,
agency, or firm identifying, delineating, and mapping the boundaries
shall be provided together with the date of the field survey concerned.
G. The Location of Woodlands as mapped by the Southeastern Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission and existing vegetation to be retained
within the proposed subdivision.
H. Location, right-of-way width, and names of all existing and proposed
streets, highways, alleys, or other public ways, pedestrian and bicycle
ways, utility rights-of-way, active and abandoned railway rights-of-way,
vision corner easements, and other easements within or adjacent to the
plat.
I. Type, Width, and Elevation of any existing street pavements within or
adjacent to the plat, together with any legally established center line
elevations, referenced to mean NGVD (1929).
§ 495-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-30
1:393
J. Approximate Radii of all curved lines within the exterior boundaries of
the plat.
K. Location and Names of any adjoining subdivisions, parks, cemeteries,
public lands, and watercourses, including impoundments. The owners
of record of abutting unplatted lands shall also be shown.
L. All Existing Structures, together with an identification of the type of
structure, such as residence, garage, barn or shed; the distances of
such structures from existing and proposed property lines, wells,
watercourses, and drainage ditches; and existing property boundary
lines in the area adjacent to the exterior boundaries of the proposed
plat and within 100 feet thereof. The proposed use of existing
structures to be retained shall be noted. All wells within the exterior
boundaries of the plat, and within 50 feet of the exterior boundaries of
the plat, shall be shown.
M. Locations of all civil division boundary lines and U.S. Public Land
Survey system section and one-quarter section lines within the plat and
within 100 feet of the exterior boundaries of the plat.
N. Approximate Dimensions of all lots, the minimum lot area required by
the zoning district in which the plat is located, and proposed lot and
block numbers.
O. Building or Setback Lines which are proposed to be more restrictive
than the regulations of the zoning district in which the plat is located.
P. Location, Approximate Dimensions, and Area of any sites to be reserved
or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways, open space
preservation, or other public use.
Q. Location, Approximate Dimensions, and Area of any proposed common
areas or facilities.
R. Location, Approximate Dimensions, and Area of any sites which are to
be used for multifamily housing, shopping centers, church sites, or
other non-public uses not requiring lotting.
S. Location, Size, and Invert Elevation of any existing sanitary or storm
sewers, culverts and drain pipes, the location of manholes, catch
basins, hydrants, electric and communication facilities, whether
overhead or underground, and the location and size of any existing
water and gas mains within or adjacent to the plat. If no sewers or
water mains are located on or immediately adjacent to the proposed
subdivision, the nearest such sewers or water mains which might be
extended to serve the proposed subdivision shall be indicated by their
direction and distance from the plat, and by their size and invert
elevations. All elevations shall be referenced to NGVD (1929).
T. Any Proposed Lake and Stream Access, and the width of the proposed
access, to be provided within the exterior boundaries of the plat.
§ 495-30 SLINGER CODE § 495-30
1:394
§ 495-31. Street plans and profiles.
The Village Engineer or Plan Commission may require that the subdivider
provide street plans and profiles showing the existing ground surface,
proposed and established street grades, including extensions for a
reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision when
requested. All elevations shall be based upon NGVD (1929), and plans and
profiles shall meet the approval of the Village Engineer.
§ 495-32. Soil borings and tests.
§ 495-33. Soil and water conservation.
The Plan Commission, upon the recommendation of the Village Engineer,
after determining from a review of the preliminary plat that the soil, slope,
vegetation, and drainage characteristics of the site are such as to require
substantial cutting, clearing, grading, and other earthmoving operations in
the development of the subdivision or otherwise entail a severe erosion
hazard, may require the subdivider to provide soil erosion and
sedimentation control plans and specifications. Such plans shall generally
follow the guidelines and standards promulgated by the County Land
Conservation Committee, and shall be in accordance with the requirements
U. Any Proposed Lake and Stream Improvement or relocation, and notice
of application for approval by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources, when applicable.
V. The Approximate Location of any existing onsite sewage treatment and
disposal facilities.
W. Any Additional Information requested by the Village Plan Commission.
A. The Plan Commission, upon recommendation of the Village Engineer,
may, in order to determine the suitability of specific areas for the
construction of buildings and supporting roadways, require that soil
borings and tests be made to ascertain subsurface soil conditions and
depths to bedrock and to the groundwater table. The number of such
borings and tests shall be adequate to portray for the intended purpose
the character of the soil and the depths to bedrock and groundwater
from the undisturbed surface.
B. Where a Subdivision is not to be served by public sanitary sewer, soil
borings and tests shall be made to determine the suitability of the site
for the use of onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems. Such
borings and tests shall meet the requirements of Chapters SPS 383 and
385 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. The location of the borings
shall be shown on the preliminary plat and the findings, with respect to
the suitability of the site for the use of onsite sewage treatment and
disposal systems, shall be set forth in a separate report submitted with
the plat.
§ 495-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-33
1:395
set forth in Chapter 526, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control, of
the Code of the Village of Slinger.
§ 495-34. Covenants and condominium or homeowners' association
documents.
§ 495-35. Surveyor's certificate.
The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify on the face of
the plat that it is a correct representation of the exterior boundaries of
the proposed plat and of all existing land divisions and features within
and adjacent thereto; and that the surveyor has fully complied with the
provisions of this Ordinance and of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
A. A Draft Copy of any proposed protective covenants whereby the
subdivider intends to regulate land use in the proposed subdivision
shall accompany the preliminary plat. The proposed covenants shall be
subject to review and approval by the Village Attorney as to form.
B. A Draft Copy of any proposed condominium or homeowners' association
declarations, covenants, or other documents shall accompany the
preliminary plat. These documents shall include the information
specified in § 495-12. The proposed documents shall be subject to
review and approval by the Village Attorney as to form.
§ 495-33 SLINGER CODE § 495-35
1:396
ARTICLE V
Final Plat
§ 495-36. General requirements.
A final plat prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be required for
all subdivisions and condominiums. It shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 495-37. Plat data.
The Plat shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information
required by Section 236.20 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the following:
A. Length and Bearing of the center line of all streets. The lengths shall be
given to the nearest 0.01 foot and bearings to the nearest one second of
arc. The arc, chord, and radius lengths and the chord bearings,
together with the bearings of the radii at the ends of the arcs and
chords, shall be given for all curved streets.
B. Street Width along the line of any obliquely intersecting street to the
nearest 0.01 foot.
C. Active and Abandoned Railway rights-of-way within and abutting the
exterior boundaries of the plat.
D. Building or Setback Lines required by the Village Plan Commission or
other approving or objecting agency which are more restrictive than
the regulations of the zoning district in which the plat is located, or
which are proposed by the subdivider and are to be included in
recorded private covenants.
E. Easements for any Public sanitary sewers, water supply mains,
stormwater management facilities, drainageways, or access ways.
F. All Lands Reserved for future public acquisition or reserved for the
common use of property owners within the plat. If property reserved for
common use is located within the subdivision or condominium, the
information required by § 495-12 shall be submitted with the Final Plat,
together with any associated deed or plat restrictions required by the
Plan Commission.
G. Boundaries of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval floodplain and
related regulatory stages as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission. Where such data are not available, the floodplain
boundaries and related stages shall be determined by a registered
professional engineer retained by the subdivider and the engineer's
report providing the required data shall be submitted with the plat for
review and approval by the Village Engineer.
§ 495-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-37
1:397
§ 495-38. Deed restrictions.
The Village may require that deed restrictions be filed with the final plat.
When required, such restrictions shall be recorded with the final plat.
§ 495-39. Survey accuracy.
The Village Engineer shall examine all final plats within the Village and
may make, or cause to be made by a registered land surveyor under
the supervision or direction of the Village Engineer, field checks for the
accuracy and closure of survey, proper kind and location of monuments, and
liability and completeness of the drawing. In addition:
H. Location and Right-of-Way of existing and proposed bicycle and
pedestrian ways and utility rights-of-way.
I. Notations or Any Restrictions required by the Village Plan Commission
or other approving or objecting agency relative to access control along
any public ways within or adjacent to the plat; the provision and use of
planting strips; or provisions for the protection of any existing wetlands
or other environmentally significant lands within the exterior
boundaries of the plat.
A. The Maximum Error of Closure before adjustment of the survey of the
exterior boundary of the subdivision shall not exceed, in horizontal
distance or position, the ratio of one part in 10,000, nor in azimuth, of
four seconds of arc per interior angle. If field measurements exceed this
maximum, new field measurements shall be made until a satisfactory
closure is obtained. When a satisfactory closure of the field
measurements has been obtained, the survey of the exterior boundary
shall be adjusted to form a closed geometric figure.
B. All Street, Block, and Lot Dimensions shall be computed as closed
geometric figures based upon the control provided by the closed
exterior boundary survey. If field checks disclose an error for any
interior line of the plat greater than the ratio of one part in 5,000, or an
error in measured angle greater than one minute of arc for any angle
where the shorter side forming the angle is 300 feet or longer,
necessary corrections shall be made. Where the shorter side of a
measured angle is less than 300 feet in length, the error shall not
exceed the value of one minute multiplied by the quotient of 300 divided
by the length of the shorter side; however, such error shall not in any
case exceed five minutes of arc.
C. The Village Board shall receive the results of the Village Engineer's
examination prior to approving the final plat. The Village Engineer may,
however, in accordance with § 495-13C of this chapter, waive the
placing of monuments for a reasonable time, not to exceed one year, on
condition that the subdivider provide a letter of credit, certified check,
or surety bond equal to the estimated cost of installing the monuments,
to ensure the placing of such monuments within the time required by
§ 495-37 SLINGER CODE § 495-39
1:398
§ 495-40. Surveying and monumenting.
All final plats shall meet all surveying and monumenting requirements of
Section 236.15 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 495-41. State plane coordinate system.
Where the plat is located within a one-quarter section, the corners of which
have been located, monumented, and placed on the State Plane Coordinate
System through high order horizontal control surveys conducted to
standards established by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission, the plat shall be tied directly to two adjacent section or
quarter-section corners defining a quarter section line so located,
monumented, and placed on the State Plane Coordinate System. The grid
bearing and distance of each tie shall be determined by field measurements.
The Wisconsin State Plane Coordinates, together with a description of the
monuments marking the section or quarter-section corners to which the
plat is tied shall be shown on the plat. All distances and bearings shall be
referenced to the Wisconsin State Plane Coordinate System, South Zone,
based upon the North American Datum of 1927, and shall be adjusted to
the control survey network established to the standards promulgated by
the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission for the area
concerned. Where the field measurements differ from the control survey
data by more than one part in 10,000, in the alternative to adjusting the
field measured distances and bearings of the ties to the control survey
network, the surveyor shall show both the measured field distances and
bearings and the recorded and published control survey distances and
bearings concerned. Under this alternative, the discrepancies shall be
brought to the attention of the custodian of the control survey data for
the area concerned by the surveyor. All distances shall be recorded to the
nearest 0.01 foot and all bearings to the nearest one second of arc. The
grid bearing and distance of the tie shall be determined by a closed survey
meeting the error of closure herein specified for the survey of the exterior
boundaries of the subdivision.
§ 495-42. Certificates.
All final plats shall provide all the certificates required by Section 236.21 of
the Wisconsin Statutes; and, in addition, the surveyor shall certify that he
or she has fully complied with all the provisions of this Ordinance.
§ 495-43. Filing and recording.
Statute. In that case, the Village Engineer's examination required under
this section and any related field checks shall be made after the
required monuments have been installed. The letter of credit, certified
check, or surety bond concerned shall not be released until the Village
Engineer is satisfied with the accuracy of the land surveying concerned.
§ 495-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-43
1:399
A. The Final Plat shall be submitted for recording in accordance with
§ 495-23G of this chapter.
B. The County Register of Deeds shall record the plat as provided by
Section 236.25 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
C. The Subdivider shall file a copy of the final plat with the Village Clerk,
as provided by Section 236.27 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 495-43 SLINGER CODE § 495-43
1:400
ARTICLE VI
Certified Survey Map
§ 495-44. General requirements.
§ 495-45. Required information.
The map shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information
required by Section 236.34 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the following:
A. A certified survey map prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be
required for all minor land divisions. It shall comply in all respects with
the requirements of Section 236.34 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The
minor land division shall comply with the design standards and
improvement requirements set forth in Articles VII and VIII of this
chapter.
B. A preliminary map or sketch map may be submitted by the subdivider to
the Village Plan Commission or its staff for review and comment prior to
the submission of a proposed certified survey map for review and
approval.
A. Inset Map of the area concerned showing the location of the proposed
certified survey map in relation to the U. S. Public Land Survey section
and quarter-section lines and abutting and nearby public streets and
highways.
B. Date, graphic scale, and north point.
C. Name and addresses of the owner, subdivider, and land surveyor
preparing the plat.
D. All Existing Structures, together with an identification of the type of
structure, such as residence, garage, barn, or shed; the distances of
such structures from existing and proposed property lines, wells,
watercourses, and drainage ditches; and existing property boundary
lines in the area adjacent to the exterior boundaries of the proposed
certified survey map and within 100 feet thereof. The proposed use of
existing structures to be retained shall be noted. All wells within the
exterior boundaries of the proposed certified survey map, and within 50
feet of the exterior boundaries of the map, shall be shown.
E. Location, Approximate Dimensions, and Area of any sites to be reserved
or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways, open space
preservation, or other public use.
F. Building or Setback Lines required by the Village Plan Commission, or
other approving or objecting agency, which are more restrictive than
the regulations of the zoning district in which the certified survey map
is located, or which are proposed by the subdivider and are to be
included in recorded private covenants.
§ 495-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-45
1:401
§ 495-46. Additional information.
The Plan Commission may require that the following additional information
be provided when necessary for the proper review and consideration of the
proposed land division:
G. Location and Names of any adjoining streets, highways, subdivisions,
parks, cemeteries, public lands, and watercourses, including
impoundments. The owners of record of abutting unplatted lands shall
also be shown.
H. Length and Bearing of the center line of all streets. The lengths shall be
given to the nearest 0.01 foot and the bearings to the nearest one
second of arc. The arc, chord, and radius lengths, and the chord
bearing, together with the bearings of the radii of the ends of the arcs
and chords, shall be given for all curved lines.
I. Street Width along the line of any obliquely intersecting street line to
the nearest 0.01 foot.
J. Active and Abandoned Railway rights-of-way within and abutting the
exterior boundaries of the proposed certified survey map, and the
location and right-of-way of existing and proposed bicycle and
pedestrian ways.
K. Notations or Any Restrictions required by the Village Plan Commission
or other approving or objecting agency relative to access control along
any public ways within or adjacent to the proposed certified survey
map; the provision and use of planting strips; or provisions for the
protection of any existing wetlands or other environmentally significant
lands within the exterior boundaries of the proposed certified survey
map.
L. Easements for any Public sanitary sewers, water supply mains,
stormwater management facilities, drainageways, or access ways.
A. Topographic Features, including existing and/or proposed contours,
with two-foot intervals for slopes less than 12% and at no more than
five-foot intervals for slopes 12% and greater. Elevations shall be
marked on such contours, referenced to National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) of 1929. The requirement to provide topographic data
may be waived if the parcel or parcels proposed to be created are fully
developed.
B. Soil Types as shown on the soil survey maps prepared by the U. S. Soil
Conservation Service (now known as the Natural Resources
Conservation Service).
C. The Square Footage and elevation of the first floor of all buildings
proposed to remain on the site or sites included in the certified survey
map.
§ 495-45 SLINGER CODE § 495-46
1:402
D. The Village Plan Commission, upon recommendation of the Village
Engineer, may, in order to determine the suitability of the site
concerned for the construction of buildings and supporting roadways,
require that soil borings and tests be made to ascertain subsurface soil
conditions and depths to bedrock and to the groundwater table. The
number of such borings and tests shall be adequate to portray for the
intended purpose the character of the soil and the depths to bedrock
and groundwater from the undisturbed surface.
E. Where the Site is Not to be Served by public sanitary sewer, soil borings
and tests shall be made to determine the suitability of the site for the
use of onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems. Such borings and
tests shall meet the requirements of Chapters SPS 383 and 385 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code. The location of the borings shall be
shown on the map and the findings, with respect to suitability for the
use of onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems, set forth in a
separate report submitted with the proposed certified survey map.
F. Boundaries of Primary and Secondary Environmental Corridors and
isolated natural resource areas, as delineated and mapped by the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission. The
boundaries of wetlands shall also be shown. The wetland boundaries
shall be determined on the basis of a field survey made to identify,
delineate, and map those boundaries; and the name of the person,
agency, or firm identifying, delineating, and mapping the wetland
boundaries shall be provided together with the date of the field survey
concerned.
G. Boundaries of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval floodplain and
related regulatory stages, as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission. Where such data are not available, the floodplain
boundaries and related stages shall be determined by a registered
professional engineer retained by the subdivider, and the engineer's
report providing the required data shall be submitted for review and
approval by the Village Engineer.
H. The Location of Woodlands, as mapped by the Southeastern Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission, within the proposed certified survey
map.
I. The Approximate Location of existing and proposed onsite sewage
treatment and disposal facilities.
J. Historic, Cultural, and Archaeological Features, with a brief description
of the historic character of buildings, structures, ruins, and burial sites.
K. Location and Water Elevations at the date of the survey of all lakes,
ponds, rivers, streams, creeks, and drainage ditches within the
proposed certified survey map and within 200 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the map. Approximate high and low water elevations and
the ordinary high water mark referenced to NGVD 1929 shall also be
§ 495-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-46
1:403
§ 495-47. State Plane Coordinate System.
Where the map is located within a one-quarter section, the corners of which
have been located, monumented, and placed on the State Plane Coordinate
System through high order horizontal control surveys conducted to
standards established by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission, the map shall be tied directly to two adjacent section or
quarter section corners defining a quarter section line so located,
monumented, and placed on the State Plane Coordinate System. The grid
bearing and distance of each tie shall be determined by field measurements.
The Wisconsin State Plane Coordinates, together with a description, of the
monuments marking the section or quarter section corners to which the
map is tied shall be shown on the map. All distances and bearings shall be
referenced to the Wisconsin State Plane Coordinate System, South Zone,
based upon the North American Datum of 1927, and shall be adjusted to
the control survey network established to the standards promulgated by
the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission for the area
concerned. Where the field measurements differ from the control survey
data by more than one part in 10,000, in the alternative to adjusting the
field measured distances and bearings of the ties to the control survey
network, the surveyor shall show both the measured field distances and
bearings and the recorded and published control survey distances and
bearings concerned. Under this alternative, the discrepancies shall be
brought to the attention of the custodian of the control survey data for
the area concerned by the surveyor. All distances shall be recorded to the
nearest 0.01 foot and all bearings to the nearest one second of arc. The
grid bearing and distance of the tie shall be determined by a closed survey
meeting the error of closure herein specified for the survey of the exterior
boundaries of the certified survey map.
§ 495-48. Certificates.
All certified survey maps shall provide all of the certificates required for
final plats by Section 236.21 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The Village Board
shall certify its approval on the face of the map. In addition, the surveyor
shown. The status of navigability of the lakes, ponds, rivers, streams,
creeks, and drainage ditches shall be indicated based upon a
determination by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
L. The Village Plan Commission may require that the entire area
contiguous to the land encompassed within the proposed certified
survey map and owned or controlled by the subdivider be included in
the certified survey map even though only a portion of said area is
proposed for immediate development. The Village Plan Commission
may also require the submission of a sketch plan, drawn to scale,
showing the entire contiguous holdings owned or controlled by the
subdivider and identifying proposed future development of the parcel,
including general street and parcel locations.
§ 495-46 SLINGER CODE § 495-48
1:404
shall certify that he or she has fully complied with all of the provisions of
this Ordinance.
§ 495-49. Recording.
After the certified survey map has been duly approved by the Village Board,
the Village Clerk shall cause the certificate to be inscribed upon the map
attesting to such approval and the map recorded as provided for under
§ 495-25F of this chapter.
§ 495-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-49
1:405

ARTICLE VII
Design Standards
§ 495-50. Street arrangement.
A. General requirements. In any new land division or condominium, the
street layout shall conform to the arrangement, width, type, and
location indicated on the adopted County jurisdictional highway system
plan, the adopted Village Official Map, or the adopted Village
Comprehensive Plan or plan component. In areas for which such plans
have not been completed, or are of insufficient detail, the street layout
shall recognize the functional classification of the various types of
streets and shall be developed and located in proper relation to existing
and proposed streets, to the topography, to such natural features as
streams and existing trees, to public convenience and safety, to the
proposed use of the land to be served by such streets, and to the most
advantageous development of adjoining areas. The land division or
condominium shall be designed so as to provide each lot with
satisfactory frontage on a public street.
B. Arterial Streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready access to
centers of employment, centers of governmental activity, community
shopping areas, community recreation, and points beyond the
boundaries of the community. They shall also be properly integrated
with and related to the existing and planned system of arterial streets
and highways and shall be, insofar as practicable, continuous and in
alignment with existing or planned streets with which they are to
connect.
C. Collector Streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready collection of
traffic from residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the
arterial street and highway system and shall be properly related to the
arterial streets to which they connect.
D. Land Access Streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, to
discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient
storm and sanitary sewerage systems, and to require the minimum
street area necessary to provide safe and convenient access to abutting
property.
E. Proposed Streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the lot, parcel, or
tract being subdivided or developed unless prevented by topography or
other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the Plan
Commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the
coordination of the layout of the land division or condominium or for the
advantageous development of adjacent lands.
F. Arterial street protection. Whenever an existing or planned arterial
street is located adjacent to or within a proposed land division or
condominium, adequate protection of residential lots, limitation of
access to the arterial street, and separation of through and local traffic
§ 495-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-50
1:407
§ 495-51. Limited access highway and railroad right-of-way
treatment.
Whenever a proposed land division or condominium contains or is adjacent
to a limited access highway or railroad right-of-way the design shall provide
the following treatment:
shall be provided through the use of alleys, frontage streets, or culde-
sac or loop streets. A restricted non-access easement along any
property line abutting an arterial street may be required. Permanent
screening or landscape plantings may be required in any restricted nonaccess
area.
G. Development Control or Reserve Strips shall not be allowed on any plat
or certified survey map to control access to streets or alleys, except
where control of such strips is placed with the Village under conditions
approved by the Plan Commission.
H. Access shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts for offstreet
loading and service areas.
I. Street Names shall be approved by the Village and shall not duplicate
or be similar to existing street names elsewhere in the Village. Existing
street names shall be continued into the land division or condominium
wherever possible. Where an adopted Village or County street address
system plan exists, the street names shall be assigned in accordance
with the recommendations of such plan or plans.
A. Non-access easement and planting area. When lots within a proposed
land division or condominium back upon the right-of-way of an existing
or planned limited access highway or railroad, a non-access easement
and planting area at least 50 feet in depth shall be provided adjacent to
the highway or railroad right-of-way. The minimum lot depth required
by the Village zoning ordinance shall be increased by 50 feet to
accommodate the non-access easement and planting area. This nonaccess
easement and planting area shall be a part of all lots and shall
have the following restriction lettered on the face of the plat or certified
survey map: "This area is reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs.
No access shall be permitted across this area. The building of
structures, except public or private utility structures and fences, is
prohibited hereon."
B. Plats Located in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts shall
provide, on each side of a limited access highway or railroad right-ofway,
streets approximately parallel to such highway or railroad. A
distance of not less than 150 feet shall be provided to allow for the
appropriate use of the land between such streets and the highway or
railroad.
C. Streets Parallel to a Limited Access Highway or railroad right-of-way,
when intersecting an arterial or collector street which crosses said
§ 495-50 SLINGER CODE § 495-51
1:408
§ 495-52. Street, bicycle, and pedestrian way design standards.
highway shall be located at a minimum distance of 250 feet from
said street or railroad right-of-way. Such distance, where desirable and
practicable, shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum
distance required for the future separation of grades by means of
desirable approach gradients.
D. Land Access Streets immediately adjacent to arterial streets and
railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided in residential areas.
A. Minimum width. The minimum right-of-way and roadway width of all
proposed streets and alleys shall be as specified by the Comprehensive
Plan or component thereof, Official Map, or County jurisdictional
highway system plan. If no width is specified therein, the minimum
right-of-way and roadway widths for arterial, collector, and land access
streets shall be as shown on Table 1 for streets having an urban crosssection.
If the Plan Commission determines that a permanent rural
cross-section may be used, the minimum right-of-way and roadway
widths set forth in Table 2 shall apply.
B. Cross-Sections for collector and land access streets having an urban
cross-section shall be as shown on Table 1. If the Plan Commission
determines that a permanent rural cross-section may be used, the
cross-sections for collector and land access streets set forth in Table 2
shall apply. The cross-sections for arterial streets should be based on
detailed engineering studies. Appendix A contains cross-sections for
both urban and rural streets.
C. Cul-de-Sac Streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall
not exceed 1,000 feet in length unless provisions are made for adequate
emergency access and water main configuration. Cul-de-sac streets
shall terminate in a circular turnabout having a minimum right-of-way
radius of 75 feet. Cul-de-sac turnabouts with an urban cross-section
shall have a minimum outside face-of-curb radius of 61 feet; and have a
tapered landscaped island with a face-of-curb radius of 37 feet at its
widest end, a face-of-curb radius of 20 feet at its narrowest end, and a
length of 100 feet. Cul-de-sac turnabouts with a rural cross-section
shall have a minimum outside pavement radius of 53 feet; and have a
tapered landscaped island with a face-of-curb radius of 35 feet at its
widest end, a face-of-curb radius of 20 feet at its narrowest end, and a
length of 93 feet.
D. Temporary Termination of streets intended to be extended at a later
date shall be accomplished with the construction of a temporary "T"-
shaped turnabout contained within the street right-of-way subject to
review and approval by the Village Engineer.
E. Bicycle and Pedestrian Ways with a right-of-way width of not less than
12 feet may be required where deemed necessary by the Plan
Commission to provide adequate bicycle and pedestrian circulation or
§ 495-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-52
1:409
access to schools, shopping centers, churches, or transportation
facilities. Bicycle and pedestrian ways in wooded and wetland areas
shall be so designed and constructed as to minimize the removal of
trees, shrubs, and other vegetation, and to preserve the natural beauty
of the area.
F. Grades.
(1) Street grades shall be established wherever practicable so as to
avoid excessive grading, the promiscuous removal of ground cover
and tree growth, and general leveling of the topography. All
changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a
minimum length equivalent in feet to 30 times the algebraic
difference in the rates of grade for arterial streets, and one-half this
minimum for all other streets.
Table 1
Required Urban Cross-Sections for Streets and Other
Public Ways
Type of Street
Or Public Way
Right-of-Way
Width To be
Dedicated
Roadway, Terrace,
Sidewalk, and Related
Widths
Arterial streets 120 feet, or as
required by the
Village Official
Map or
Comprehensive
Plan
As determined by the Village
Plan Commission
Collector
streets
80 feet • 48-foot pavement (face of
curb to face of curb)
• 10-foot terraces
• 5-foot sidewalks
• 1-foot sidewalk buffers
Land access
streets
60 feet • 32-foot pavementa (face of
curb to face of curb)
• 8-foot terraces
• 5-foot sidewalks
• 1-foot sidewalk buffers
Minor land
access streetsb
50 feet • 28-foot pavement (face of
curb to face of curb)
• 5-foot terraces
• 5-foot sidewalksc
• 1-foot sidewalk buffers
§ 495-52 SLINGER CODE § 495-52
1:410
Table 1
Required Urban Cross-Sections for Streets and Other
Public Ways
Type of Street
Or Public Way
Right-of-Way
Width To be
Dedicated
Roadway, Terrace,
Sidewalk, and Related
Widths
Alley 25 feet • 20-foot pavement
• 2.5-foot buffers
Cul-de-sac 75-foot outside
radius
• 61-foot outside curb
radius
• 37-foot radius for center
islandd
• 24-foot pavement (face of
curb to face of curb)
• 8-foot terrace
• 5-foot sidewalk
• 1-foot sidewalk buffer
Pedestrian and
bicycle ways
12 feete • 8-foot pavementf
• 2 foot buffer
NOTES:
a The thirty-two-foot pavement width is suggested only for use
with land access streets serving relatively low density, singlefamily
residential areas. For land access streets serving higher
density single- and multifamily residential, commercial, and
industrial areas, a minimum width of 36 feet should be
provided.
b A fifty-foot right-of-way and twenty-eight-foot pavement width
for land access streets would be applicable on relatively short
loop and cul-de-sac streets in areas of single-family homes with
attached garages and driveways, with adequate area available
on each lot for off-street parking and snow storage, and where
no bus or truck traffic other than occasional school buses and
service or delivery trucks would be expected to operate over the
street.
c Sidewalks may be eliminated on one side of minor land access
streets at the discretion of the Planning Commission.
d The center island should be tapered with a face-of-curb radius
of 37 feet at its widest end, a face-of-curb radius of 20 feet at its
narrowest end, and a length of 100 feet.
§ 495-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-52
1:411
e Recommended right-of-way width for combined bicycle and
pedestrian ways separate from street rights-of-way.
f The pavement width of pedestrian and bicycle ways in areas of
high use may be increased to 12 feet, and the buffers decreased
to four feet each.
Table 2
Required Rural Cross-Sections for Streets and Other Public
Ways
Type of
Street Or
Public Way
Right-of-Way
Width To be
Dedicated
Roadway and Related
Widths
Arterial
streets
120 feet, or as
required by the
Village Official
Map or
Comprehensive
Plan
As determined by the Village
Plan Commission
Collector
streets
80 feet • 24-foot pavement
• 6-foot shouldersa
• 22-foot terraces/drainage
swalesb
Land access
streets
66 feet • 22-foot pavement
• 4-foot shouldersa
• 18-foot terraces/drainage
swalesb
Cul-de-sac 75-foot outside
radius
• 53-foot outside pavement
radius
• 35-foot radius for center
islandc
• 18-foot traveled way
• 22-foot terrace/drainage
swaleb
Pedestrian and
bicycle ways
12 feetd • 8-foot pavement
• 2-foot buffer
§ 495-52 SLINGER CODE § 495-52
1:412
NOTES:
a Shoulders may be paved or gravel.
b The Plan Commission may require sidewalks to be provided on
one or both sides of any street, if the Commission determines
that sidewalks will be needed to accommodate anticipated
pedestrian traffic. Such sidewalks shall be located at the
outside edge of the terrace/drainage swale, with a one-foot
wide buffer between the sidewalk and outside edge of the
street right-of-way, unless otherwise directed by the Plan
Commission upon the recommendation of the Village Engineer.
c The center island should be tapered with a face-of-curb radius
of 35 feet at its widest end, a face-of-curb radius of 20 feet at
its narrowest end, and a length of 93 feet.
d Recommended right-of-way width for combined bicycle and
pedestrian ways separate from street rights-of-way.
(2) Unless necessitated by exceptional topography, subject to the
approval of the Plan Commission, the maximum center line grade of
any street or public way shall not exceed the following:
(a) Arterial streets: 6%.
(b) Collector streets: 8%.
(c) Land access streets, alleys and frontage streets: 10%.
(d) Bicycle ways: 5%; however, steeper grades are acceptable for
distances up to 500 feet.
(e) Pedestrian ways: 12%. Steps or stairs shall be provided if the
grade will exceed 12%.
(3) The grade of any street shall in no case exceed 10% or be less than
1/2 of 1% for streets with an urban cross-section, and 1% for
streets with a rural cross section.
G. Crowns. Unless otherwise approved, roadway pavements shall be
designed with a center line crown. Offset crowns or continuous crossslopes
may be utilized upon approval of the Village Engineer. Alley
pavements shall be "V"-shaped, with a center line gutter for drainage.
H. Radii of curvature.
(1) When a continuous street center line deflects at any one point by
more than 10°, a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius
of curvature on said center line of not less than the following:
(a) Arterial streets and highways: 500 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 300 feet.
§ 495-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-52
1:413
§ 495-53. Street intersections.
(c) Land access streets: 100 feet.
(2) A tangent at least 100 feet in length shall be provided between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
I. Elevations of Arterial Streets shall be set so that they will not be
overtopped by a fifty-year recurrence interval flood.
J. Bridges and culverts. All new and replacement bridges and culverts
over navigable waterways, including pedestrian and other minor
bridges, shall be designed so as to accommodate the peak rate of
discharge of a one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood event
without raising the peak stage, either upstream or downstream, more
than 0.01 foot above the peak stage for the one-hundred-year
recurrence interval flood, as established by the Southeastern Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. Larger permissible flood stage increases may be acceptable for
reaches having topographic or land use conditions which could
accommodate the increased stages without creating additional flood
damage potential upstream or downstream of the proposed structure,
providing that flood easements or other appropriate legal measures
have been secured from all property owners affected by the excess
stage increases. Such bridges and culverts shall be so designed and
constructed as to facilitate the passage of ice flows and other debris.
K. Half-streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half-street is
adjacent to the proposed land division or condominium plat, the other
half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. The platting of
new half-streets shall not be permitted.
A. Right angle. Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles
as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit.
B. The Maximum Number of streets converging at one intersection shall
not exceed two.
C. The Number of Intersections along arterial streets and highways shall
be held to a minimum. Wherever practicable, the distance between
such intersections shall not be less than 1,200 feet.
D. Continuation of land access and collector streets. Land access and
collector streets shall not necessarily continue across arterial streets;
but if the center lines of such streets approach the arterial streets from
opposite sides within 300 feet of each other, measured along the center
line of the arterial or collector streets, then the location of the collector
and/or land access streets shall be so adjusted so that a single
intersection is formed.
E. Corner curves. Property lines at intersections of arterial streets and at
intersections of collector and arterial streets shall be rounded to an arc
§ 495-52 SLINGER CODE § 495-53
1:414
§ 495-54. Blocks.
§ 495-55. Lots.
with a minimum radius of 15 feet, or a greater radius if required by the
Village Engineer.
F. Vision Clearance Easements shall be provided at street intersections as
may be required by the Village zoning ordinance and by any approving
or objecting authority concerned.
A. General requirements. The widths, lengths, and shapes of blocks shall
be suited to the planned use of the land; zoning requirements; the need
for convenient bicycle, pedestrian, and motor vehicle access; traffic
safety; and the limitations and opportunities of topography.
B. The Length of Blocks in residential areas shall not as a general rule be
less than 600 feet nor more than 1,200 feet in length unless otherwise
dictated by exceptional topography or other limiting factors of good
design.
C. The Width of Blocks shall be sufficient to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth except where otherwise required to separate
residential development from arterial streets and railroad rights-of-way.
The width of lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or
industrial use shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and
loading required by the contemplated use and the Village zoning
ordinance.
A. General requirements. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be
appropriate for the location of the land division and for the type of
development and use contemplated. The lots should be designed to
provide an aesthetically pleasing building site, and a proper
architectural setting for the buildings contemplated. Lot lines shall
follow municipal boundary lines rather than cross them.
B. Side Lot Lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to
curved street lines on which the lots face, unless a non-conventional lot
layout is approved by the Plan Commission.
C. Double Frontage Lots shall be prohibited except where necessary to
provide separation of residential development from arterial streets or
to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
D. Public street frontage. Every lot shall front or abut for a distance of at
least 40 feet on a public street.
E. The area and dimensions of lots, parcels or condominium parcels.
(1) Lots within the Village. The area and dimensions shall conform to
the requirements of the Village's Zoning Code.
§ 495-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-55
1:415
(2) Lots, parcels or condominium parcels in the Village's
extraterritorial plat review area. All lots or parcels, including
condominium ownership parcels, created in the aforementioned
area shall be a minimum of 35 acres in size to preserve such areas
for reasons described in the Village's Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Approval of lots, parcels or condominium parcels less than 35 acres
in size in the Village's extraterritorial plat review area. The Village
Planning Commission may consider and recommend, and the
Village Board may approve the creation of lots, parcels, or
condominium ownership parcels less than 35 acres in size in the
aforementioned area, provided the Village finds that the following
applicable criteria are met:
(a) Prior approval. The land division must be approved
conceptually by the Town's Planning Commission before its
submittal to the Village.
(b) Public entity benefit. If applicable, the land division is created
by or for a county, city, village, town, school district, or agency
of the state, and is specifically for a public purpose.
(c) Open space preservation. If applicable, the land division
results in the preservation of permanent open space lands for
public or for private use.
(d) Agricultural land divisions. If applicable, the land division will
assist and assure the continued agricultural use of the whole
property.
(e) Non-agricultural or residential subdivisions or land divisions.
[1] The created parcels are located outside the Village's
planned Sanitary Sewer Service Area.
[2] The resulting development would be compatible with the
Village's Comprehensive Plan.
[3] The resulting development would be compatible with
nearby land uses. Measures of compatibility include basic
use, lot sizes, traffic generation, access, noise and visual
appearance.
[4] The resulting development would not adversely affect the
Village's ability to provide current or future public
services, or install public improvements, or accomplish
future annexations. The Village may consider annexation
agreements with property owner(s) to meet this criteria.
[5] If commercial, industrial or institutional use is proposed,
the land division would allow infill between or adjacent to
already existing commercial, industrial or institutional
use(s).
§ 495-55 SLINGER CODE § 495-55
1:416
[6] If mineral extraction is proposed, the land division would
meet criteria described in the Village's Comprehensive
Plan Report.
(f) Possible conditions. The Village may require conditions in
conjunction with its approval authority as described herein.
F. Re-division of lots. Wherever a lot, parcel, or tract is subdivided into
lots or parcels that are more than twice the minimum lot area required
in the zoning district in which the lot or parcel is located, the Plan
Commission may require that such lots or parcels be arranged and
dimensioned to allow re-division into smaller lots or parcels that will
meet the provisions of this Ordinance and the zoning ordinance.
G. Depth. Lots shall have a minimum average depth of 125 feet. Excessive
depth in relation to width shall be avoided and a proportion of two to
one shall be considered a desirable ratio, unless a deeper lot is needed
to protect natural resources. The depth of lots or parcels reserved or
laid out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide
for off-street parking and loading areas required by the contemplated
use and the Village zoning ordinance.
H. The Width of Lots shall conform to the requirements of the Village
Zoning Ordinance, and in no case shall a lot be less than 75 feet in
width at the building setback line, unless otherwise provided by the
Village zoning ordinance.
I. Corner Lots, when located in a district that permits a lot width less than
100 feet, shall have an extra width of 15 feet to permit adequate
building setbacks from side streets.
J. The Shape of lots shall be approximately rectangular, with the
exception of lots located on a curved street or on a cul-de-sac
turnabout. Flag lots shall be prohibited, except where necessary to
accommodate exceptional topography or to preserve natural resources
or to allow for shared driveways.
K. Lands Lying Between the Meander Line and the Water's Edge and any
otherwise unplattable lands which lie between a proposed land division
or condominium and the water's edge shall be included as part of lots,
outlots, or public dedications in any plat abutting a lake or stream.
L. Restrictions prohibiting development. Whenever a lot appearing on a
final plat, condominium plat, or certified survey map is not intended to
be buildable, or is intended to be buildable only upon certain
conditions, an express restriction to that effect, running with the land
and enforceable by the Village, shall appear on the face of the plat or
map.
M. Basement elevations on proposed building sites affected by high
groundwater.
§ 495-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-55
1:417
§ 495-56. Building and setback lines.
Building setback lines appropriate to the location and type of development
contemplated, which are more restrictive than required in the applicable
zoning district, may be permitted or required by the Plan Commission and
(1) Any person proposing to create new building sites shall perform a
detailed soil profile evaluation and satisfactorily demonstrate to the
Village Engineer that any structures with a basement will be
constructed to minimize risks from high groundwater where any of
the following conditions exist:
(a) In areas with soils classified by the Natural Resource
Conservation Service (NRCS) as hydric, poorly drained,
somewhat poorly drained or very poorly drained.
(b) Within eight vertical feet adjacent to soils classified by NRCS
as hydric or poorly drained, wetlands or other surface water
features such as lakes, streams, ponds, etc.
(c) Within areas where other soil investigations show indicators of
seasonal high water tables.
(d) Within other areas the Village Engineer determines to be at
risk of high groundwater based on site topography, drainage
patterns, observed hillside seeps or other indicators.
(2) All soil profile evaluations shall be performed in accordance with
Chapter SPS 385, Wisconsin Administrative Code. A minimum of
one soil profile evaluation shall be conducted within 50 feet of each
proposed basement meeting one or more of the criteria above.
Determinations of seasonal high water table elevations shall be
made in written interpretive report and signed and stamped by a
certified soil tester or professional soil scientist registered in the
State of Wisconsin. All submittals to the Village Engineer shall
include all applicable soil profile evaluations.
(3) To minimize the risks from the presence of high groundwater,
recommended basement floor elevation data shall be included on
the face of the plat or CSM and recorded with the Register of Deeds
with the following statement:
"Basement floor surface elevation shall not be lower than (xxx.x)
due to the potential for seasonal high groundwater conditions."
N. Drain tiles and discharge of groundwater. The Village Engineer shall be
notified of any drain tiles that are uncovered during construction, which
the Village Engineer may require to be restored or connected to other
drainage systems. No discharge of groundwater from tile lines, sump
pumps or other means shall be allowed onto another person's land, road
right-of-way or other public space without the prior written approval of
the downstream landowner or the applicable unit of government.
§ 495-55 SLINGER CODE § 495-56
1:418
shall be shown on the final plat, condominium plat, or certified survey
map. Examples of the application of this provision would include requiring
greater setbacks on cul-de-sac lots to achieve the necessary lot width at the
setback line, requiring greater setbacks to conform to setbacks of existing
adjacent development, requiring greater setbacks to accommodate a coving
design, requiring greater setbacks to avoid placing buildings within
easements or vision clearance triangles, setting special yard requirements
to protect natural resources, or requiring greater setbacks along arterial
streets and highways to meet the requirements of Chapter Trans 233 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 495-57. Easements.
§ 495-58. Protection of natural resources.
Where natural drainage channels, floodplains, wetlands, or other
environmentally sensitive areas are encompassed in whole or in part within
a proposed land division or condominium, the Plan Commission may require
A. Utility easements. The Plan Commission may require utility easements
of widths deemed adequate for the intended purpose. Such easements
shall be located as determined by the applicable utility company, but
preferably should be located along rear and side lot lines and should be
designed to avoid the location of such facilities as electric power
transformers in the flow lines of drainage swales and ditches. All lines,
pipes, cables and similar equipment shall be installed underground
unless the Plan Commission finds that the topography, soils, depth to
bedrock, woodlands, wetlands, or other physical barriers would make
underground installation impractical, or that the lots to be served by
said facilities can be served directly from existing overhead facilities
and requiring underground installation would constitute an undue
hardship upon the subdivider. Associated equipment and facilities
which are appurtenant to underground electric power,
communications, and gas facility systems, including but not limited to,
substations, pad-mounted transformers, pad-mounted sectionalizing
switches, above-grade pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, junction
boxes, meter points, and similar equipment may be installed at ground
level.
B. Drainage easements. Where a land division or condominium is
traversed by a drainageway or stream, an adequate easement shall be
provided as required by the Plan Commission and shown on the final
plat or CSM. The location, width, alignment, and improvement of such
drainageway or easement shall be subject to the approval of the Village
Engineer; and parallel streets or parkways may be required in
connection therewith. Where necessary, stormwater drainage shall be
maintained by landscaped open channels of adequate size and grade to
hydraulically accommodate maximum potential volumes of flow. These
design details are subject to review and approval by the Village
Engineer.
§ 495-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-58
1:419
that such areas be dedicated or that restriction be placed on the plat or
certified survey map to protect such resources. The Plan Commission may
further require that such areas be included in outlots designated on the plat
or certified survey map and restricted from development.
§ 495-59. Park, open space, and other public sites.
A. In the Design of a subdivision or condominium plat or a certified survey
map, due consideration shall be given to the dedication or reservation
of suitable sites of adequate size for future schools, parks, playgrounds,
public access to navigable waters, and other public purposes.
Accordingly, each subdivider of land in the Village shall dedicate park
and open space lands designated on the Village Official Map or
Comprehensive Plan or component thereof, or, where no park or open
space lands are directly involved, pay a public site fee. Proposed school
sites shall be reserved by the subdivider for future acquisition by the
School Board.
(1) Dedication of public parks and open space sites. Whenever a
proposed public playground, park, parkway, trail corridor, public
open space site, or other public lands designated on the Village's
Official Map or Comprehensive Plan or component thereof is
encompassed, in whole or in part, within a proposed land division
or condominium, the public lands shall be made a part of the
subdivision or condominium plat or certified survey map and shall
be dedicated to the public by the subdivider. Should the value of the
land to be dedicated be less than the value of the public site fee, the
subdivider shall be required to pay the Village the difference
between the value of the land dedicated and the public site fee.
Should the value of the land to be dedicated exceed the public site
fee, any lands in excess of the value of the public site fee shall be
reserved for a period not to exceed three years, unless extended by
mutual agreement, for purchase by the Village at the price agreed
upon and set forth in the Development Agreement. If the reserved
lands are not acquired within the three-year period, the land will be
released from reservation to the owner. Land values shall be
determined in accordance with § 495-59B.
(2) Reservation of school sites. Whenever a proposed public school site
designated on the Village's Official Map or Comprehensive Plan or
component thereof is encompassed, in whole or in part, within a
proposed land division or condominium, the proposed school site
shall be made a part of the plat and reserved at the time of final plat
or certified survey map approval for a period not to exceed three
years, unless extended by mutual agreement, for acquisition by the
School Board at a price agreed upon and set forth in the
Development Agreement.
(3) Public site fee option. If a proposed land division or condominium
does not encompass a proposed public playground, park, parkway,
open space site, or other public lands, the subdivider shall pay a
§ 495-58 SLINGER CODE § 495-59
1:420
public site fee to be used for the acquisition of public sites to
serve the future inhabitants of the proposed subdivision, minor
land division, or condominium at the time of application for final
plat or certified survey map approval at the rate and in accordance
with the procedures set forth in § 495-91.
B. The Value of Land to be dedicated for park or open space purposes shall
be agreed upon by the Village and the subdivider on the basis of full and
fair market value of the land to be dedicated. If the value cannot be
agreed upon by the Village and the developer, an appraisal board
consisting of one appraiser selected by the Village and retained at the
Village's expense, one appraiser selected by the subdivider and
retained at the subdivider's expense, and a third appraiser selected by
the other two appraisers and retained at a cost shared equally by the
Village and the subdivider, shall determine the value of the land.
C. Navigable Streams or Lakeshores shall have a public access-way at
least 60 feet in width platted to the low water mark at intervals of not
more than one-half mile and connecting to existing public streets,
unless wider access or greater shoreline intervals are agreed upon by
the Wisconsin Department of Administration, the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources, and the Village, as required by
Section 236.16(3) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 495-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-59
1:421

ARTICLE VIII
Required Improvements
§ 495-60. General requirements.
All required improvements shall be constructed in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the Village Engineer.
§ 495-61. Survey monuments.
The subdivider shall install survey monuments placed in accordance with
the requirements of Section 236.15 of the Wisconsin Statutes and as may
be required by the Village Engineer.
§ 495-62. Grading.
§ 495-63. Surfacing.
Following the installation, inspection, and approval by the Village Engineer
of utility and stormwater drainage improvements, the subdivider shall
surface all roadways in streets proposed to be dedicated to the public
to widths prescribed by this Ordinance, the Village Official Map,
Comprehensive Plan or component thereof, or neighborhood development
plan. Said surfacing shall be done in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Village Engineer. The cost of surfacing in
excess of 48 feet in width that is not required to serve the needs of the
land division or condominium should be borne by the Village or other unit
or agency of government having jurisdiction over the street.
§ 495-64. Curb and gutter.
A. Following the Installation of temporary block corner monuments or
other survey control points by the subdivider and establishment of
street grades by the Village Engineer, the subdivider shall grade the full
width of the right-of-way of all streets proposed to be dedicated in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Village
Engineer. The subdivider shall grade the roadbeds in the street rightsof-
way to subgrade.
B. Streets and Lots shall be brought to finished grades as specified in a
site grading plan approved by the Village Engineer.
A. Following the Installation and the Village's inspection and approval of
all utility and stormwater drainage improvements, the subdivider shall
construct concrete curbs and gutters in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Village Engineer. This requirement may
be waived where a permanent rural street section has been approved
by the Plan Commission. The cost of installation of all inside curbs and
gutters for dual roadway pavements shall be borne by the Village or the
unit or agency of government having jurisdiction.
§ 495-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-64
1:423
§ 495-65. Improvements to existing rural roads.
B. Curb Ramps shall be installed in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act and Section 66.0909 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and as
approved by the Village Engineer.
A. Existing rural roads located adjacent to or within land divisions or
developments regulated by this Ordinance shall be reviewed by the
Village Engineer regarding the extent of improvements required to be
made to such roads by the Subdivider or Developer.
B. The Village Engineer shall consider a full range of alternatives
including, but not limited to the following:
(1) Continuing the rural cross-section road with limited improvements
such as resurfacing.
(2) Reconstruction to a permanent rural cross-section road.
(3) Reconstruction to an urban cross-section road.
C. The Village Engineer shall consider the improvements as recommended
on Table 17 of the Village's Comprehensive Plan.264
D. The Village Engineer may require the Subdivider or Developer's
Engineer to provide all engineering information necessary to formulate
a recommendation regarding the extent of improvements to be made.
Such engineering information may include, but is not limited to
investigating existing pavement and subbase condition and thickness,
profiles and cross-section data, existing culvert and ditch elevations,
the location of any existing utilities, trees and other obstructions, and
survey data of existing or future rights-of-way.
E. The Village Engineer shall prepare a recommendation to the Planning
Commission regarding stormwater management related to the limited
improved or reconstructed rural cross-section roads.
F. Where such roads are divided along their center line by a Village/Town
corporate limit line, improvements may be required within the Town
portion of the road to be paid by the Subdivider/Developer. The
Developer shall obtain all necessary Town permits and pay all
associated Town fees.
G. The Village Engineer shall prepare a recommendation to the Planning
Commission who may recommend or deny continuing a rural crosssection
road as a permanent facility.
H. When a permanent rural cross-section road has been approved by the
Planning Commission, the Subdivider or Developer shall finish grade all
shoulders and ditches, install or replace all necessary culverts at
intersections and, if required, surface ditch inverts to prevent erosion
264. Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is available of the Village's website.
§ 495-64 SLINGER CODE § 495-65
1:424
§ 495-66. Sidewalks.
The subdivider shall construct a concrete sidewalk on one side of all
frontage streets and both sides of all other streets within the land division
or condominium. The construction of all sidewalks shall be in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the Village Engineer. Wider than
standard sidewalks may be required by the Village Engineer in the vicinity
of schools, commercial areas, and other places of public assembly. The
Plan Commission may waive the requirement for sidewalks upon a finding
that such walks are not required because of the provision of a separate
network of pedestrian ways, low vehicular or pedestrian traffic volumes, or
lot arrangement.
§ 495-67. Public sanitary sewerage and private sewage disposal
systems.
and sedimentation in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Village Engineer.
A. The Subdivider Shall Construct sanitary sewers in such a manner as to
make adequate sanitary sewerage service available to each lot within
the land division or condominium. Where public sanitary sewer
facilities are not available, the subdivider shall make provision for
adequate private sewage disposal systems as specified by the Village,
County, and State agencies concerned. Sanitary sewer facilities shall be
installed to the furthest limit of the parcel being developed to avoid
gaps in the sanitary sewer system, and to allow for future extensions
therefrom.
B. The Subdivider Shall Install sewer laterals to the street lot line. If, at
the time of final platting, sanitary sewer facilities are not available to
the plat, but will become available within a period of five years from the
date of plat recording, the subdivider shall install or cause to be
installed sanitary sewers and sewer laterals to the street lot line in
accordance with this section and shall cap all laterals as may be
specified by the Village Engineer. The size, type, and installation of all
sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the Village Engineer.
C. The Subdivider Shall Assume the cost of installing all sanitary sewers,
laterals, and appurtenances required to serve the land division or
condominium development proposed. If sewers greater than eight
inches in diameter are required to accommodate sewage flows
originating from outside of the proposed development, the cost of such
larger sewers shall be prorated either in proportion to the ratio of the
total area of the land division or condominium development to the total
tributary drainage area to be served by such larger sewer, or in
proportion to the contributing sewage flows, as may be agreed upon
between the subdivider and the Village, and the excess cost either
§ 495-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-67
1:425
§ 495-68. Stormwater management facilities.
§ 495-69. Water supply facilities.
§ 495-70. Other utilities.
borne by the Village or assessed against the total tributary drainage
area.
A. The Subdivider Shall Construct stormwater drainage facilities, which
may include curbs and gutters, catch basins and inlets, storm sewers,
road ditches, open channels, and storage facilities as may be required.
All such facilities are to be of adequate size and grade to hydraulically
accommodate potential volumes of flow. The type of facilities required
and the design criteria shall be determined by the Village Engineer.
Storm drainage facilities shall be so designed as to prevent and control
soil erosion and sedimentation and present no hazard to life or property.
The size, type, and installation of all stormwater management facilities
proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with the plans and
specifications approved by the Village Engineer.
B. The Subdivider Shall Assume the costs entailed in constructing
stormwater conveyances and storage facilities necessary to serve the
proposed development and to carry the existing stormwater flows
through the proposed development. If larger conveyance and storage
facilities are required to accommodate flows originating from outside of
the proposed development, or to avoid flooding attendant to increased
flows downstream of the proposed development caused not by the
development but by preexisting development upstream, the cost of such
facilities shall be prorated in proportion to the contributing rates of
flows, and the excess cost shall be borne by the Village or assessed
against the tributary drainage areas concerned.
A. The Subdivider Shall Construct water mains in such a manner as to
make adequate water service available to each lot within the land
division or condominium. If municipal water service is not available, the
subdivider shall make provision for adequate private water systems as
specified by the Village, County, and State agencies concerned. The
Village Plan Commission may require the installation of water laterals
to the street lot line. The size, type, and installation of all public water
mains proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Village Engineer. Water mains shall be
installed to the furthest limit of the parcel being developed to avoid
gaps in the water main system, and to allow for future extensions
therefrom.
B. The Subdivider Shall Assume the cost of installing all water mains eight
inches in diameter or less in size. If water mains greater than eight
inches in diameter are required to serve areas outside the proposed
development, the excess cost shall be borne by the Village.
§ 495-67 SLINGER CODE § 495-70
1:426
§ 495-71. Streetlights.
§ 495-72. Street signs.
The subdivider shall install at the intersection of all streets proposed to be
dedicated a street sign of a design specified by the Village Engineer.
§ 495-73. Street trees.
§ 495-74. Erosion and sedimentation control.
A. The Subdivider Shall Cause gas, electrical power, and telephone and
other communication facilities to be installed in such a manner as to
make adequate service available to each lot in the land division or
condominium, in accordance with § 495-57.
B. Plans Indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power,
telephone, and other communications distribution and transmission
lines required to serve the land division or condominium shall be
approved by the Village Engineer.
A. The Subdivider Shall pay for the installation and facilities to provide
public streetlights along all streets proposed to be dedicated. The Plan
Commission shall approve the style of light poles and fixtures. The
Planning Commission shall approve the illumination levels and spacing
of all streetlights which shall be compatible with the neighborhood and
type of development proposed. There shall be a minimum standard of
streetlights at the intersection of any two streets and one streetlight at
the end of every cul-de-sac.
B. In Lieu of or in Addition to the Installation of public street lamps, the
Village Plan Commission may permit the installation of private post
lamps on each lot of a land division and at appropriate locations within
a condominium. The type and location of such post lamps shall be
approved by the Village Engineer.
A. The Subdivider Shall Plant or provide funding for the planting of at
least one tree of a species approved by the Plan Commission of at least
two inches in diameter measured at six inches above the top of the root
ball at an average spacing of 50 feet along the frontage of all streets
proposed to be dedicated. The required trees shall be planted in the
area between the sidewalk and curb in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Village Engineer.
B. The Requirement for street trees may be waived by the Plan
Commission if substantial alternative landscaping, including trees, is to
be provided within the land division or condominium in accordance with
a landscaping plan approved by the Village Plan Commission.
A. The Subdivider Shall Prepare an erosion and sedimentation control
plan addressing the installation and maintenance of soil erosion and
§ 495-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-74
1:427
§ 495-75. Landscaping.
§ 495-76. Landscaping standards for cul-de-sac islands and related
maintenance responsibilities.
The Subdivider shall install landscaping improvements in public or private
cul-de-sac islands in accord with an approved Landscaping Plan which shall
incorporate the following standards:
sedimentation control measures. Such plans shall meet the
requirements set forth in Chapter 526, Stormwater Management and
Erosion Control.
B. The Subdivider Shall Plant those grasses, trees, and ground cover of
species and size specified by the Plan Commission, upon
recommendation of the Village Engineer, necessary to prevent soil
erosion and sedimentation, in accordance with the approved erosion
and sedimentation control plan.
C. The Subdivider Shall Install those protection and rehabilitation
measures, such as fencing, sloping, seeding, riprap, revetments, jetties,
clearing, dredging, snagging, drop structures, brush mats, willow
poles, and grade stabilization structures, set forth in the approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
A. The Subdivider Shall Install landscaping in accordance with a
landscaping plan approved by the Village Plan Commission. If plantings
are not installed prior to approval of a final plat or condominium plat, a
landscaping schedule shall be specified in the Development Agreement
and appropriate sureties shall be provided.
B. Maintenance of All Landscaping included in an approved landscaping
plan shall be the responsibility of the property owner, or, for
landscaping installed in common areas, the homeowners or
condominium owners association. Provisions for the maintenance of
such landscaping shall be included in the homeowners' association
documents required under § 495-12.
A. Minimum required landscaping which includes:
(1) Seeding or sodding with approved turf grass.
(2) Planting at least six trees with a minimum two-inch trunk diameter,
located at least 10 feet inside the perimeter curb edge to provide
snow storage area and spaced in accord with the approved
Landscaping Plan.
(3) Minimum landscaping shall be maintained by a Homeowners'
association or Condominium Association, or by surrounding
property owners established by deed restriction, or by the Village
where necessary.
§ 495-74 SLINGER CODE § 495-76
1:428
B. Optional additional landscaping may include:
(1) Seeding with prairie or ornamental grass in lieu of turf grass.
(2) Planting more than six trees.
(3) Planting shrubs, flowers, groundcovers or planting beds containing
any such plantings.
(4) Mandatory maintenance by either a Homeowner's Association, a
Condominium Association or by surrounding property owners
established by deed restriction.
C. Optional landscaping in islands for stormwater management which may
include:
(1) Creating internal stormwater basin(s) to collect and treat
stormwater in accord with an approved Stormwater Management
Plan.
(2) Planting with water-tolerant plants, grasses, or trees or a
combination thereof to achieve stormwater management goals.
(3) Mandatory maintenance by either a Homeowner's Association, a
Condominium Association or by surrounding property owners
established by deed restriction.
§ 495-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-76
1:429

ARTICLE IX
Construction
§ 495-77. Commencement.
No construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a
proposed land division or condominium development until a development
agreement has been executed, the Village Engineer has given written
authorization to proceed, and a preconstruction meeting of concerned
parties, such as the utilities and contractors concerned, has been called by
the Village Engineer.
§ 495-78. Phasing.
The Village Board may permit the construction and installation of public
improvements in phases corresponding to the development phases of a final
plat.
§ 495-79. Building permits.
No building permits shall be issued for a structure on any lot not of record
on the date of adoption of this Ordinance until all the requirements of this
Ordinance have been met.
§ 495-80. Plans.
Each of the following plans and accompanying construction specifications
shall, except for the landscaping plan, be approved by the Village Engineer
and any other agency having relevant approving authority before
commencement of the installation of the relevant improvement.
A. Street Plans and Profiles showing existing and proposed grades,
elevations, cross-sections, materials, and other details of required
improvements.
B. Sanitary Sewer Plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes,
elevations, materials, and other details of required facilities.
C. Plans for Stormwater Management Facilities showing the locations,
grades, sizes, elevations, materials, and other details of required
facilities, together with the path of drainage to the receiving storm
sewer, drainage channel, or watercourse.
D. Water Supply and Distribution Plans and profiles showing the locations,
sizes, elevations, materials, and other details of required facilities.
E. Grading Plans showing existing and proposed topographic contours,
mass and finished grading plans, proposed top of building foundation
and finished yard grade elevations, and such supplemental information
as required by the Village Engineer.
§ 495-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-80
1:431
§ 495-81. Earth moving.
Earth moving, such as grading, topsoil removal, mineral extraction, stream
course changing, road cutting, waterway construction or enlargement,
removal of stream or lake bed materials, excavation, channeling, clearing,
ditching, drain tile laying, dredging, and lagooning, shall be so conducted
as to minimize erosion and sedimentation and disturbance of the natural
fauna, flora, watercourse, water regimen, and topography.
§ 495-82. Preservation of existing vegetation.
The subdivider shall make every effort to protect and retain all existing
desirable trees, shrubs, grasses, and groundcover not actually lying in
public roadways, drainageways, building foundation sites, private
driveways, soil absorption waste disposal areas, and bicycle and pedestrian
ways. Trees shall be protected and preserved during construction in
accordance with the approved landscaping plan and with sound
conservation practices, including the preservation of trees by well islands
or retaining walls, whenever abutting grades are altered.
§ 495-83. Inspection.
The subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the land division
or condominium, shall make arrangements with the Village Engineer to
provide for inspection. The Village Engineer shall inspect and approve all
completed work prior to approval of the final plat or release of the sureties.
§ 495-84. Completion of improvements.
All of the improvements required under this Ordinance shall be completed
prior to the final approval of a subdivision or condominium plat by the
Village Board, except that in lieu of completion of construction, a certified
check, surety bond, or letter of credit approved by the Village Attorney may
be furnished as provided in § 495-13.
F. Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plans showing those structures
necessary to retard the rate of runoff water and those measures and
practices that will minimize erosion and sedimentation, in accordance
with § 495-74.
G. Landscaping Plans showing and describing in detail the location, size,
and species of any proposed new trees, shrubs, and other vegetation;
existing trees, shrubs, and other vegetation proposed to be retained;
nonliving durable material such as rocks, sand, gravel, or mulch; and
structures such as walls, fences, and entrance signs.
H. Additional Special Plans or information required by the Village staff,
Plan Commission, or Village Board.
§ 495-80 SLINGER CODE § 495-85
1:432
§ 495-85. As-built plans.
Within 30 days following completion and acceptance by the Village
Engineer of all improvements, the subdivider shall provide reproducible
copies of plans and profiles that accurately show the location, extent, and
horizontal and vertical location and alignment of all improvements as
actually constructed. Horizontal locations shall be expressed in terms of
Wisconsin State Plane Coordinates, North American Datum of 1927 and
vertical locations shall be referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929.
§ 495-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-85
1:433

ARTICLE X
Fees
§ 495-86. General.
The subdivider shall pay to the Village Treasurer all fees as hereinafter
required and at the times specified before being entitled to record the Plat
or Certified Survey Map concerned.
§ 495-87. Preliminary plat or certified survey map review fee.
§ 495-88. Improvement review fee.
§ 495-89. Construction review fee.
The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the Village for
such inspection as the Village Engineer deems necessary to assure that the
construction of the required improvements is in compliance with the plans,
specifications, and ordinances of the Village or any other governmental
authority.
§ 495-90. Final plat review fee.
A. The Subdivider Shall pay a fee as set forth in the Village fee schedule to
the Village Treasurer at the time of first application for approval of any
preliminary plat or certified survey map to assist in defraying the cost of
review.
B. A Reapplication Fee as set forth in the Village fee schedule shall be paid
to the Village Treasurer at the time of reapplication for approval of any
preliminary plat or certified survey map which has previously been
reviewed.
A. The Subdivider Shall pay a fee or present a letter of credit or a bond
equal to 1% of the cost of the required public improvements as
estimated by the Village Engineer at the time of the submission of
improvement plans and specifications to partially cover the cost to the
Village of reviewing such plans and specifications.
B. The Fee May be recomputed, upon demand of the subdivider or Village
Engineer, after completion of improvement construction in accordance
with the actual cost of such improvements and the difference, if any,
shall be paid by or remitted to the subdivider. Evidence of cost shall be
in such detail and form as required by the Village Engineer.
A. The Subdivider Shall pay a fee as set forth in the Village fee schedule
for each lot or parcel within the final plat to the Village Treasurer at the
time of first application for approval of said plat to assist in defraying
the cost of review.
§ 495-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-90
1:435
§ 495-91. Park and open space and public facilities fees.
§ 495-92. Engineering fee.
§ 495-93. Special legal and fiscal review fees.
The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the cost of any special legal or
fiscal analyses which may be undertaken by the Village in connection with
the proposed land division or condominium plat, including the drafting
of contracts between the Village and the subdivider. These fees may also
include the cost of obtaining independent professional opinions of
engineers, landscape architects, and land planners requested by the Village
Plan Commission in connection with the review of the land division or
condominium plat being considered.
§ 495-94. Extraterritiorial zoning and land division fee.
The Subdivider shall pay a fee as set forth in the Village fee schedule
to the Village Treasurer at the time of first application for approval of
extraterritorial land division(s).
§ 495-95. Appeal of fees.
The Subdivider shall have the right to challenge the amount of any fees
levied under §§ 495-88, 495-89, 495-92 and 495-93 of this chapter by an
appeal to the Village Board. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the Village
Board, upon due notice, shall hold a public hearing at which the Subdivider
B. A Reapplication Fee as set forth in the Village fee schedule shall be paid
to the Village Treasurer at the time of a reapplication for approval of
any final plat which has previously been reviewed.
A. If required by the Plan Commission under § 495-59, a fee for the
acquisition of public sites to serve the future inhabitants of the
proposed land division or condominium shall be paid to the Village
Treasurer at the time of first application for building permit.
B. Park and Open Space and Public Facilities Fees shall be placed in a nonlapsing
separate Service District Fund by the Village Treasurer to be
used for those purposes contained in the appropriate Needs
Assessment reports referenced in Section 10.06, Public Site Fee, of the
Village of Slinger Code of Ordinances.
A. The Subdivider Shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the Village for
all engineering work incurred by the Village in connection with the plat.
B. Engineering Work shall include the preparation of construction plans
and standard specifications. The Village Engineer may permit the
subdivider to furnish all, some, or part of the required construction
plans and specifications, in which case no engineering fees shall be
levied for such plans and specifications.
§ 495-90 SLINGER CODE § 495-95
1:436
and the Village officials concerned can present their case. Based upon
review of relevant records and the testimony presented at the public
hearing, the Village Board shall make a determination with respect to
the fairness of the amount of the fees challenged and shall make a
determination to decrease, affirm, or increase the fees concerned.
§ 495-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-95
1:437

ARTICLE XI
Definitions
§ 495-96. General definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply.
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural number; and the plural number includes the singular.
The word "shall" is mandatory. Any words not defined in this section shall
be presumed to have their customary dictionary definitions.
§ 495-97. Specific words and phrases.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVISORY AGENCY — Any agency, other than an objecting agency, to which
a plat or certified survey map may be submitted for review and comment.
An advisory agency may give advice to the Village and suggest that certain
changes be made to the plat or certified map, or it may suggest that a
plat or certified survey map be approved or denied. Suggestions made
by an advisory agency are not, however, binding on the Village Board or
Plan Commission. Examples of advisory agencies include the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission, school districts, and local utility
companies.
ALLEY — A public way affording secondary access to abutting properties.
APPROVING AUTHORITIES — Each governmental body having authority to
approve or reject a preliminary or final plat. Approving authorities are set
forth in Section 236.10 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
ARTERIAL STREET — A street used, or intended to be used, primarily for
fast or heavy through traffic, whose function is to convey traffic between
municipalities and activity centers. Arterial streets are designated in the
Regional Transportation System Plan prepared and adopted by the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission.
BLOCK — An area of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets,
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines, shorelines
of waterways, and Village, Village, or town boundaries.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to a lot line and at a specified minimum
distance from the lot line to comply with the building setback requirements
of the Village Zoning Ordinance and the requirements of this Ordinance.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — See "building line."
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP — A map, prepared in accordance with Section
236.34 of the Wisconsin Statutes and this Ordinance, for the purpose of
dividing land into not more than four parcels; or used to document for
recording purposes survey and dedication data relating to single parcels.
§ 495-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-97
1:439
COLLECTOR STREET — A street used, or intended to be used, to carry
traffic from land access streets to the system of arterial streets, including
the principal entrance streets to residential developments.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — See Open Space, Common.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The extensively developed plan, also called a
master plan, adopted by the Plan Commission and certified to the Village
Board pursuant to Section 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes, or a
Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Village Board pursuant to Section
66.1001 of the Wisconsin Statutes. Components of a Comprehensive Plan
include, but are not limited to, a land use, transportation system, park
and open space, sanitary sewer, public water supply, and stormwater
management system elements, and neighborhood unit development plans.
Devices for the implementation of such plans include zoning, Official
Mapping, land division control, and capital improvement programs.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of ownership combining individual unit
ownership with shared use and ownership of common property or facilities,
established in accordance with Chapter 703 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Common areas and facilities are owned by all members of the condominium
association on a proportional, undivided basis. A condominium is a legal
form of ownership, and not a specific building type or style.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — An association, whose members consist
of owners of units in a condominium, which administers and maintains the
common property and common elements of a condominium.
CONDOMINIUM DECLARATION — The instrument by which property
becomes subject to Chapter 703 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT — A part of a condominium intended for any type
of independent use, including one or more cubicles of air at one or more
levels of space or one or more rooms or enclosed spaces located on one or
more floors (or parts thereof) in a building. A unit may include two or more
noncontiguous areas.
COUNTY PLANNING AGENCY — The agency created by the County Board
and authorized by Statute to plan land use and to review subdivision plats
and certified survey maps.
COVENANT — A restriction on the use of land, usually set forth in the deed.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate turn-about for vehicular traffic.
DEED RESTRICTION — A restriction on the use of a property set forth in
the deed.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — An agreement entered into by and
between the Village and a subdivider whereby the Village and subdivider
agree as to the design, construction, and installation of required public
improvements; the payment for such public improvements; dedication of
land; and other matters related to the requirements of this Ordinance. The
Development Agreement shall not come into effect unless and until a Letter
§ 495-97 SLINGER CODE § 495-97
1:440
of Credit or other appropriate surety has been provided to the Village by the
subdivider.
ENVIRONMENTAL CORRIDOR — See "Primary Environmental Corridor",
"Secondary Environmental Corridor", and "Isolated Natural Resource
Area".
EXTRATERRITORIAL PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTION — The
unincorporated area within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or a village and
within three miles of all other cities. Where such jurisdictions overlap, the
jurisdiction over the overlapping area is divided on a line, all parts of which
are equidistant from the boundaries of each municipality, so that not more
than one municipality exercises extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction
over any area.
FINAL PLAT — A map prepared in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes and this Ordinance for the purpose
of creating a subdivision.
FLOODPLAINS — Those lands, including the floodplains, floodways, and
channels, subject to inundation by the one-hundred-year recurrence
interval flood or, where such data are not available, the maximum flood of
record.
FRONTAGE — The total dimension of a lot abutting a public street
measured along the street line.
FRONTAGE STREET — A land access street auxiliary to and located on the
side of an arterial street for control of access and for service to the abutting
development.
HEDGEROW — A row of shrubs or trees planted for enclosure or separation
of fields.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An association combining individual
home ownership with shared use, ownership, maintenance, and
responsibility for common property or facilities, including private open
space, within a land division.
ISOLATED NATURAL RESOURCE AREA — An area containing significant
remnant natural resources at least five acres in area and at least 200 feet in
width, as delineated and mapped by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional
Planning Commission.
LAND ACCESS STREET — A street used, or intended to be used, primarily
for access to abutting properties.
LAND DIVISION — A generic term that includes both subdivisions and
minor land divisions, as those terms are defined in this section.
LANDSCAPING — Living plant material, such as grass, groundcover,
flowers, shrubs, vines, hedges, and trees; nonliving durable material such
as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, wood chips or bark; and structures such as
walls and fences.
§ 495-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-97
1:441
LETTER OF CREDIT — An irrevocable written agreement guaranteeing
payment for improvements, entered into by a bank, savings and loan, or
other financial institution authorized to do business in the State of
Wisconsin and which has a financial standing acceptable to the Village,
which secures a subdivider's obligation to pay the cost of designing,
constructing, and installing required public improvements and certain other
obligations in connection with an approved land division or condominium.
LOT — A parcel of land having frontage on a public street, occupied or
intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size
to meet lot width, lot frontage, lot area, setback, yard, parking, and other
requirements of the Village Zoning Ordinance.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection,
provided that the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of 135° or
less.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage
on more than one street. Double frontage lots shall normally be deemed to
have two front yards and two side yards and no rear yard.
LOT, FLAG — A lot not fronting on or abutting a public street and where
access to the public street system is by a narrow strip of land, easement,
or private right-of-way. Flag lots generally are not considered to conform to
sound planning principles.
MINOR LAND DIVISION — A "minor land division" is any division of land
that:
MUNICIPALITY — An incorporated Village or Village.
NATIONAL MAP ACCURACY STANDARDS — Standards governing the
horizontal and vertical accuracy of topographic maps and specifying the
means for testing and determining such accuracy, endorsed by all Federal
agencies having surveying and mapping functions and responsibilities.
These standards have been fully reproduced in Appendix D of SEWRPC
Technical Report No. 7, Horizontal and Vertical Survey Control in
Southeastern Wisconsin.
NAVIGABLE WATER — Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within
Wisconsin, and all rivers, streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages, and other
waters within the territorial limits of Wisconsin which are navigable under
the laws of this State. The Wisconsin Supreme Court has declared navigable
Creates more than one, but less than five, parcels or building sites,
inclusive of the original remnant parcel, any one of which is five acres
or less in area, by a division or by successive divisions of any part of the
original parcel within a period of five years; or
A.
Divides a block, lot, or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat into
more than one, but less than five, parcels or building sites, inclusive of
the original remnant parcel, without changing the exterior boundaries
of said plat or the exterior boundaries of blocks within the plat, and the
division does not result in a subdivision.
B.
§ 495-97 SLINGER CODE § 495-97
1:442
all bodies of water with a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and with
levels of flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the
shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis. The Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources is responsible for determining if a water body or
watercourse is navigable.
OBJECTING AGENCY — An agency empowered to object to a subdivision
plat pursuant to Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The Village may
not approve any plat upon which an objection has been certified until the
objection has been satisfied. The objecting agencies include the Wisconsin
Department of Administration, the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, and the
County Planning Agency.
OFFICIAL MAP — A document prepared and adopted pursuant to Section
62.23(6) of the Wisconsin Statutes, which shows the location of existing
and planned streets, parkways, parks, playgrounds, railway rights-of-way,
waterways, and public transit facilities.
OPEN SPACE — Any site, parcel, lot, area, or outlot of land or water
that has been designated, dedicated, reserved, or restricted from further
development. Open space may be privately or publicly owned, but shall
not be part of individual residential lots. Open space shall be substantially
free of structures, but may contain recreational facilities approved by the
Village.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Privately-owned land within a land division
or condominium that has been restricted in perpetuity from further
development and is set aside for the use and enjoyment by residents of the
land division or condominium. Common open space shall be substantially
free of structures, but may contain recreational facilities approved by the
Village.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Land within a land division or condominium that
has been dedicated to the public for recreational or conservation purposes.
Open space lands shall be substantially free of structures, but may contain
recreational facilities approved by the Village.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up
to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction, or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
OUTLOT — A parcel of land, other than a buildable lot or block, so
designated on the plat, which is used to convey or reserve parcels of
land. Outlots may be created to restrict a lot which is unbuildable due to
high groundwater, steep slopes, or other physical constraints, or to create
common open space. Outlots may also be parcels of land intended to be redivided
into lots or combined with lots or outlots in adjacent land divisions
in the future for the purpose of creating buildable lots. An outlot may also
be created if a lot fails to meet requirements for a private onsite wastewater
§ 495-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-97
1:443
treatment system, but which may be buildable if public sewer is extended
to the lot or land division.
Section 236.13(6) of the Wisconsin Statutes prohibits using an outlot as
a building site unless it complies with all the requirements imposed for
buildable lots. The Village will generally require that any restrictions
related to an outlot be included on the face of the plat.
PARCEL — A single piece of land separately owned, either publicly or
privately, and capable of being conveyed separately.
PLAT — A map prepared, as required by § 495-8 of this chapter, for the
purpose of recording a subdivision, minor land division, or condominium.
PRAIRIES — Open, generally treeless areas which are dominated by native
grasses, as delineated and mapped by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional
Planning Commission.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A map showing the salient features of a proposed
subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary
consideration. A preliminary plat precisely describes the location and
exterior boundaries of the parcel proposed to be divided, and shows the
approximate location of lots and other improvements.
PRIMARY ENVIRONMENTAL CORRIDOR — A concentration of significant
natural resources at least 400 acres in area, at least two miles in length, and
at least 200 feet in width, as delineated and mapped by the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, open channel,
water main, street, park, sidewalk, bicycle or pedestrian way, or other
facility for which the Village may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation.
PUBLIC WAY — Any public street, highway, bicycle or pedestrian way,
drainageway, or part thereof.
REPLAT — The process of changing, or the plat or map which changes,
the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat, certified survey map, or a
part thereof. The division of a large block, lot, or outlot within a recorded
subdivision plat or certified survey map without changing the exterior
boundaries of said block, lot, or outlot is not a replat.
RESERVE STRIP — Any land which would prohibit or interfere with the
orderly extension of streets, bicycle or pedestrian ways, sanitary sewer,
water mains, stormwater facilities or other utilities or improvements
between two abutting properties.
SECONDARY ENVIRONMENTAL CORRIDOR — A concentration of
significant natural resources at least 100 acres in area and at least one
mile in length. Where such corridors serve to link primary environmental
corridors, no minimum area or length criteria apply. Secondary
environmental corridors are delineated and mapped by the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission.
§ 495-97 SLINGER CODE § 495-97
1:444
SHORELANDS — Those lands lying within the following distances: 1,000
feet from the ordinary high water elevation of a navigable lake, pond, or
flowages; or 300 feet from the ordinary high water elevation of a navigable
stream, or to the landward edge of the floodplain, whichever is greater.
SOIL MAPPING UNIT — Soil type, slope, and erosion factor boundaries
as shown on the operational soil survey maps prepared by the U. S. Soil
Conservation Service (now known as the Natural Resources Conservation
Service).
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent thereof,
dividing or proposing to divide land resulting in a subdivision, minor land
division, or replat, or any person who creates a condominium under Chapter
703 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
SUBDIVISION — A division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the owner
thereof or the owner's agent for the purpose of sale or of building
development, including condominium development, where:
SURETY BOND — A bond guaranteeing performance of a contract or
obligation through forfeiture of the bond if said contract or obligation is
unfulfilled by the subdivider.
TRACT — A parcel lying in more than one U. S. Public Land Survey section.
UNIT — See "condominium unit."
VILLAGE ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer who is a full
time employee of the Village, or a consulting engineer who provides
resident staff services to the Village, and who is duly appointed by the
Village Board to the position.
WETLAND — An area where water is at, near, or above the land surface
long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation,
and which has soils indicative of wet conditions.
WOODLANDS — Upland areas at least one acre in extent covered by
deciduous or coniferous trees as delineated and mapped by the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission.
The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites,
inclusive of the original remnant parcel, any one of which is five acres
or less in area, by a division or by successive divisions of any part of the
original property within a period of five years; or
A.
The act of division creates six or more parcels or building sites,
inclusive of the original remnant parcel, of any size by successive
divisions of any part of the original property within a period of five
years.
B.
§ 495-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-97
1:445
Chapter 526
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 481.
Land division and development — See Ch.
495.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 526-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted by the Village of Slinger Village Board under
the authority granted by §§ 61.354, 92.07(15), 281.33 and Ch. 236, Wis.
Stats. This chapter supersedes all conflicting and contradictory regulations
previously enacted by the Village of Slinger relating to stormwater
management and construction site erosion control. The requirements of
this chapter do not preempt more stringent erosion and sediment control
requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
§ 526-2. Findings.
The Village Board finds that construction site erosion and uncontrolled
stormwater runoff from land disturbing and land development activities
have significant adverse impacts upon local water resources and the health,
safety and general welfare of the community, and diminish the public
enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, soil erosion and
stormwater runoff can:
A. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals, including those authorized under §§ 281.16 and
283.33, Wis. Stats.
B. Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated under
rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under § NR
151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Carry a significant amount of sediment, nutrients, bacteria/other
pathogens, organic matter, toxins and other pollutants to local lakes,
streams and wetlands;
B. Diminish the capacity of water resources to support recreational and
water supply uses, and a natural diversity of plant and animal life;
C. Clog drainage systems with sediment, and organic material, which in
turn increases maintenance costs;
D. Overwhelm existing drainageways with increased flows, causing bank
and channel erosion, and increasing downstream flooding and property
damage;
§ 495-97 SLINGER CODE § 526-2
1:446
§ 526-3. Purpose and intent.
§ 526-4. Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the Village of Slinger.
§ 526-5. Applicability, exemptions and waivers.
E. Reduce groundwater recharge, which may diminish stream base flows
and/or lower water levels in local lakes, ponds and wetlands;
F. Contaminate drinking water supplies;
G. Generate airborne particulate concentrations that are health
threatening or may cause other off-site damage to property or the
environment; and
H. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence
and levels of flooding.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for
land development and land disturbing activities aimed to minimize
sedimentation, water pollution, flooding and related property and
environmental damage caused by soil erosion and uncontrolled
stormwater runoff during and after construction, in order to diminish
the threats to public health, safety, welfare, and the natural resources
of the Village of Slinger.
B. Intent. It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate construction
site erosion and stormwater management under the authority granted
in § 61.354, Wis. Stats. This chapter is not intended to limit activity or
land divisions permitted under the applicable zoning and land division
ordinances.
C. Regional stormwater management. The Village Board recognizes that
the preferred method of permanently managing stormwater runoff from
land development activities is through the preparation and
implementation of regional stormwater management plans by
watershed areas which are designed to meet the requirements of this
chapter. Accordingly, provisions have been incorporated into this
chapter to allow for the implementation of this type of plan in lieu of
complying with certain on-site stormwater management requirements.
A. Construction site erosion control. Unless otherwise exempted under
Subsection C below, or waived under Subsection D below, an erosion
and runoff control permit under § 526-6 of this chapter shall be
required, and all construction site erosion control provisions of this
chapter shall apply to all land disturbing activity that meet any of the
following:
(1) Disturbs 4,000 square feet or more of total land surface area;
§ 526-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-5
1:447
(2) Involves excavation or filling, or a combination of excavation and
filling, in excess of 400 cubic yards of material;
(3) Disturbs 100 lineal feet of road ditch, grass waterway or other land
area where surface drainage flows in a defined open channel;
including the placement, repair or removal of any underground
pipe, utility or other facility within the cross-section of the channel
at flow capacity;
(4) Involves the laying, repairing, replacing, or enlarging of an
underground utility, pipe or other facility, or the disturbance of
road ditch, grass swale or other open channel for a distance of 300
feet or more;
(5) Involves the maintenance of an existing stormwater best
management practice (BMP);
(6) Other land disturbing activities, including the installation of access
drives, that the Village Engineer determines to have a high risk of
soil erosion or water pollution, or that may significantly impact an
environmentally sensitive area. All determinations made by the
Village Engineer under this subsection shall be made in written
form, unless otherwise waived in writing by the requesting entity.
B. Stormwater management. Unless otherwise exempted under
Subsection C below, or waived under Subsection D below, an erosion
and runoff control permit under § 526-6 below, shall be required, and all
stormwater management provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
land development activity that meet any of the following:
(1) The project is located within a subdivision plat or is part of a
subdivision plat.
(2) Involves the construction of any new public or private roads or
access drives of any length;
(3) Is a certified survey map or any other land development activity
that may ultimately result in the addition of impervious surfaces of
20,000 square feet or greater in total area or may result in land
disturbing activity of one acre or greater, including smaller
individual sites that are part of a common plan of development; or
(4) Other land development activities, including access drives, that the
Village Engineer determines may significantly increase
downstream runoff volumes, flooding, soil erosion, water pollution
or property damage, or significantly impact an environmentally
sensitive area. All determinations made by the Village Engineer
under this subsection shall be made in written or electronic form,
unless otherwise waived in writing by the requesting entity.
C. Exemptions.
§ 526-5 SLINGER CODE § 526-5
1:448
(1) The following sites shall be exempt from all of the requirements of
this chapter:
(a) All activities directly relating to agricultural land use.
(b) Any land disturbing or land development activity conducted by
or contracted for any state agency, as defined under
§ 227.01(1), Wis. Stats., including but not limited to road
construction projects administered by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation. These activities must meet the
erosion control and stormwater management requirements of
the state.
(2) The following sites shall be exempt from Subsection A above, which
includes the construction site erosion control provisions of this
chapter only:
(a) The construction of one and two family residential buildings
under Ch. SPS 321, Wis. Adm. Code, unless the proposed or
actual land disturbance is one acre or greater or requested by
the Village Building Inspector or Village Board. These activities
must meet the erosion control requirements of the Wisconsin
Uniform Dwelling Code.
(b) Nonmetallic mining activities that are covered under a
nonmetallic mining reclamation permit under Ch. NR 135, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(c) Placement of underground pipe or other utility that is plowed
or bored into the ground outside areas of channelized runoff.
D. Waivers.
(1) The Village Engineer may waive any requirement of this chapter if
the Village Engineer, or the Zoning Board of Appeals under
§ 526-15 of this chapter, determines that:
(a) The site will have no appreciable off-site impact;
(b) Compliance is impractical or impossible due to site conditions,
urban street cross ordinance requirements, or other
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant;
(c) Compliance would be in direct conflict with other regulations
or related objectives of this chapter which would take
precedent; or
(d) The specific requirement is not necessary for a particular site
to ensure compliance with the erosion control and stormwater
management requirements of §§ 526-88 and 526-9 of this
chapter.
§ 526-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-5
1:449
§ 526-6. Application for erosion and runoff control permit or
preliminary approval letter.
(2) Any waiver granted shall be in written or electronic form and shall
comply with the general requirements under § 526-8A of this
chapter relating to construction site erosion control and under
§ 526-9A of this chapter relating to stormwater management.
A. Application. The applicant shall submit a completed application on a
form provided by the Village Engineer for that purpose, and indicate
whether applying for a preliminary approval letter or an erosion and
runoff control permit. By submitting an application, the applicant is
authorizing the Village Engineer to enter upon the site to obtain
information needed to administer this chapter.
B. Erosion and runoff control permit. An erosion and runoff control permit
is required for all sites that meet the applicability provisions of § 526-5A
or B of this chapter and are not exempt under § 526-5C of this chapter
or waived under § 526-5D of this chapter. To request an erosion and
runoff control permit under this chapter, the following information shall
be submitted to the administering authority:
(1) A completed application on a form provided by the Village Engineer
for that purpose;
(2) The applicable fee(s);
(3) A final erosion control plan in accordance with § 526-8 of this
chapter for those land disturbing activities that meet any of the
applicability criteria in § 526-5A of this chapter;
(4) A final stormwater management plan in accordance with § 526-9E
of this chapter and a draft maintenance agreement in accordance
with § 526-12 of this chapter for those land development activities
that meet any of the applicability criteria of § 526-5B of this
chapter; or the documentation required under § 526-9B of this
chapter related to a regional stormwater management plan; and
(5) A financial guarantee, in accordance with § 526-11C of this chapter.
C. Preliminary approval letter.
(1) Purpose and intent. A preliminary approval letter is a step in the
permit process subdivisions and other large or complex land
development activities that will need to submit a stormwater
management plan. It is designed to assist the applicant in
preparing general site plans and obtaining other applicable permits
or zoning approvals prior to finalizing detailed construction plans
for a proposed project. It will also act to notify other review
authorities that the applicant has agreed to meet the requirements
of an erosion and runoff control permit and provides a preliminary
plan of what will likely be required. An erosion and runoff control
§ 526-5 SLINGER CODE § 526-6
1:450
§ 526-7. Plan review procedures.
permit is still required prior to the start of any proposed land
disturbing or land development activity. The Village Engineer shall
issue an erosion and runoff control permit after determining that
the final erosion control and stormwater management plans are
in substantial compliance with the preliminary plans and after the
applicant has met all other requirements of Subsection B above.
(2) Application. To request a preliminary approval letter, the following
information must be submitted to the Village Engineer:
(a) A completed application, on a form provided by the Village
Engineer for that purpose;
(b) The applicable fee(s);
(c) A preliminary erosion control plan in accordance with § 526-8E
of this chapter for those sites that meet any of the applicability
criteria under § 526-5A of this chapter; and
(d) A preliminary stormwater management plan in accordance
with § 526-9F of this chapter for those land development
activities that meet any of the applicability criteria of § 526-5B
of this chapter.
D. Fees. Except as provided in § 526-9B(3) of this chapter for regional
stormwater management plans, all application and review fees for this
chapter will be established by the Village Board. Fee amounts shall be
designed to offset the costs to the Village for the administration of this
chapter and may be modified from time to time based on the records
and recommendation of the administering authority. A schedule of the
fees established by the Village Board will be available for review and
distribution through the office of the Village Clerk. No fee shall exceed
the actual and direct costs of administering this chapter. Those persons
as defined in § 32.01(1), Wis. Stats., shall be exempt from the fees in
this chapter.
A. For applications that only involve erosion control plans for less than one
acre of disturbed area.
(1) The procedures under this subsection shall only apply to
applications which meet all of the following criteria:
(a) Meet one of the applicability criteria under § 526-5A of this
chapter relating to construction site erosion control;
(b) Disturb less than one acre in total land surface area; and
(c) Do not meet any of the applicability criteria under § 526-5B of
this chapter relating to stormwater management.
§ 526-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-7
1:451
(2) With the receipt of the fully completed application form, fee and
final erosion control plan, the Village Engineer shall:
(a) Determine if the requirements of this chapter have been met,
including § 526-8D(1) of this chapter relating to the
requirements of a final erosion control plan;
(b) Determine if more information or additional review is needed;
and
(c) Notification shall be in written or electronic form, unless
otherwise waived in writing by the applicant.
(3) If all of the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met,
the Village Engineer shall issue an erosion and runoff control
permit. If the requirements of this chapter have not been met, the
Village Engineer shall notify the applicant what changes would be
necessary to meet the requirements.
(4) For any resubmittal of plans and supporting information by the
applicant, the Village Engineer will review the resubmitted
information in accordance with the process described above until
the submittal is deemed in compliance with the requirements.
B. For all other applications for an erosion and runoff control permit or
preliminary approval letter:
(1) The procedures under this subsection shall apply to all other
applications that meet at least one of the applicability criteria
under § 526-5 of this chapter, but do not meet all of the criteria
under Subsection A above, for erosion control plans for less than
one acre.
(2) With the receipt of a completed application form, fee and
applicable erosion control and/or stormwater management plan(s)
in accordance with § 526-6 of this chapter, the Village Engineer
shall:
(a) Determine if the requirements of this chapter have been met,
including § 526-8D(2) of this chapter and/or § 526-9E of this
chapter relating to the required contents of final erosion
control and stormwater management plans;
(b) Determine if more information or additional review is needed;
and
(c) Notify the applicant of the results of Subsection B(2)(a) and (b)
above. Notification shall be in written or electronic form,
unless otherwise waived by the applicant.
(3) The Village Engineer may request comments from other agencies
or units of government or require applicant to seek review from
other agencies or units of government within the review period.
§ 526-7 SLINGER CODE § 526-7
1:452
§ 526-8. Erosion control plan requirements.
(4) If all of the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met,
the Village Engineer will provide a preliminary plan approval letter
or an erosion and runoff control permit. If the requirements of this
chapter have not been met, the Village Engineer will notify the
applicant what changes would be necessary to meet the
requirements.
A. General requirements.
(1) An erosion control plan shall ensure, to the extent practical, that
soil erosion, siltation, sedimentation and other off-site impacts from
land disturbing activities are minimized.
(2) All erosion control plans shall by design, achieve to the maximum
extent practicable, a runoff discharge of no more than five tons of
sediment per acre per year from sheet and rill erosion during land
disturbing activities as compared with no sediment or erosion
controls, until the site is stabilized. This shall be completed by the
landowner, landowner's engineer, or other responsible party
designated by the landowner in conformance with the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources Construction Site Soil Loss and
Sediment Discharge Guidance.
(3) All erosion control plans and best management practice designs
prepared under this chapter shall comply with the plan
requirements of this section and the technical standards and
specifications described in § 526-10 of this chapter.
B. Guiding principles. To satisfy the requirements of this section, all
proposed land disturbing activities shall, to the extent practical:
(1) Be planned and implemented in a manner that best fits the terrain
of the site, avoiding steep slopes and other environmentally
sensitive areas;
(2) Minimize the loss of trees and other natural vegetation and the size
of the disturbed area;
(3) Minimize, through project phasing and proper construction
sequencing, the time the disturbed soil surface is exposed [Note:
See § 526-11B(3) of this chapter for special conditions relating to
construction scheduling and the issuance of a permit.];
(4) Emphasize the use of erosion control measures that prevent soil
detachment and erosion rather than trying to intercept its
transport or repair damage done.
C. Specific erosion control requirements. Unless otherwise waived under
§ 526-5D of this chapter, the following minimum requirements shall be
met on all sites subject to the applicability criteria under § 526-5A of
§ 526-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-8
1:453
this chapter and shall be addressed in the erosion control plan
submitted by the applicant, if applicable. The Village Engineer is
authorized to exceed the minimum requirements stated below for any
site that the Village Engineer determines is a high risk of soil erosion
or may significantly impact an environmentally sensitive area, and that
further controls are practical.
(1) Access drives and tracking. Each site shall provide an access
drive(s) and parking area, of sufficient dimensions and design,
surfaced with a material that will prevent erosion and minimize
tracking or washing of soil onto public or private roadways. All
nonpaved access drives shall be designed so that stormwater runoff
from adjacent areas does not flow down the drive surface. Culverts
shall be sized for calculated peak flows produced by the ten-year,
twenty-four-hour design storm and shall meet all other state and
local requirements relating to road access.
(2) Diversion of upslope runoff. Any significant amount of runoff from
upslope land area, rooftops or other surfaces that drains across the
proposed land disturbance shall be diverted around the disturbed
area, if practical. Any diversion of upslope runoff shall be done in a
manner that prevents erosion of the flow path and the outlet.
(3) Cut and fill slopes. Any cuts and fills shall be planned and
constructed to minimize the length and steepness of slope, and
stabilized in accordance with the approved erosion control plan
time lines and technical standards of this chapter.
(4) Open channels. Any open channels shall be designed and
constructed to carry the calculated peak flows for a ten-year,
twenty-four-hour design storm, and stabilized in accordance with
the approved erosion control plan timelines and technical
standards of this chapter.
(5) Inlet protection. All inlets to storm drains, culverts and other
stormwater conveyance systems shall be protected from siltation
until final site stabilization.
(6) Outlet protection. All outlets for site dewatering and stormwater
conveyance systems, including pipe or open channels entering a
stormwater management facility, shall be protected from erosion
through channel lining or other stabilization measures.
(7) Site erosion control. Measures shall be taken, using approved best
management practices (BMPs), to minimize sediment from being
carried off-site by water or wind during the construction phase,
such as: diversions, silt fence, straw bales, downspout extenders,
soil treatment, temporary mulch, sediment traps, sediment basins,
etc. All temporary best management practices shall be maintained
until the site is stabilized. Some best management practices, such
as sediment basins, may be designed to also serve as a permanent
stormwater best management practice after the site is stabilized.
§ 526-8 SLINGER CODE § 526-8
1:454
(8) Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by
sediment basins or other approved measures to prevent soil
erosion and water pollution.
(9) Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building
materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater,
toxic materials, or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed
of and not allowed to be carried off-site by runoff or wind.
(10) Topsoil. Enough topsoil from the disturbed area must be saved to
ensure that a minimum of four inches to six inches is reapplied for
all areas to be seeded or sodded. If adequate topsoil does not exist
on the site to meet this requirement, it shall be imported. If the
disturbed area is to be used for the growing of agricultural crops in
the future, the original depth of topsoil shall be restored.
(11) Subsoil. For disturbed areas that are to be used for the growing of
agricultural crops, trees or other woody vegetation in the future, a
minimum of one foot of original subsoil shall remain or be reapplied
prior to the application of topsoil to provide an adequate root zone.
(12) Soil stockpiles. Soil stockpiles shall be located no closer than 75
feet from lakes, streams, wetlands, ditches, drainageways, curbs/
gutters or other stormwater conveyance system, unless otherwise
approved by the Village Engineer. Any soil stockpile that remains
for more than seven days shall be covered or treated with
stabilization practices such as temporary or permanent seeding
and mulching.
(13) Sediment cleanup. All off-site sediment deposits occurring as a
result of construction work or a storm event shall be cleaned up by
the end of each day of the occurrence. Flushing shall not be
allowed.
(14) Final site stabilization. All disturbed areas shall be treated with
stabilization measures such as seeding, mulching, soil treatment,
erosion netting, matting, sodding, etc. within three working days of
final grading. Sites greater than 10 acres shall be treated in stages
as final grading is completed in equal increments. Any soil erosion
that occurs after final grading and/or the application of
stabilization measures must be repaired and the stabilization work
redone.
(15) Temporary site stabilization. For any disturbed area that remains
inactive for greater than seven working days, or where grading
work extends beyond September 15, the permanent seeding
deadline established by the Village Board, the administering
authority may require the site to be treated with temporary
stabilization measures such as soil treatment, temporary seeding
and/or mulching in addition to other erosion control measures as
part of an approved erosion control plan.
§ 526-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-8
1:455
(16) Removal of practices. When the disturbed area has been stabilized
by permanent vegetation or other means, temporary best
management practices such as silt fences, straw bales and
sediment traps shall be removed and these areas shall be
stabilized.
(17) Stormwater BMP data. When a stormwater permit involves the
maintenance of an existing stormwater BMP, including the removal
of accumulated sediment, the Village Engineer may require
additional support data such as before/after surveys, design and
construction details, and oversight by a professional engineer
licensed in Wisconsin.
D. Final erosion control plan contents.
(1) Sites of less than one acre of total land disturbance. The following
shall be the minimum requirements for items to be included in a
final erosion control plan:
(a) A scaled drawing of the site of not less than one inch equals 60
feet with a North arrow, delineation of the proposed land
disturbance, existing and proposed buildings, roads, access
drives, property boundaries, drainage ways, water bodies,
trees, culverts, and other structures within 50 feet of the
proposed land disturbance;
(b) The direction and steepness of slopes before and after the
proposed land disturbance;
(c) A description and location, including construction timeline and
sequencing, of all temporary best management practices
proposed to be used to minimize off-site impacts during the
construction phase;
(d) A description and location, including construction timeline and
sequencing, of all permanent best management practices
proposed to be used to stabilize the site within three working
days following final grading; and
(e) The name, address and day time phone number of the
person(s) charged with installing and maintaining all best
management practices and thus subject to the enforcement
provisions of § 526-14 of this chapter.
(f) Other information determined to be necessary by the
administering authority to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) Sites of one acre or greater in total land disturbance. The following
shall be the minimum requirements for items to be included in an
erosion control plan:
§ 526-8 SLINGER CODE § 526-8
1:456
(a) Existing site map and data. A map and supporting data of
existing site conditions at a scale of one inch equals no more
than 60 feet showing the following items on the site and within
50 feet in each direction of the site boundaries:
[1] Ownership boundaries and other references that will
accurately identify site location;
[2] Name, address and daytime telephone number of the
applicant;
[3] Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed two
feet on a plan of not less than one inch equals 60 feet;
[4] Location and name, if applicable, of all lakes streams and
other water bodies as defined on a 7.5-minute topographic
map published by the U.S. Geological Survey;
[5] Location and name, if applicable, of all other channels,
ditches, and other watercourses or areas of channelized
flow;
[6] Location and name, if applicable, of all wetlands, as
defined on the official wetland Zoning Maps of the Village
of Slinger, Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
Wetland Inventory Map and as also defined by the USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) under
federal jurisdiction and definition;
[7] Boundaries of shoreland zones, one-hundred-year
floodplains, flood fringes and floodways, as defined on the
official shoreland and floodplain zoning maps of the Village
of Slinger;
[8] Boundaries and soil symbol for each soil mapping unit, as
published in the Soil Survey of Washington County [Note:
This item may be on a separate map at smaller scale
showing key locations of proposed land disturbing or land
development activity.];
[9] Location and description of trees and other vegetative
cover types;
[10] Location, dimensions and contributing watershed area
delineation and flow calculations for all existing
stormwater drainage systems and natural flow paths or
channels entering and/or leaving the site;
[11] Locations and dimensions of any buildings, roads, parking
areas, fence lines, access lanes, rock outcrops, tile drains,
utilities and other physical features or structures;
§ 526-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-8
1:457
[12] Location and support documentation for any well currently
located on the site and/or delineation of any regulatory
setback distances of other wells, as stated in Chs. NR 811
and 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
[13] Locations and dimensions of any easements, rights-of-way,
building setbacks or other restrictions;
[14] Location of primary environmental corridor boundaries, as
defined by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission;
[15] Spill prevention and response procedures;
[16] Any other existing site information that the Village
Engineer determines to be necessary to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Site development plan. A site development plan, at a scale not
less than one inch equals 60 feet, shall include the following
map items and supporting documentation:
[1] Locations and dimensions of all proposed land
development and land disturbing activities, including
proposed cuts, fills and two-foot contours of final grade;
[2] Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil stockpiles,
the estimated length of time they will exist and any
applicable erosion control method;
[3] Locations, dimensions and applicable design
documentation for all temporary and permanent best
management practices necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter;
[4] Location, dimensions, supporting flow calculations and
stabilization plans for the proposed construction or
modification of any open channels;
[5] A construction schedule, including the sequence and
anticipated starting and completion date for each
construction step and the installation of best management
practices needed to meet the requirements of this chapter;
[6] Description of maintenance responsibilities for all
temporary best management practices;
[7] The name(s) and daytime phone number(s) of the
person(s) charged with the responsibility of installing and
maintaining all best management practices until the
completion of a satisfactory final inspection by the Village
Engineer under § 526-11E of this chapter [Note: All
persons so designated shall be subject to the enforcement
§ 526-8 SLINGER CODE § 526-8
1:458
§ 526-9. Stormwater management plan requirements.
provisions of § 526-14 of this chapter should they fail to
ensure compliance with this chapter.];
[8] Description of site revegetation and stabilization plans,
including topsoil and subsoil reapplication, seeding
mixtures, fertilizer, rates of application, time schedule and
maintenance responsibilities until the grass and/or other
plants are well established; and
[9] Detailed drawings, including profiles, cross-sections, and
other information determined to be necessary by Village
Engineer to ensure compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
[10] Certification, from a professional engineer or landscape
architect registered in the State of Wisconsin, that all
computations and designs included in the final erosion
control plan have been reviewed and approved as being in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The
name, address, daytime phone, email address, and FAX
number of the engineer must also be included for contact
during the plan review process.
E. Preliminary erosion control plan. Preliminary erosion control plans
shall contain the same information listed under Subsection D(2) above,
with the exception of Subsection D(2)(b)[2], [6], and [7] above, the
supporting documentation in Subsection D(2)(b)[5] above, and the
starting and completion dates in Subsection D(2)(b)[5] above.
A. General requirements.
(1) A stormwater management plan, prepared in accordance with this
chapter, shall maintain the site's natural drainage patterns and
predevelopment peak flows. In addition, measures shall be taken to
prevent or minimize the pollution of surface waters and
groundwater resources, damage to downstream property and local
flooding as a result of stormwater discharges from the proposed
land development.
(2) All stormwater management plans and best management practice
designs prepared under this chapter shall comply with the plan
requirements of this section and technical standards and
specifications described in § 526-10 of this chapter.
B. Exception: regional stormwater management plans.
(1) In lieu of submitting a preliminary or final stormwater management
plan for an individual site, an applicant may submit documentation
of the following:
§ 526-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-9
1:459
(a) A regional stormwater management plan, that:
[1] Includes the entire area of the proposed land development
activity;
[2] Is prepared in accordance with the general requirements
of Subsection A above and the regional stormwater
management planning technical guidelines adopted by the
Village Board under § 526-10C of this chapter; and
[3] Is approved by the Village Board and all other applicable
units of government included in the planning area.
(b) A site development plan, in accordance with Subsection E(2)
below, for the planned development showing any on-site
stormwater best management practices recommended in the
regional stormwater management plan;
(c) Certification, by a professional engineer registered in the State
of Wisconsin, that any stormwater best management
practice(s) planned to treat the runoff from the area of the
proposed land development as part of a regional stormwater
management plan, has been constructed in accordance with
the technical standards and specifications under § 526-10 of
this chapter, if applicable; and
(d) Documentation that there is an entity with the legal obligation
for operation and maintenance of any applicable stormwater
management facility in accordance with § 526-12 of this
chapter, if applicable.
(2) Upon certification by the Village Engineer that all of the conditions
of Subsection B(1)(a) above have been met, and the submitted
materials are in compliance with the regional stormwater
management plan, an application shall be deemed as meeting the
stormwater management planning requirements of this chapter.
(3) As a condition of an erosion and runoff control permit, the applicant
may be required to pay a fee or meet other requirements, as
determined by the applicable entity charged with the
implementation of the regional stormwater management plan. Any
fee would be based on an equitable distribution of the cost for land,
engineering design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater
management practices needed to serve the land development
through the regional stormwater management plan.
C. Guiding principles. To satisfy the requirements of this chapter, unless
otherwise waived under § 526-5D of this chapter, all proposed land
development activities shall, to the extent practical:
§ 526-9 SLINGER CODE § 526-9
1:460
(1) Be planned and implemented in a manner that best fits the terrain
of the site, avoiding steep slopes and other environmentally
sensitive areas;
(2) Preserve natural watershed boundaries and drainage patterns;
(3) Maintain groundwater recharge areas and the infiltration capacity
of native soils by avoiding the unnecessary filling of large natural
depressions or compaction of upper soil horizons by construction
equipment;
(4) Utilize natural or constructed vegetated swales or reinforced
permeable open channels for stormwater conveyance and
attenuation;
(5) Minimize impervious surfaces and have them drain to vegetated
areas for flow attenuation, pollutant filtering and groundwater
recharge; and
(6) Reserve adequately sized areas to allow for detention of flows and
treatment of pollutants from stormwater before being discharged
from the site.
D. Specific stormwater management requirements and performance
standards. Except where provided for under Subsection B above, or
waived under § 526-5D of this chapter, all land development activities
subject to the provisions of this subsection shall provide on-site
stormwater management plans, practices and facilities that meet the
following minimum requirements:
(1) Peak flows. The peak flow rates of stormwater runoff from a
development shall not exceed the predevelopment storm runoff
calculated for a series of design storms that at a minimum include
the one-, two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year rainfall events.
(2) Stormwater quality. The first 1/2 inch of stormwater runoff
(commonly referred to as the "first flush") shall, to the extent
practical, be treated to remove suspended solids, nutrients, organic
matter, trace metals, hydrocarbons and other pollutants associated
with the planned land development activity.
(a) By design, each stormwater management plan shall meet the
following post-development total suspended solids reduction
targets, based on average annual rainfalls, as compared to no
runoff management controls;
[1] For new land development and in-fill development, 80%
reduction in total suspended solids;
[2] For redevelopment, 40% reduction of total suspended
solids load from parking areas and roads;
§ 526-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-9
1:461
[3] The Village Engineer may require a higher level of controls
if the Village Engineer determines that the site has a high
risk of water pollution or may otherwise impact an
environmentally sensitive area, and that further controls
are practical.
(b) When designing best management practices, runoff draining to
the best management practice from off-site shall be taken into
account in determining the treatment efficiency of the
practice. Any impact on the efficiency shall be compensated for
by increasing the size of the best management practice
accordingly.
(c) Pollutant loading data for phosphorus shall also be included.
All major assumptions used in developing input parameters
shall be clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making
the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the
required map(s).
(3) Infiltration.
(a) Best management practices. BMPs shall be designed, installed,
and maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance with the
following or to the maximum extent practicable:
[1] Low imperviousness. For development up to 40%
connected imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and
low-density residential development, infiltrate sufficient
runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration
volume shall be at least 90% of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems
to meet this requirement, no more than 1% of the postconstruction
site is required as an effective infiltration
area.
[2] Moderate imperviousness. For development with more
than 40% and up to 80% connected imperviousness, such
as medium- and high-density residential, multifamily
development, industrial and institutional development,
and office parks, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that
the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least
75% of the predevelopment infiltration volume, based on
an average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement,
no more than 2% of the post-construction site is required
as an effective infiltration area.
[3] High imperviousness. For development with more than
80% connected imperviousness, such as commercial strip
malls, shopping centers, and commercial downtowns,
infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-
§ 526-9 SLINGER CODE § 526-9
1:462
development infiltration volume shall be at least 60% of
the predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement,
no more than 2% of the post-construction site is required
as an effective infiltration area.
(b) Pretreatment. Before infiltration runoff, pretreatment shall be
required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road
construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas
that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be
designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior
to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality
in accordance with Subsection D(7). Pretreatment options may
include, but are not limited to, oil and grease separation,
sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
NOTE: To achieve the infiltration requirement for the parking
lots or roads, "maximum extent practicable" should not be
interpreted to require significant topography changes that
create an excessive financial burden. To minimize potential
groundwater impacts, it is desirable to infiltrate the cleanest
runoff. To achieve this, a design may propose greater
infiltration of runoff from low pollutant sources such as roofs,
and less from higher pollutant source areas such as parking
lots.
(c) Infiltration prohibitions. Due to potential for groundwater
contamination, runoff shall not be infiltrated and will not be
credited toward meeting the requirements of this subsection
for the following:
[1] Runoff from outdoor material storage and loading docks
for tier 1 and tier 2 industrial facilities, as identified in
§ NR 216(2), Wis. Adm. Code. Parking lot runoff from tier 1
industrial facilities is prohibited. Parking lot runoff from
tier 2 facilities may be infiltrated, but may require
pretreatment.
[2] Runoff from fueling and vehicle maintenance areas, not
including rooftops and canopies.
[3] Infiltration of runoff within 1,000 feet upgradient or within
100 feet downgradient of karst features.
[4] Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in Ch. NR 811, Wis. Adm. Code, or within 100
feet of a private well as specified in Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm.
Code, for runoff infiltrated from commercial, industrial
and institutional land uses or regional devices for
residential development, not including rooftop runoff.
§ 526-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-9
1:463
[5] Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in Ch.
NR 720, Wis. Adm. Code, are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
(d) Separation distances. Infiltration BMPs shall be located so the
characteristics of the soil and the separation distance between
the bottom of the infiltration BMP and the elevation of the
highest groundwater table or the top of bedrock are in
accordance with the following:
Source Area
Groundwater or
Bedrock
Separation
Distance
Soil
Characteristics
Industrial,
commercial, and
institutional
parking lots and
roads
5 feet or more Filtering layer
Residential arterial
roads
5 feet or more Filtering layer
Roofs draining to
subsurface
infiltration
practices
1 foot or more Native or
engineered soil
with particles finer
than coarse sand
Roofs draining to
surface infiltration
practices
Not applicable Not applicable
All other impervious
source areas
3 feet or more Filtering layer
(e) Infiltration exemptions. Infiltration practices located in the
following areas may be credited toward meeting the
requirements under the following conditions, but the decision
to infiltrate under these conditions is optional:
[1] Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the
proposed bottom of the infiltration system is less than 0.6
inch per hour using a scientifically credible field test
method.
[2] Where the least permeable soil horizon to five feet below
the proposed bottom of the infiltration system using the
U.S. Department of Agriculture method of soils analysis is
one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay
loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay.
(4) Protective areas.
§ 526-9 SLINGER CODE § 526-9
1:464
(a) An area of land that commences at the top of the channel of
lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of
wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as
measured horizontally from the top of the channel or
delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface.
However, in this section, "protective area" does not include any
area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or
culvert, such that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this
location. The minimum protective area widths are as follows:
[1] For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource
waters, 75 feet.
[2] For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a U.S.
Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or a
county soil survey map, whichever is more current, 50
feet.
[3] For lakes, 50 feet.
[4] For wetlands not subject to Subsection D(4)(a)[5] or [6], 50
feet.
[5] For highly susceptible wetlands, 75 feet. Highly
susceptible wetlands include the following types:
calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous
bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland hardwood
swamps, and ephemeral ponds.
[6] For less susceptible wetlands, 10% of the average wetland
width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less
susceptible wetlands include: degraded wetland
dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass;
cultivated hydric soils; and any gravel pits, or dredged
material or fill material disposal sites that take on the
attributes of a wetland.
[7] In Subsection D(4)(a)[4] through [6], determinations of the
extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be
made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the
standards and criteria in § NR 103.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
[8] Wetland boundary delineation shall be made in accordance
with § NR 103.08(1m), Wis. Adm. Code. This subsection
does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled
in compliance with all applicable state and federal
regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have
been partially filled in compliance with all applicable state
and federal regulations shall be measured from the
wetland boundary delineation after a fill has been placed.
§ 526-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-9
1:465
Where there is a legally authorized wetland fill, the
protective area standard need not be met in that location.
[9] For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas
greater than 130 acres, 10 feet.
[10] Notwithstanding Subsection D(4)(a)[1] to [9], the greatest
protective area width shall apply where rivers, streams,
lakes and wetlands are contiguous.
[11] Minimum horizontal and vertical setbacks from the lowest
opening of the principal structure shall follow § 526-10F.
(b) Requirements. The following requirements shall be met for all
land development activity located within a protective area:
[1] Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective
area entirely or to the maximum extent practicable. If
there is no practical alternative to locating an impervious
surface in the protective area, the stormwater
management plan shall contain a written, site-specific
explanation.
[2] Where land-disturbing activity occurs within a protective
area, and where no impervious surface is present,
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70% or
greater shall be established and maintained. The adequate
sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to
provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat and
filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow areas
under sheet flow conditions. Nonvegetative materials,
such as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as
necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep slopes or
where high velocity flows occur.
NOTE: It is recommended that seeding of nonaggressive
vegetative cover be used in the protective areas.
Vegetation that is flood- and drought-tolerant and can
provide long-term bank stability because an extensive root
system is preferable.
[3] Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or
wet detention basins that are designed to control
pollutants from nonpoint sources may be located in the
protective area, but shall not encroach into wetlands,
floodplains, woodlands, isolated natural resource areas, or
primary or secondary environmental corridors to the
maximum extent practicable.
NOTE: Other regulations, such as Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and
Chs. NR 103, 115, 116 and 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and their
§ 526-9 SLINGER CODE § 526-9
1:466
associated review and approval process, may apply in the
protective area.
(c) Protective area exemptions. The protective area requirements
do not apply to any of the following:
[1] Structures that cross or access surface waters such as
boat landings, bridges and culverts;
[2] Structures constructed in accordance with § 59.692(1v),
Wis. Stats.; and
[3] Sites where runoff does not enter the surface water,
including wetlands, without first being treated by a BMP to
meet the total suspended solids requirements under
§ 526-9D(2) and peak discharge requirements under
§ 526-9D(1), except to the extent that vegetative ground
cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
(5) Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas shall have BMPs designed, installed and
maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, such that the runoff
that enters waters of the state contains no visible petroleum sheen.
NOTE: A combination of the following BMPs may be used: oil and
grease separators, canopies, petroleum spill cleanup materials, or
any other structural or non-structural method of preventing or
treating petroleum in runoff.
(6) Protection of wetlands. Stormwater discharges shall minimize the
hydrologic changes and pollutant loadings to wetlands, to the
extent practical, in order to preserve the wetland functional values.
All discharges to wetlands shall require the same protection as
Subsection D(1) and (2) above, unless otherwise approved by any
other applicable regulatory agency and the Village Engineer in
accordance with technical standards adopted under § 526-10 of
this chapter. If any land disturbing activity is proposed in a wetland
as part of a final stormwater management plan, the Village
Engineer will require all other applicable permits to be obtained
prior to the issuance of an erosion and runoff control permit.
(7) Protection of groundwater quality.
(a) Stormwater discharges shall prevent the introduction of
pollutants in the groundwater at concentrations that will likely
exceed groundwater preventive action limits or enforcement
standards established by the Department of Natural Resources
in Ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code. Pretreatment shall be provided
for all stormwater management facilities that will likely violate
this subsection, as determined by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources or stated in the technical standards adopted
under § 526-10 of this chapter.
§ 526-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-9
1:467
(b) Stormwater structures shall not be installed that meet the
definition of an injection well under § NR 812.05, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(c) If a wellhead protection plan has been approved for any area
included in the proposed land development, the administering
authority shall consult with the appropriate authority to ensure
compliance with any recommendations or regulations
contained in that plan.
(8) Flooding. All stormwater management facilities shall have a twofoot
freeboard between one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour design
storm and emergency spillway and the capacity to safely handle the
calculated peak flow rates for a one-hundred-year, twenty-fourhour
design storm without structural failure, bank erosion, loss of
freeboard or other problems. At a minimum, an emergency spillway
must be provided to carry these flows and the overflow route
indicated on an exhibit within the stormwater management report.
Additional control measures, such as infiltration practices or
maintaining predevelopment peak flows for the one-hundred-year
design storm, may be required if the Village Engineer determines
that the proposed land development activity has a high risk of
creating or significantly compounding downstream flooding or
chronic wetness problems.
(9) Soil investigations. Soil profile investigations shall be conducted at
each site proposed for the construction of a stormwater
management facility. Each excavation shall extend a minimum of
three feet below the proposed bottom of the facility or any
component of the facility, such as infiltration trenches. An adequate
number of excavations shall be conducted to examine all soil types
present in the immediate area of the proposed facility, as
determined by the Village Engineer. Each soil investigation site
shall be located on the site development plan, under Subsection
E(2) below along with the elevation, to the nearest tenth of a foot,
of the original ground surface. A soil tester, certified in the State of
Wisconsin, or the Village Engineer is required to log the soil profile
and groundwater elevation(s). The Village Engineer may require an
inspection of the soil profile when it is logged by another party.
(10) Additional requirements. The administrating authority may
establish more stringent requirements than the minimums set forth
in this section, such as addressing thermal impacts of stormwater,
downstream flooding, a total maximum daily load (TMDL) standard
for a watershed including but not limited to phosphorus, bacteria,
chlorides, other applicable state or federal laws, an order of any
court of competent jurisdiction, or chronic wetness conditions, if
the administrating authority determines that and added level of
protection is needed.
§ 526-9 SLINGER CODE § 526-9
1:468
E. Final stormwater management plan contents. The following shall be the
minimum requirements for items to be included in a final stormwater
management plan:
(1) Existing site map and data. The requirements for the existing site
map and data are the same as those listed under § 526-8D(2) of this
chapter.
(2) Site development plan. A site development plan, using the same
map scale as the existing site map, shall include the following map
items and supporting documentation:
(a) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land development
activities, including proposed cuts, fills and two-foot contours;
(b) Delineation and labeling of all proposed impervious areas and
accompanying area computations;
(c) Location of all proposed stormwater conveyance systems and
grade stabilization structures, including grade lines, crosssections,
flow/velocity computations based on a ten-year,
twenty-four-hour design storm, and the delineation of
proposed subwatersheds for each reach [Note: For watershed
areas that extend outside of the boundaries of the site map,
other scaled maps may be used.];
(d) Location of all proposed stormwater best management
practices and facilities, including plan views, cross-sections,
profiles, inlet/outlet and other detail drawings and supporting
flow computations;
(e) Summary of hydrologic and hydraulic computations prepared
to meet the requirements of Subsection D above, and for the
design of all stormwater management facilities. All major
assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated, and all geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced;
(f) Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required
under Subsection D(9) above, including location and elevation
of each investigation site, for the placement and design of
stormwater management facilities;
(g) Location(s) and dimensions of all proposed easements or other
methods used to ensure the preservation of flow paths and
adequate access for maintenance purposes, in accordance with
§ 526-12 of this chapter;
(h) Certification, from a professional engineer registered in the
State of Wisconsin, that all calculations and designs included in
the final stormwater management plan have been reviewed
§ 526-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-9
1:469
§ 526-10. Technical standards and specifications.
and approved as being in accordance with the requirements of
this section;
(i) The name, address and daytime phone, email and FAX number
of the contact person during the plan review process, the
construction supervisor, and the engineer that will certify
construction of all stormwater management facilities under
§ 526-11D of this chapter;
(j) For sites where changes are proposed in stormwater flow
paths, or where proposed stormwater discharges may
otherwise have a significant negative impact on downstream
property owner(s), the Village Engineer may require the
applicant to obtain written authorization or complete other
legal arrangements with the affected property owner(s); and
(k) Other items deemed necessary by the Village Engineer to
ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
F. Preliminary stormwater management plan contents. Preliminary
stormwater management plans shall contain the same information
listed under Subsection E above, with the following exceptions:
(1) No computations will be required for stormwater conveyance
systems, water control structures or other individual system
components; and
(2) No detail drawings, cross-sections or profiles will be required
unless the Village Engineer determines they are necessary to
assess the general feasibility of the preliminary stormwater
management plan.
A. Hydrologic and hydraulic computations.
(1) Models. All computations of runoff volumes and peak flow rates
used in the development of erosion control and stormwater
management plans in accordance with this chapter shall be based
on the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology. Models such as
SLAMM, P8 or other administrating authority approved models
may be used to evaluate the efficiency of the design in reducing
total suspended solids to meet this chapter. Models such as
SLAMM, RECARGA or other administrating authority approved
models may be used to evaluate the efficiency of the design in
meeting the infiltration requirements of this chapter. Models
distributed and supported by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources may be used to determine compliance with calculating
soil loss on construction sites.
§ 526-9 SLINGER CODE § 526-10
1:470
(2) Rainfall depths. To determine compliance with this chapter, the
following design storm values shall be used:
Design
Storm
1-year
24-hour
2-year
24-hour
10-year
24-hour
100-year
24-hour
Rainfall
depth
2.35
inches
2.65 inches 3.82 inches 6.41 inches
(3) Runoff curve numbers. All computations of predevelopment
conditions as required under § 526-9D(1) of this chapter shall use
those NRCS runoff curve numbers assigned for a "good" hydrologic
condition for each land cover type. For lands where the
predevelopment land use was woodland, grassland/meadow, or
cropland, the following NRCS curve number values shall be used as
maximums:
Hydrologic Soil Group
Runoff Curve
Number A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 55 69 78 83
(4) Average annual rainfalls. All modeling involving average annual
rainfall or runoff volumes shall use rainfall data from the
Milwaukee area between March 28 and December 6, 1969, as the
typical annual rainfall pattern for Washington County, unless
otherwise prescribed in BMP design standards.
(5) Rainfall distribution. All peak flow calculations shall use MSE3
rainfall distribution patterns, as defined in NRCS methodologies.
(6) All velocity and peak flow computations for open channels and
storm sewer pipe flows shall be based on Manning's Formula.
(7) Flow routing, culvert design, weir and orifice flow and other related
hydraulic computations used to design stormwater management
facilities shall be based on standard applicable engineering
formulas.
(8) Any data or design method proposed to be used for hydrologic or
hydraulic computations other than those listed above shall be
approved in advance in writing by the Village Engineer.
B. Best management practice design standards. The design of all best
management practices used to meet the requirements of this chapter
shall comply with the following technical standards:
§ 526-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-10
1:471
(1) Technical standards as developed or disseminated by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under Ch. NR 151, Subchapter V,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Section IV of the Field Office Technical Guide, published by the
United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource
Conservation Service; and
(3) Other technical standards published or adopted by the above noted
agencies, the Wisconsin Standards Oversight Council or the Village
Board.
C. Technical guidelines. The Village Board may adopt technical guidelines
to assist with the consistent administration of certain portions of this
chapter where more specific standards currently do not exist, are
insufficient or are subject to rapid change. The Village Board shall seek
the expertise of other agencies and organizations in the development
and maintenance of technical guidelines under this subsection.
D. Construction specifications. The construction or installation of all best
management practices and other structures shall comply with all the
construction specifications adopted by the Village Board, including
standard seeding or sodding deadlines for site stabilization.
E. Availability. Copies of all technical standards, guidelines and
specifications adopted by the Village Board shall be available for review
through the Village Clerk. Fees may be charged for copies of these
items in accordance with a fee schedule established by the Village
Board.
F. Structure setback from stormwater management facilities or wetlands
to minimize flood damage. Flows generated by the one-hundred-year,
twenty-four-hour design storm under planned land use conditions may
exceed the design capacity of stormwater management facilities or
wetlands. The restrictions described herein are used solely for setbacks
determined by stormwater calculations and are not meant to
circumvent more restrictive setback requirements described elsewhere
in Chapter 550, Zoning. For principle structures, the following
minimum requirements shall apply:
(1) Vertical setback. The lowest elevation of the finished yard grade at
the principle structure shall be at least two feet above the
maximum water elevation of any stormwater management facility
or wetland for an event produced by the one-hundred-year, twentyfour-
hour design storm.
(2) Horizontal setback. A principle structure shall be located no closer
than 25 feet from the maximum water elevation produced by a onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour design storm adjacent to any
stormwater facility or wetland.
§ 526-10 SLINGER CODE § 526-10
1:472
§ 526-11. Permit requirements.
(3) In determining the limiting elevations described above, the
stormwater management report shall include an analysis assuming
no outflow from principle outlets (plugged condition) and no
infiltration (frozen ground condition) resulting from a single onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour design storm. An additional
analysis showing the impact of back-to-back one-hundred-year,
twenty-four-hour design storms assuming no outflow from principle
outlets and no infiltration shall be included in the stormwater
management report for informational purposes.
(4) All limiting elevations determined using the methodology described
above shall be recorded as a deed restriction on the subdivision
plat, condo plat, certified survey map or any other form of land
division, and shall remain with the property in perpetuity. The
Village Engineer, upon review of the analysis described in
Subsection F(3) above, may require restrictive horizontal and
vertical setbacks than those described in Subsection F(1) and (2)
above.
(5) To prevent basement flooding of new structures, all window wells
shall be connected to the buildings sump drainage system in a
manner approved by the Building Inspector.
G. Future revisions or updates. The technical standards, guidelines and
specifications referenced in this section are made a part of the
ordinance and shall be updated periodically in order to keep current
with field experiences, research, technological advances and the
development of related technical standards by other agencies and units
of government. Any future revision or update of the technical standards
or specifications incorporated herein are also made part of this chapter
unless otherwise acted upon by the Village Board.
A. General conditions. For all permits issued under this chapter, the
permit holder shall:
(1) Obtain all other applicable federal, state, county or local permits
and comply with all other applicable regulations. The Village
Engineer will require the applicant to obtain other permits or plan
approvals prior to issuing an erosion and runoff control permit.
(2) Complete all activities in accordance with the plan(s) and
construction schedule approved by the Village Engineer. Any
significant changes made during implementation without prior
approval by the Village Engineer shall be subject to enforcement
action under § 526-14 of this chapter.
(3) Notify the Village Engineer at least 24 hours in advance of
commencing any work associated with the permit. The Village
Engineer may require further notification of work on various stages
§ 526-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-11
1:473
of construction or upon completion of individual components for
inspection purposes.
(4) Authorize the Village Engineer access to the property to perform
inspections and to carry out any necessary enforcement activities
under § 526-14 of this chapter.
(5) Inspect all best management practices after each rain event of 0.5
inch or more, or at least once each week, and make any needed
repairs. The permit holder shall maintain best management
practices until the financial guarantee under Subsection C(2) below
is released by the Village Engineer.
(6) Clean up all off-site sediment deposits and repair any erosion or
other damage occurring as a result of construction work or a storm
event at the end of each work day. Flushing of sediment is not
allowed.
B. Permit issuance and duration.
(1) The Village Engineer shall establish an expiration date for all
permits issued under this chapter. The expiration date shall not
exceed 18 months and shall be based on the construction schedules
submitted by the applicant under § 526-8D(2)(b)[5] and [9] of this
chapter, and the technical standards and specifications adopted by
the Village Board under § 526-10 of this chapter.
(2) The Village Engineer may grant longer permit periods or grant
extensions to existing permits if deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter or Village Board policy. The Village
Engineer may require additional erosion and runoff control
measures as a condition of granting longer permit periods or
permit extensions.
(3) In accordance with the technical standards and specifications in
§ 526-10 of this chapter, the Village Engineer may withhold
issuance, suspend or revoke an erosion and runoff control permit,
or require a change in the proposed construction schedule as a
condition of a permit under Subsection B(1) above, if the Village
Engineer determines that all of the following apply:
(a) The proposed or actual land disturbing activity will exceed
standard deadlines for seeding and sodding;
(b) Runoff or erosion from the site may significantly impact an
environmentally sensitive area or cause other off-site
environmental or property damage; and
(c) The applicant or permit holder is unable or unwilling to provide
other approved measures to minimize off-site impacts.
C. Financial guarantee.
§ 526-11 SLINGER CODE § 526-11
1:474
(1) Purpose and type. A bond, escrow or letter of credit in a form
approved by the Village Board and Village Attorney shall be
required for all erosion and runoff control permits issued to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(2) Amount. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be determined
by the Village Engineer and shall be based on the estimated costs
of construction of the best management practices in the approved
erosion control and/or stormwater management plan(s) plus any
costs for best management practice maintenance that may be
needed during the construction phase or immediately after the site
is stabilized, such as sediment removal.
(3) Security. Each financial guarantee shall be accompanied by a
written agreement outlining its purpose, applicable amounts and
all of the conditions for release.
(4) Conditions for release.
(a) The Village Engineer shall release the financial guarantee only
after determining full compliance with the requirements of the
permit and this chapter, including the following:
[1] Certification of construction by a professional engineer, in
accordance with Subsection D below;
[2] Completion of a satisfactory final inspection by the Village
Engineer in accordance with Subsection E below;
[3] Submittal of a copy of the recorded maintenance
agreement, in accordance with § 526-12 of this chapter.
(b) The permit holder may apply for a prorated release of the
financial guarantee based on the completion or partial
completion of various construction components or satisfaction
of individual requirements of Subsection C(4) above.
(c) The Village Engineer shall withhold from the financial
guarantee amount released to the permit holder, any costs
incurred by the Village to complete installation or maintenance
of best management practices through enforcement action, as
described in § 526-14 of this chapter, or prior to the transfer of
maintenance responsibilities through an approved
maintenance agreement, or other unpaid fees or costs incurred
by the Village associated with the administration of this
section.
(5) Other financial guarantees. The financial guarantee provisions of
this chapter shall be in addition to any other financial guarantee
requirements of the Village Board and Village Attorney for other
site improvements.
D. Construction certification.
§ 526-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-11
1:475
§ 526-12. Maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
(1) A professional engineer, licensed in the State of Wisconsin, shall be
in responsible charge and certify that the construction of all
stormwater management facilities, and other best management
practices as determined by the Village Engineer, comply with the
plan(s) approved by the Village Engineer and the technical
standards and specifications of § 526-10 of this chapter.
(2) "As-built" plans shall be submitted for all stormwater management
facilities and other permanent best management practices or
practice components as deemed necessary by the Village Engineer
to ensure compliance with this chapter. As-built plans shall
document, on maps and drawings of the same scale and quality as
the site development plan, actual location, elevations, materials,
construction specifications and other items and be certified by the
project engineer.
E. Final inspection. After completion of construction, the Village Engineer
shall conduct a final inspection of all sites regulated by this chapter to
assist in determining compliance with the approved plan(s) and other
applicable requirements, the permit and this chapter. If upon
inspection, the Village Engineer determines that any of the applicable
requirements have not been met, the Village Engineer shall notify the
permit holder what changes would be necessary to meet the
requirements. At the request of the permit holder, the Village Engineer
shall provide notification of noncompliance or a report of final
inspection in written form.
A. Maintenance agreement required. A maintenance agreement between
the local municipality or other approved unit of government and the
proposed property owner(s) shall be required for all stormwater
management facilities installed to comply with the requirements of this
chapter. The agreement shall be independent of all other restrictions or
covenants and shall be prepared in accordance with this section.
B. Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall, at a
minimum, contain the following information and provisions:
(1) Identification of the owner(s) of the land parcel where the
stormwater management facility is located;
(2) A legal description and survey map of the stormwater BMP
location(s), showing associated drainage or access easements
required to maintain the BMP;
(3) Identification of each type of stormwater management facility and
a general description of its purpose and design, including but not
limited to facility dimensions, inlet and outlet design and
dimensions and the drainage area served by the facility;
§ 526-11 SLINGER CODE § 526-12
1:476
(4) A description of all long-term maintenance activities that may or
will be required for each stormwater management facility, and an
estimated time interval between each activity;
(5) Granting of an access easement for access to all stormwater
management facilities that is a minimum of 20 feet wide, with a
minimum twelve-foot travel lane, not including drainage
easements, rights-of-way or other restricted areas. Damage to this
travel lane will be paid by the by the party responsible for the
maintenance agreement;
(6) Identification of the landowner(s), organization, municipality or
other entity responsible for long term maintenance of the
stormwater management facility;
(7) Authorization for access to the property by the Village Department
of Public Works, the Village Engineer to conduct periodic
inspections of the facility, monitor its performance and
maintenance, and notify the designated entity when maintenance
or repair activities are necessary;
(8) Recognition that, upon written notification, the designated entity
shall, within a reasonable time period, complete any needed
maintenance or repair work recommended as a result of an
inspection of the facility;
(9) Authorization for the Village, and/or other designated authority to
carry out any maintenance activities if the designated entity does
not perform the required maintenance or repair work within the
time period specified in Subsection B(7) above;
(10) Recognition that the applicable local government may exercise
their statutory authority to levy and collect special assessments
and charges under § 66.60, Wis. Stats., for any services carried out
relating to Subsection B(8) above;
(11) Language confirming that the entire agreement shall remain
binding among all parties to and within the agreement, until
changes are mutually agreed to in writing by all parties. Any
changes made to the agreement must maintain the minimum items
listed in this subsection and the long term maintenance of the
stormwater management facility.
(12) Other information as determined to be necessary by the Village
Engineer or the Village Board to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
C. Agreement approval and recording.
(1) The Village Engineer shall ensure that all submitted maintenance
agreements comply with Subsection B above. If the agreement
§ 526-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-12
1:477
§ 526-13. Illicit discharges.
does not comply, the Village Engineer shall notify the applicant or
permit holder what changes are needed in order to comply.
(2) Upon certification of compliance with Subsection B above by the
Village Engineer, the maintenance agreement shall be recorded at
the Washington County Register of Deeds referencing any plat,
certified survey or other ownership transfer device pertaining to
land which contains a stormwater management facility or is subject
to maintenance responsibility in the approved agreement. The
agreement as recorded shall ensure that the maintenance
requirements are binding on all subsequent owners of the property
upon which the stormwater management facility is located and that
the restrictions run with the land and on any other property which
is subject to maintenance responsibility in the agreement.
(3) The permit holder shall provide a copy of the recorded agreement,
including evidence of the actual recording(s), to the Village
Engineer.
D. Agreement form. The maintenance agreement requirements of this
section may, at the discretion of the Village Engineer, be a separate
document or may be incorporated into a developer's agreement. The
form of the document proposed for recording shall be reviewed and
approved by the Village Engineer. Any method used shall comply with
all of the requirements of this section.
E. Maintenance responsibilities prior to a maintenance agreement. The
permit holder shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
stormwater management facilities prior to a satisfactory final
inspection under § 526-11E of this chapter and the release of a financial
guarantee under § 526-11C of this chapter.
A. Prohibitions.
(1) Discharges. Except for stormwater and other discharges
specifically exempted under Subsection B below, no discharge,
spilling or dumping of substances or materials shall be allowed into
receiving water bodies or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots
or other areas that drain into the storm drainage system.
(2) Connection. The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system is
prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made prior to the adoption of this chapter,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or
practice applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
B. Exemptions.
§ 526-12 SLINGER CODE § 526-13
1:478
§ 526-14. Enforcement.
(1) The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this
section unless found to have an adverse impact on the stormwater:
(a) Discharges resulting from firefighting activities.
(b) Discharges from uncontaminated ground water, potable water
source, roof drains, foundation drain and sump pump, airconditioning
condensation, springs, lawn watering, individual
residential car washing, water main and hydrant flushing and
swimming pools if the water has been dechlorinated.
C. Notice of violation. Whenever the administrating authority finds a
violation of this section, the administrating authority may order
compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible party. Such
notice may require without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contaminated hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
(4) Any responsible party that fails to comply with notice of violation
under this section, shall be subject to further enforcement action
under the provisions of § 526-14 below.
A. Ordinance administrator. The Village Engineer or authorized designee
is authorized to administer and enforce compliance with this chapter.
The Village Engineer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) Advise applicants as to the requirements of this chapter and assist
them in filling out forms and other related administrative
procedures.
(2) Review applications, issue permits, and make all determinations
stated in this chapter.
(3) Conduct on-site inspections and investigate complaints in a timely
manner to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(4) Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections and
determinations made, work approved, enforcement action and
other official action.
(5) Make recommendations to the Village Board on any revisions or
updates to this chapter, including keeping all technical standards,
construction specifications and administrative tools current and
advising on policy issues.
§ 526-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-14
1:479
(6) Assist the Zoning Board of Appeals with the appeal process by
providing the necessary information for their consideration and
action.
(7) Carry out duties relating to ensuring the long-term maintenance of
stormwater management facilities, such as site inspections and
making recommendations for needed repairs or maintenance, in
accordance with approved working agreements.
B. Prohibited practices. It shall be deemed a violation, and be subject to
enforcement action, for any person, firm, association, corporation or
other entity subject to the requirements of this chapter to do in any of
the following:
(1) Commence in any land disturbing or land development activity
prior to:
(a) Obtaining an erosion and runoff control permit;
(b) Notifying the Village Engineer a minimum of 24 hours in
advance of commencement of a land disturbing activity;
(c) Installing those best management practices identified in the
approved plan(s) to be installed prior to any land disturbing or
land developing activity.
(2) Fail to follow the approved plan(s), or other permit conditions,
including but not limited to the required construction sequence,
practice installation and technical standards or specifications.
(3) Fail to maintain, repair or replace any best management practice
deemed ineffective prior to the release of a financial guarantee.
C. Violations.
(1) The Village Engineer is authorized to use the following methods of
enforcement in any combination thereof against any person, firm,
association, corporation or other entity that is found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter:
(a) Forfeiture. Any violator shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than $50 or more than $500 plus the cost of prosecution
for each violation. Each day that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
(b) Stop-work order. Any violator is subject to an order to stop all
work except that which is needed as a corrective action to
bring the site into compliance, or the Village Attorney may be
requested to obtain a temporary restraining order and such
other remedial court orders as shall be necessary to ensure
compliance.
§ 526-14 SLINGER CODE § 526-14
1:480
§ 526-15. Appeals.
(c) Permit withholding and revocation. The Village Engineer may
revoke a permit issued under this chapter, and the Village may
withhold other permits or approvals, if the Village Engineer
determines that the permit holder is not making a good faith
effort to comply with the conditions of the permit. Upon loss of
the permit, all construction shall cease except that the site
shall be stabilized to preclude any further soil erosion or
sediment disposition activity, with any costs incurred by the
Village to be charged against the financial guarantee.
(d) Emergency action. The Village may enter upon the property
and take any necessary emergency action if the Village
Engineer determines that the site in violation is an immediate
threat to public health, safety, welfare, the environment or offsite
property, or if the permit holder or other violator refuses to
take the corrective action as ordered by the Village Engineer.
Any cost incurred by the Village as a result of this action shall
be billed to the permit holder as a special assessment under
the authority of § 66.60, Wis. Stats. Failure to pay said costs on
a timely basis shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(2) Any enforcement measures shall continue until compliance is
achieved or as ordered by the court.
(3) The Village Engineer shall notify the permit holder in writing of any
violation. The written notice shall be hand delivered to the permit
holder or sent by certified mail and shall describe the violation,
remedial action(s) needed, a schedule for all remedial action to be
completed, and additional enforcement action which may be taken.
(4) The schedule established by the Village Engineer for required
remedial action shall be based on a reasonable amount of time
required to carry out the remedial action.
(5) Private enforcement. Any person affected by activities regulated
under this chapter may enforce the provisions of this chapter by
private action seeking an injunction.
D. Responsible party. For purposes of determining the responsible party or
parties for any enforcement action under this chapter, the phrase
"person, firm, association, corporation or other entity" as used in this
chapter shall include, as the context requires, any owner, lessee,
tenant, mortgagee, trustee, land contract vendor or vendee, or other
holder of any legal or equitable interest in the particular land subject to
this chapter and shall also include any contractor, subcontractor,
engineer, consultant, agent or employee retained or acting on behalf of
any of the preceding and having any material responsibility or having
undertaken any activity with respect to the particular land subject to
this chapter.
§ 526-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-15
1:481
§ 526-16. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meaning:
AFFECTED — As used in § 526-14C(5) of this chapter, means that a
regulated activity has significantly:
AGRICULTURAL CROPS — Any plant grown for the purpose of harvest to
support a business.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — A practice, technique or measure that
is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil erosion and/
or water pollution from runoff both during and after land development
activities. These can include structural, vegetative or management
practices.
COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT — All lands included within the
boundary of one or more certified surveys or other land divisions where
multiple, separate and distinct land development activity may occur at
different times.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface connected to
the waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious flow path,
or a minimally pervious flow path.
CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL — Preventing or reducing soil
erosion and sedimentation from land disturbing activity.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical depth of rainfall that would occur for
the stated return frequency (e.g., two-year or ten-year) and duration (e.g.,
twenty-four-hour). All values are based on the historical rainfall records
A. Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the review and
appeal authority for any order, requirement, decision or determination
by the Village Engineer under this chapter.
B. Procedure. The rules, procedures, duties and powers of the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be as provided in the Village Code and the
provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats., shall apply to any review or appeal
under this chapter.
C. Variances. Upon appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize
variances from the provisions of this chapter which are not contrary to
the public interest or the purpose of this chapter, and where owing to
special conditions beyond the control of the applicant, a literal
enforcement of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship.
D. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken
by any aggrieved person or by an officer, department or board of the
Village affected by any decision of the Village Engineer.
Caused negative impacts on water quality, water quantity and flooding,
or the use or maintenance of one's property or business; or
A.
B. Endangered one's health, safety or general welfare.
§ 526-15 SLINGER CODE § 526-16
1:482
for the area and are available for reference in many publications. [Note:
See § 526-10A of this chapter for a table of applicable design storms for
Washington County.]
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — Any area that, due to the natural
resources present or the lack of filtering capacity, is significantly more
susceptible to the negative impacts of sedimentation and other pollutants
associated with erosion and urban runoff. Examples include direct
hydrologic connections to lakes, stream, wetlands or other water resources,
very coarse or shallow soils to groundwater or bedrock, or areas inhabited
by endangered resources.
FINAL GRADING — The placement of topsoil over disturbed areas in
accordance with the requirements of § 526-8C of this chapter.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer
that is not composed entirely of runoff, except discharges authorized by
a WPDES permit or any other discharge not requiring a WPDES permit
such as later line flushing, landscape irrigation, individual residential car
washing, firefighting and similar discharges.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any land cover that prevents rain or melting
snow from soaking into the ground, such as roofs (including overhangs),
roads, sidewalks, patios, driveways and parking lots. For purposes of this
chapter, all road, driveway or parking surfaces, including gravel, shall
be considered impervious, unless specifically designed to encourage
infiltration and approved by the Village Engineer.
IMPRACTICAL — That complying with a specific requirement would cause
undue economic hardship and that special conditions exist which are
beyond the control of the applicant and would prevent compliance.
IN-FILL — An undeveloped area of land located within an existing urban
sewer service area, surrounded by development or development and natural
or man-made features where development cannot occur.
INFILTRATION — The process by which rainfall or runoff seeps into the soil.
INTERCEPT SOIL TRANSPORT — The process of trying to prevent delivery
of sediment by installing a silt fence or some other form of sediment trap in
the flow path to slow flows and settle the suspended soil particles.
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Any construction related activity that
results in the addition or replacement of impervious surfaces such as
rooftops, roads, parking lots and other structures.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY — Any construction related activity that
exposes soil to the erosive forces of wind, rain and snow melt. Land
disturbing activities include removing vegetative cover, grading, excavating
and filling. It does not include the planting, growing and harvesting of
agricultural crops or mining activity that is otherwise regulated through a
local mine reclamation ordinance.
NO APPRECIABLE OFF-SITE IMPACT — That the impact of any land
disturbing or land development activity on off-site property or natural
§ 526-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-16
1:483
resources would be negligible due to site conditions, such as internal
drainage or a very large vegetative buffer area surrounding a small building
project.
ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Engineer or his/her
designee.
PEAK FLOW — The highest flow rate of runoff, as estimated by calculations
and measured in cubic feet per second, that would normally result from a
given design storm.
PERMANENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — Any best management
practice that is designed to remain in place after the development is
complete. They are designed to stabilize the site or to permanently manage
stormwater runoff.
PRACTICAL — That complying with a specific requirement does not cause
undue economic hardship and that special conditions do not exist which are
beyond the control of the applicant and would prevent compliance.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The conditions of the land surface,
including vegetative cover and natural drainage patterns, prior to the
proposed land development activity. For purposes of this chapter, all
predevelopment conditions shall assume good land management and good
hydrologic condition.
REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A published document
that establishes a planned course of action for managing stormwater runoff
from an entire drainage area or watershed, including future land
development activities within the watershed. A regional stormwater
management plan will recommend the use of best management practices
for individual development sites and for selected points within the
watershed to meet the goals and objectives of the plan.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — For purposes of determining the responsible party
or parties for any enforcement action under this chapter, the phrase
"person, firm, association, corporation or other entity" as used in this
chapter shall include, as the context requires, any owner, lessee, tenant,
mortgagee, trustee, land contract vendor or vendee, or other holder of any
legal or equitable interest in the particular land subject to this chapter and
shall also include any contractor, subcontractor, engineer, consultant, agent
or employee retained or acting on behalf of any of the preceding and having
any material responsibility or having undertaken any activity with respect
to the particular land subject to this chapter.
ROADS — As used in § 526-5B(2) of this chapter, means any access drive
that serves more than two residences or businesses.
RUNOFF — Any rain or melting snow that flows over the ground surface.
(Also referred to as "stormwater runoff.")
SHORELAND/WETLAND/FLOODPLAIN ZONE — The land area that is
within the districts identified as the shoreland/wetland/floodplain zone on
the Official Zoning Maps of the Village of Slinger. The shoreland zone
generally includes all lands within 300 feet of a navigable stream or 1,000
§ 526-16 SLINGER CODE § 526-16
1:484
feet from a lake shore. The wetland and floodplain zoning districts may
extend beyond the shoreland zone.
SOIL DETACHMENT — The first step in the soil erosion process, or the
dislodging of the soil particle from raindrop impact, water flow or wind.
After detachment, the soil particle can be suspended and carried in runoff
or wind to another site. Soil detachment is reduced by providing a
vegetative or synthetic cover over the soil surface or through the
application of soil treatment measures designed for this purpose.
STABILIZED — That vegetation is well established or other surfacing
material is in place and the risk of further soil erosion is minimal.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — Any measures taken to permanently
reduce or minimize the negative impacts of stormwater runoff quantity and
quality from urban areas after land development activities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structural best
management practice, such as a retention pond, infiltration basin or other
physical structure, that is designed to collect and permanently manage the
quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff.
SUBSOIL — The "B" horizon in any natural soil profile. Natural soil profiles
are described in detail in the Soil Survey of Washington County.
TEMPORARY BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — Any best management
practice that is intended to reduce soil erosion and/or sediment in runoff
during the construction phase only, and is intended to be removed after the
site is stabilized.
TOPSOIL — The "A" horizon found in any natural soil profile not formed
from organic material. Natural soil profiles are described in detail in the
Soil Survey of Washington County.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD or TMDL — The amount of pollutants
specified as a function of one or more water quality parameters, that can
be discharged per day into a water quality limited segment and still ensure
attainment of the applicable water quality standard.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS LOAD — The total weight of material,
including sediment and other solids, that is assumed to be carried in the
runoff water and discharged from the site based on runoff models for
urban lands. For best management practice design purposes, a five-micron
particle size is usually selected as a target to achieve 80% total suspended
solids removal rate, as required in § 526-9D of this chapter.
WATERSHED — The total area of land where runoff drains to a specific
point on the landscape. It is also referred to as the "drainage area."
WETLAND FUNCTIONAL VALUES — The type, quality and significance of
the ecological and cultural benefits provided by the wetland, such as: flood
storage, water quality protection, groundwater recharge and discharge,
shoreline protection, fish and wildlife habitat, floral diversity, aesthetics,
recreation and education.
§ 526-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 526-16
1:485
WORKING DAY — A day when the administering authority and other local
businesses are routinely and customarily open for business, not including
Saturdays, Sundays or scheduled holidays. When used in § 526-8 of this
chapter, relating to specific erosion control requirements, the term
"working days" shall not include any days that site stabilization activities
could not reasonably be carried out due to inclement weather conditions.
Chapter 550
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 14, Art. I.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 14, Art.
IV.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 432.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 453.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 481.
Land division and development — See Ch.
495.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 526.
§ 526-16 SLINGER CODE § 526-16
1:486
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 550-1. Statutory authority.265
This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by §§ 61.35 and
62.23(7), Wis. Stats., and amendments thereto. The Village Board of the
Village of Slinger does ordain as follows.
§ 550-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as, referred to and cited as the "Zoning
Ordinance, Village of Slinger, Wisconsin," and is hereinafter referred to as
"this chapter."
§ 550-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the comfort, health, safety,
morals, prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of the Village of Slinger,
Wisconsin.
§ 550-4. Intent.
It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate and restrict the use of all
structures, lands and waters; and to:
A. Regulate lot coverage and the size and location of all structures so as to
prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation,
and drainage;
B. Regulate population density and distribution so as to lessen congestion
in and promote the safety and efficiency of streets and highways;
C. Regulate parking, loading and access so as to avoid sprawl or undue
concentration and to facilitate the provision of adequate public service
and utilities;
D. Secure safety from fire, flooding, pollution, contamination and other
dangers;
E. Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values;
F. Preserve and protect the natural as well as man-made aesthetic
characteristics of the Village of Slinger;
G. Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation, and other pollution of the
surface and subsurface waters;
H. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful water conditions;
265. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:487
§ 550-5. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted
or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
§ 550-6. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the Village and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of
any other power now possessed by the Village of Slinger.266
I. Provide for and protect a variety of suitable commercial and industrial
sites;
J. Protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed arterial
streets and highways;
K. Implement those municipal, county, watershed, and regional
comprehensive plans, or components of such plans adopted by the
Village of Slinger;
L. Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter; and to
provide penalties for the violation of this chapter.
266. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1.08, Warning and disclaimer of liability, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-4 SLINGER CODE § 550-6
1:488
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 550-7. Jurisdiction.
The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands and waters within the
Village limits of the Village of Slinger, Wisconsin.
§ 550-8. Zoning Administrator designated.
The Village Building Inspector is hereby designated as the Zoning
Administrator. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator, with the aid
of the Village police, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning
Administrator shall further:
§ 550-9. Compliance.
No structure, land or water shall hereafter be used or developed, and
no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered except
in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which
it is located.
§ 550-10. Zoning permit required.
No building shall be erected, moved, placed, altered or enlarged until after
the issuance of a zoning permit. Applications for a zoning permit shall be
A. Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work
approved, and other official actions.
B. Inspect all structures, lands, and waters as often as necessary to assure
compliance with this chapter.
C. Investigate all complaints made relating to the location and use of
structures, lands and waters; give notice of all violations of the chapter
to the owner, resident, agent or occupant of the premises; and report
uncorrected violations to the Village Attorney in a manner specified by
him.
D. Assist the Village Attorney in the prosecution of ordinance violations.
E. Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable
hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary by him to ensure
compliance with this chapter. If, however, he is refused entry after
presentation of his identification, he may procure a special inspection
warrant in accordance with § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
F. Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until he has
inspected and approved such use or erection. Request assistance and
cooperation from the Village Police Department and Village Attorney as
deemed necessary.
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-10
1:489
made in duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the
Zoning Administrator and shall include the following, where applicable:
A. Applicant. Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site,
architect, professional engineer and/or contractor.
B. Description of subject site. Description of the subject site by lot, block,
and recorded subdivision; or by metes and bounds, address of the
subject site, type of structure, existing and proposed operation or use of
the structure or site, number of employees, and the zoning district
within which the subject site lies.
C. Plat. Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor, or where
deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator, a location sketch
drawn to scale showing the location, boundaries, dimensions,
elevations, uses, and size of the following: subject site, existing and
proposed structures, existing and proposed easements, streets and
other public ways; off-street parking, loading areas and driveways;
existing highway access restrictions; existing and proposed street, side,
and rear yards. In addition, the plat of survey shall show the location,
elevations, and use of any abutting lands and their structures within
100 feet of the subject site.
D. Wastewater disposal. Municipal sanitary sewerage connections are
required where available for all new structures used or intended to be
used for human habitation or occupancy except in the agricultural
districts.
(1) If municipal sewerage service is not available, a proposed sewage
disposal plan shall be prepared in accordance with county and
state regulations.
E. Water service. Municipal water service connections are required where
available for all new structures used or intended to be used for human
habitation or occupancy except in the agricultural districts. If municipal
water service is not available, a proposed water supply plan shall be
prepared in accordance with county and state regulations.267
F. Miscellaneous information. Additional information as may be required
by the Village Planning Commission, Village Engineer, or Zoning
Administrator.
G. Zoning permit. Zoning permit shall be granted or denied in writing by
the Zoning Administrator within 30 days. The permit shall expire within
six months unless substantial work has commenced. Any permit issued
in conflict with the provisions of the ordinance shall be null and void.
267. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-10 SLINGER CODE § 550-11
1:490
§ 550-11. Other permits.
It is the responsibility of a permit applicant to secure all other necessary
permits required by any state, federal, or local agency.
§ 550-12. Site restrictions.
No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is unsuitable for
such use or structure by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate
drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, or low
bearing strength, erosion susceptibility, or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare
of this community. The Village Planning Commission, in applying the
provisions of this section, shall in writing recite the particular facts upon
which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain uses.
The applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence contesting such
unsuitability if they so desire. Thereafter, the Village Planning Commission
may affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
§ 550-13. Use restrictions. [Amended 9-21-2015 by Ord. No.
08-02-2015]
Only those principal uses specified for a district, their essential services,
and the following uses shall be permitted in that district.
A. All lots shall abut upon a public street, and each lot shall have a
minimum frontage of 40 feet.
B. All principal structures shall be located on a lot; and only one principal
structure shall be located on a lot in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, and
Rd-1 Residential Districts. The Village Planning Commission may
permit more than one structure per lot in other districts where more
than one structure is either needed or suitable for the orderly
development of the parcel. Where additional structures are permitted,
the Village Planning Commission may impose additional yard
requirements, landscaping requirements, or parking requirements or
require a minimum separation distance between principal structures.
C. No zoning permit shall be issued for a lot which abuts a public street
dedicated to only a portion of its proposed width and located on that
side thereof from which the required dedication has not been secured.
D. Lots abutting more restrictive district boundaries shall provide side and
rear yards not less than those required in the more restrictive abutting
district. The setbacks on the less restrictive district shall be modified
for a distance of not more than 60 feet from the district boundary line so
as to equal the average of the street yards required in both districts.
E. Erosion control performance standards and maintenance control
procedures as defined in § SPS 321.125, Wis. Adm. Code, are adopted
by reference and incorporated herein for all zoning districts within the
Village.
§ 550-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-13
1:491
A. Accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures are permitted in any
district, but not until their principal structure is present or under
construction. Residential accessory uses shall not involve the conduct
of any business, trade or industry except for permitted home
occupations and professional home offices, as defined in this chapter.
Accessory uses include incidental repairs, storage, parking facilities,
gardening, and private emergency shelters.
B. Conditional uses. Conditional permitted uses and their accessory uses
are considered as special uses requiring review, public hearing, and
approval by the Village Planning Commission in accordance with Article
IV of this chapter.
C. Unclassified or unspecified uses. Unclassified or unspecified uses may
be permitted by the Village Planning Commission provided that such
uses are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the
district and shall follow the procedures set forth in Article IV of this
chapter for approval.
D. Temporary uses. Temporary or seasonal uses of land or structures for
brief and/or intermittent periods of time may be approved by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may consult with the Planning
Commission prior to approval of temporary uses.
E. Home occupations and professional home offices. Home occupations
and professional home offices are permitted accessory uses in any
residential district in accord with the following requirements:
(1) The use of the residential dwelling for the home occupation or
professional home office shall be clearly incidental and subordinate
to its residential use. Such use shall not occupy more than 25% of
the floor area of the dwelling unit inclusive of any floor area in an
accessory building used for the home occupation.
(2) A home occupation or professional home office may be located in or
conducted in an attached or detached accessory structure per the
requirements of the applicable zoning district.268
(3) No person other than members of the family residing on the
premises shall be employed or engaged in such home occupation or
professional home office.
(4) Home occupations shall use only household equipment and no
stock-in-trade shall be kept or sold except that which is made on
the premises.
(5) No traffic shall be generated by the home occupation or
professional home office in greater volumes than would normally
be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for
268. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-13 SLINGER CODE § 550-13
1:492
parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation or use
shall be provided off the street and other than in the required street
yard.
(6) No outdoor storage of equipment or product shall be permitted.
(7) Home occupations which comply with the conditions set forth
above may include but are not limited to babysitting, canning,
crafts, desktop publishing and other computer services,
dressmaking, insurance sales, laundering, millinery, piano
instruction, real estate sales and word processing.
(8) Home occupations shall not include auto repair or service,
barbering, beauty shops, construction trades, dance studios,
photographic studios or other uses that the Zoning Administrator
determines to be similar in impact to the uses listed above.
(9) An occupancy permit is not required for a home occupation or
professional home office. If certain facilities need to be constructed
to accommodate the home occupation or home office, a building
permit may be required as determined by the Building Inspector.269
F. Storage of junk vehicles. No disassembled, dismantled, junked,
wrecked, inoperable or unlicensed vehicle shall be stored or allowed to
remain in the open upon private property in the Village of Slinger in
accordance with Chapter 453 of the Code.270
G. Accumulation or storage of miscellaneous items. The accumulation or
storage of miscellaneous items, such as tractors, refrigerators,
furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or parts thereof, junk,
wood, brick, cement block, similar materials, or other unsightly debris
which may tend to depreciate property values in the area or create a
nuisance or hazard shall not be allowed to remain unless one or more of
the following occurs:271
(1) A conditional use permit has been issued under Article IV of this
chapter.
(2) The tractor or machinery is being held as part of an equipment
sales or repair business enterprise located within a properly zoned
area.
(3) Firewood cut to use length and neatly stacked for personal use.
H. Solar energy systems permitted as an accessory use. Solar energy
systems as defined herein are permitted in residential, commercial,
269. Editor's Note: Original subsection F, Swimming pools, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted from this chapter and incorporated into Ch. 432 of the Code at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
270. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
271. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-13
1:493
manufacturing or institutional zoning districts. They are classified as an
accessory use because they are not the principal use of the property.
Commercial-scale solar energy systems which are the principal use
or the only use of a property are not permitted or regulated by the
provisions of this Subsection H. Small solar energy systems with a total
aggregate panel area on any one property not exceeding 12 square
feet in area are exempt from the requirements of this Subsection H.
Also exempt are solar-powered lighting fixtures not connected to the
electrical system on the property.
(1) Definition. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — Any solar collector or other solar
energy device, or any structural design feature whose primary
purpose is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of
solar energy for space heating or cooling, for water heating or for
producing electricity. Such systems may be mounted on a building
or on the ground.
(2) Permits and fees required. Permits as necessary shall be obtained
prior to installing or constructing a solar energy system.
Depending on the type and location of the solar energy system,
such permits may include a building permit, electrical permit,
HVAC or other mechanical permits. Permit applications shall be
made on forms provided by the Building Inspection Department.
The application shall be accompanied by detailed plans for the
installation and location of the solar energy system. The plans shall
include the exact location of the system depicted on a current
survey drawing of the lot and detailed mechanical specifications
sufficient to determine compliance with all applicable requirements
in building, electrical, HVAC, zoning and state codes. The
application shall be accompanied by all required initial fees. Should
a hearing be held in accord with § 66.0403(3) and (4), Wis. Stats.,
fees for the hearing and required notices shall be paid prior to the
scheduling of the hearing.
(3) Design, installation and operation. Solar energy systems shall be
designed, installed and operated in accord with standards and
requirements in the Wisconsin Administrative Code (Ch. SPS 371),
titled "Solar Energy Systems," and § 66.0403, Wis. Stats., titled
"Solar and Wind Access Permits," and § 700.35, Wis. Stats., titled
"Renewable Energy Resource Easements," and § 700.41, Wis.
Stats., titled "Solar and Wind Access," all of which as may be
amended and/or renumbered from time to time.
(4) Building-mounted solar energy systems. Such systems are
considered attached accessory structures and may be mounted on
a roof or wall of principal buildings in accord with the following
provisions:
§ 550-13 SLINGER CODE § 550-13
1:494
(a) They shall be located on the side or rear of a building and not
directly facing a public or private street.
(b) If installed on a sloped roof, they shall not extend vertically
above the peak of the roof.
(c) If installed on a flat roof, they shall not extend vertically more
than five feet above the surface of the roof.
(d) They may be installed on attached or detached accessory
buildings or structures, provided the requirements described
above are met.
(5) Ground-mounted or pole-mounted solar energy systems. Groundmounted
or pole-mounted systems shall be considered detached
accessory structures and shall be located in accord with the
following provisions:
(a) They may be located in any residential, commercial,
manufacturing, or institutional district.
(b) Shall be located only in a rear yard or interior side yard not
facing a public or private street.
(c) Shall be set back from all property lines a distance of one foot
for each one foot of the total height of the solar energy system.
In all cases, a minimum ten-foot setback shall be required.
(d) Shall not be located within utility or drainage easements, or
under any overhead utility lines.
(e) Ground-mounted systems shall not exceed 12 feet in height
above the average nearby ground grade elevation.
(f) Pole-mounted systems shall not exceed 20 feet in height above
the average nearby ground grade elevation.
(g) Shall be anchored into the ground in accord with applicable
state requirements and industry standards.
(6) Consideration of adjacent properties. Solar energy systems shall be
installed and operated in consideration of adjacent properties in
accord with the following provisions:
(a) A solar energy system shall be designed, located and operated
in a manner that does not create a public nuisance.
(b) Solar energy systems shall be located to ensure that any glare
is directed away from adjacent properties.
(c) No adjacent property owner(s) shall be required to remove
vegetation or structures that may block sunlight to the solar
energy system during the initial installation of a system.
§ 550-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-13
1:495
(d) Once the Building Inspector has determined that all permit
requirements have been met, the Village shall notify the
applicant and inform him that before approval can be granted,
it is the applicant's duty to deliver a notice to the owners of any
property which may be restricted by the permit. This notice
shall be delivered either by certified mail or by hand and the
applicant shall submit to the Village a copy of a signed receipt
for every notice delivered. The notice shall state that the
potentially affected property owner has the right to request a
hearing within 30 days after receipt of the notice, in
accordance with § 66.0403(3) and (4), Wis. Stats.
(7) Variances. May be requested in accord with procedures in Article
XII. Any application for a variance shall include all of the
information required in Subsection H(3) and (4). In addition, the
application shall also include valid factual reasons why a variance
is required to install and utilize a solar energy system on the
subject property.
I. Outdoor sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages. The outdoor
sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages, in circumstances
where a license is required under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., is prohibited,
except where such outdoor sale and consumption of alcohol is
specifically referenced within the regulations herein specified for the
district in which such use is located, and subject to § 550-44F of this
chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this prohibition does not apply
under circumstances where the activity is controlled pursuant to a
license described in §§ 125.26(6) and 125.51(10), Wis. Stats., (known as
a picnic license). Nothing herein shall be interpreted as prohibiting
outdoor sale or consumption of alcohol under circumstances allowed by
§ 125.06(6), Wis. Stats. (public park municipal exemption).
J. Chicken keeping in certain zoning districts as an accessory use. Hen
chickens or egg production for personal use may be kept as an
accessory use in the A-1 Agricultural/Transition District and in any
single-family residential district in accord with the following
requirements and standards: [Amended 11-4-2019 by Ord. No.
10-01-2019]
(1) No minimum lot area is required in single-family zoning districts.
(2) A maximum of six hens may be kept, no roosters.
(3) Chickens shall be kept in a coop which may have an adjacent fenceenclosed
area. A coop shall be located in the rear yard or in a front
yard with a minimum setback of 75 feet from the front sidewalk or
street and shall not exceed 50 square feet in area or eight feet in
height, and the coop or fenced area shall not be closer than 25 feet
to any separate residential or business structure on an adjacent lot,
and shall have a minimum setback of five feet from any lot line.
§ 550-13 SLINGER CODE § 550-13
1:496
§ 550-14. Reduction or joint use.
No lot, yard, parking area, building area, or other space shall be reduced in
area or dimension so as not to meet the provisions of this chapter. No part
of any lot, yard, parking area, or other space required for a structure or use
shall be used for any other structure or use.
Such facilities shall not conflict with any public or private utilities,
drainageways or any easements related thereto.
(4) Chicken keeping shall not cause a public nuisance due to noise,
odors, unsanitary conditions or any operation features as described
in Chapter 336, Nuisances. The Village may take enforcement
actions as necessary to abate any public nuisances.
(5) It shall be the property owner's responsibility to verify that chicken
keeping and chicken coops are permitted uses in any deed
restrictions or covenants applicable to the subject property.
(6) Prior to establishing the use, a permit shall be obtained from the
Building Inspector for chicken keeping and construction of the
coop and related fencing. The application for the permit shall
include a location sketch of the coop and fencing showing property
lines and nearby structures and design information for the coop. A
fee shall be paid with submittal of the application in accord with the
Village's Fee Schedule.
§ 550-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-14
1:497

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
§ 550-15. Establishment.
A. Zoning districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the Village of Slinger is
hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
A-1 Agricultural/Transitional District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Single-Family Residential District
R-3 Single-Family Residential District
R-4 Single-Family Residential District
R-5 Single-Family Residential District
R-6 Single-Family Residential District
Rd-1 Two-Family Residential District
Rm-1 Multiple-Family Residential District
Rm-2 Multiple-Family Residential District
Mh-1 Mobile Home Park Residential District
B-1 Commercial District
B-2 Commercial District
B-3 Commercial District
B&LM-1 Business and Light Manufacturing District
M-1 Limited Manufacturing District
M-2 General Manufacturing District
P-1 Park and Recreation District
I-1 Institutional District
C-1 Conservancy District
F-1 Floodplain Conservancy
HP Historic Preservation (reserved for future use)
GP Groundwater Protection (Overlay District)
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District
COS Conservation Subdivision Overlay
B. Designation of boundaries. Boundaries of these districts are hereby
established as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map - Village of
Slinger, Wisconsin," dated June 17, 1996, which accompanies and is
herewith made a part of this chapter. Such boundaries shall be
construed to follow corporate limits, U.S. Public Land Survey lines, lot
§ 550-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:499
§ 550-16. Zoning Map.
§ 550-17. Agricultural/Transitional District.
The A-1 Agricultural/Transitional District is intended to provide the Village
with a transitional district allowing the maintenance of existing continuous
agricultural uses until such time as urban development is warranted and/or
necessary.
property lines, center lines of streets, highways, alleys, easements,
railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended, and the limits of
delineated Conservancy areas unless otherwise noted on the Zoning
Map. The floodplain limits are based on the limits shown on the Flood
Hazard Boundary Map published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), dated October 16, 2015.272
C. Zoning of annexed areas.
(1) Temporary zoning. The Village Board shall refer to the Planning
Commission for a recommendation regarding the temporary zoning
classification for any land being considered for annexation and
shall include in the annexation ordinance a provision designating a
temporary zoning district classification for such area.
(2) Permanent zoning. If the intended land use is known at the time of
annexation, or as soon as practical after the annexation is final, the
permanent zoning classification for the annexed area shall be
established by zoning amendment pursuant to § 62.23(7)(d), Wis.
Stats.
(3) Floodplains. At the time of annexation, floodplain areas shall be
zoned to the F-1 Floodplain Conservancy District.
(4) Wetlands. At the time of annexation, wetland areas shall be zoned
to the C-1 Conservancy District.
A. A certified copy of the Zoning Map shall be adopted and approved with
the text as part of this chapter and shall bear upon its face the
attestation of the Village President and Village Clerk and shall be
available to the public in the office of the Village Clerk.
B. Modifications to the zoning districts shall be entered and attested on
the certified copy. Changes in the F-1 Floodplain District shall not
become effective until approved by the Wisconsin Emergency
Management Agency (WEMA).
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Forest preserves.
272. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-15 SLINGER CODE § 550-17
1:500
§ 550-18. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
The R-1 Residential District is intended to provide for single-family
residential development in a more rural large lot setting. Typical lots will
not have sanitary sewer or municipal water system connections.
(2) Game management.
(3) Essential services.273
B. Conditional uses. The following uses require a conditional use permit as
specified in Article IV of the Village of Slinger Zoning Code:
(1) Agricultural-related uses.
(2) Single-family farm dwellings.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Forest and game management related structures.
(2) Chicken keeping and chicken coops in accord with § 550-13J.
D. Parcel area and width. The minimum area of a parcel of land maintained
and/or annexed to the Village with the A-1 Agricultural/Transitional
District shall be 10 acres.
E. Building height and area.
(1) Buildings shall be limited to a maximum 35 feet in height.
(2) No farm building or parts of farm buildings shall exceed 80 feet in
height.
(3) The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,200 square
feet, with a first floor area of not less than 800 square feet.
F. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 50 feet from the highway or
road right-of-way shall be required.
(2) There shall be a side yard on each side of all structures not less
than 25 feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 50 feet.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with an attached or detached garage.
(2) Foster homes.
(3) Family day-care homes.
273. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-18
1:501
(4) Community living arrangements: less than nine persons.
(5) Essential services.274
B. Conditional uses. The following uses require a conditional use permit as
specified in Article IV of the Village of Slinger Zoning Code:
(1) Community living arrangements: nine to 15 persons.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Gardening, tool, and storage sheds incidental to the residential use.
(2) Home occupations and professional home offices as specified
herein.
(3) Chicken keeping and chicken coops in accord with § 550-13J.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 80% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No dwelling or parts of a dwelling shall exceed 35 feet in height. No
accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height. No accessory
structure may exceed the height of the principal building.
(2) The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,500 square
feet. Two-story dwelling units shall require a minimum of 1,800
square feet, with a first floor area of not less than 1,000 square
feet in floor area.
(3) The sum total of all accessory structures on a lot shall not exceed
720 square feet in floor area.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 40 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets shall be required.
(2) There shall be a minimum side yard of 15 feet to the lot line.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
(4) The minimum side and rear yard setback for all accessory
structures shall be 10 feet.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 40,000 square
feet and shall be not less than 150 feet in width.
274. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-18 SLINGER CODE § 550-19
1:502
§ 550-19. R-2 Single-Family Residential District.
The R-2 Residential District is intended to provide for large lot single-family
residential development, served by municipal sewer and water facilities or
private (on site or off site) sewer and water facilities.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with an attached or detached garage.
(2) Foster homes.
(3) Family day-care homes.
(4) Community living arrangements: less than nine persons.
(5) Essential services.275
B. Conditional uses. The following uses require a conditional use permit as
specified in Article IV of the Village of Slinger Zoning Code:
(1) Community living arrangements: nine to 15 persons.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential use.
(2) Home occupations and professional home offices as specified
herein.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square
feet and shall be not less than 90 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 75% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No dwelling or parts of a dwelling shall exceed 35 feet in height. No
accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height. No accessory
structure may exceed the height of the principal building.
(2) The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,500 square
feet. Two-story dwelling units shall require a minimum of 1,800
square feet, with a first floor area of not less than 1,000 square
feet in floor area.
(3) The sum total of all accessory structures on a lot shall not exceed
720 square feet in floor area.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 40 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets shall be required.
275. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-19
1:503
§ 550-20. R-3 Single-Family Residential District.
The R-3 Residential District is intended to provide for medium-sized lot
single-family residential development, served by municipal sewer and water
facilities.
(2) There shall be a minimum aggregate side yard of 30 feet, and no
single side yard shall be less than 15 feet. No fifteen-foot side yard
shall abut a second fifteen-foot side yard.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
(4) The minimum side and rear yard setback for all accessory
structures shall be 10 feet.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with an attached or detached garage.
(2) Foster homes.
(3) Family day-care homes.
(4) Community living arrangements: less than nine persons.
(5) Essential services.276
B. Conditional uses. The following uses require a conditional use permit as
specified in Article IV of the Village of Slinger Zoning Code:
(1) Community living arrangements: nine to 15 persons.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential use.
(2) Home occupations and professional home offices as specified
herein.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 14,000 square
feet and shall be not less than 90 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 70% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No dwelling or parts of a dwelling shall exceed 35 feet in height. No
accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height. No accessory
structure may exceed the height of the principal building.
(2) The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,200 square
feet. Two-story dwelling units shall require a minimum of 1,800
276. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-19 SLINGER CODE § 550-20
1:504
§ 550-21. R-4 Single-Family Residential District.
The R-4 Residential District is intended to provide for medium-sized-lot
single-family residential development, served by municipal sewer and water
facilities.
square feet, with a first floor area of not less than 1,000 square
feet in floor area.
(3) The sum total of all accessory structures on a lot shall not exceed
720 square feet in floor area.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 35 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets shall be required.
(2) There shall be a minimum aggregate side yard of 30 feet, and no
single side yard shall be less than 10 feet. No ten-foot side yard
shall abut a second ten-foot side yard.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
(4) The minimum side and rear yard setback for all accessory
structures shall be five feet.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with an attached or detached garage.
(2) Foster homes.
(3) Family day-care homes.
(4) Community living arrangements: less than nine persons.
(5) Essential services.277
B. Conditional uses. The following uses require a conditional use permit as
specified in Article IV of the Village of Slinger Zoning Code:
(1) Community living arrangements: nine to 15 persons.278
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential use.
(2) Home occupations and professional home offices as specified
herein.
277. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
278. Editor's Note: Original subsection 2, Home occupations/home industry in an accessory
building, which immediately followed this entry, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-21
1:505
§ 550-22. R-5 Single-Family Residential District.
The R-5 Residential District is intended to provide for small-sized-lot singlefamily
residential development, served by municipal sewer and water
facilities.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 12,000 square
feet and shall be not less than 80 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 65% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No dwelling or parts of a dwelling shall exceed 35 feet in height. No
accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height. No accessory
structure may exceed the height of the principal building.
(2) The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,100 square
feet in floor area. Two-story dwelling units shall require a minimum 1,400
square feet, with a first floor of not less than 800 square feet.
(3) The sum total of all accessory structures on a lot shall not exceed
720 square feet in floor area.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 35 feet from the right-of-way of
all public streets shall be required.
(2) There shall be two side yards with a minimum aggregate width of
25 feet. No single side yard shall be less than 10 feet, and no tenfoot
side yard shall abut upon another ten-foot side yard.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
(4) The minimum side and rear yard setback for all accessory
structures shall be five feet.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with an attached or detached garage.
(2) Foster homes.
(3) Family day-care homes.
(4) Community living arrangements: less than nine persons.
(5) Essential services.279
B. Conditional uses. The following uses require a conditional use permit as
specified in Article IV of the Village of Slinger Zoning Code:
279. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-21 SLINGER CODE § 550-22
1:506
§ 550-23. R-6 Single-Family Residential District.
The R-6 Residential District is intended to provide for small-sized-lot singlefamily
residential development, served by municipal sewer and water
facilities.
(1) Community living arrangements: nine to 15 persons.280
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential use.
(2) Home occupations and professional home offices as specified
herein.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 9,600 square
feet and shall be not less than 80 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 55% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No dwelling or parts of a dwelling shall exceed 35 feet in height. No
accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height. No accessory
structure may exceed the height of the principal building.
(2) The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,000 square
feet in floor area. Two-story dwelling units shall require a minimum 1,200
square feet in floor area, with a first floor of not less than 700 square feet in floor area.
(3) The sum total of all accessory structures on a lot shall not exceed
720 square feet in floor area.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 35 feet from the right-of-way of
all public streets shall be required.
(2) There shall be two side yards with a minimum aggregate width of
25 feet. No single side yard shall be less than 10 feet, and no tenfoot
side yard shall abut upon another ten-foot side yard.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
(4) The minimum side and rear yard setback for all accessory
structures shall be five feet.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with an attached or detached garage.
280. Editor's Note: Original subsection 2, Home occupations/home industry in an accessory
building, which immediately followed this entry, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-23
1:507
(2) Foster homes.
(3) Family day-care homes.
(4) Community living arrangements: less than nine persons.
(5) Essential services.281
B. Conditional uses. The following uses require a conditional use permit as
specified in Article IV of the Village of Slinger Zoning Code:
(1) Community living arrangements: nine to 15 persons.282
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential use.
(2) Home occupations and professional home offices as specified
herein.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 7,200 square
feet and shall be not less than 60 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum 45% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No dwelling or parts of a dwelling shall exceed 35 feet in height. No
accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height. No accessory
structure may exceed the height of the principal building.
(2) The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 950 square feet in floor area.
Two story dwelling units shall require a minimum of 1,200 square
feet, with a first floor area of not less than 700 square feet.
(3) The sum total of all accessory structures on a lot shall not exceed
720 square feet in floor area.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 35 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets shall be required.
(2) There shall be two side yards with a minimum aggregate width of
18 feet. No single side yard shall be less than six feet, and no sixfoot
side yard shall abut upon another six-foot side yard.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
281. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
282. Editor's Note: Original subsection 2, Home occupations/home industry in an accessory
building, which immediately followed this entry, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-23 SLINGER CODE § 550-23
1:508
§ 550-24. Rd-1 Two-Family Residential Districts.
The Rd-1 Residential District is intended to provide for medium-sized-lot
two-family residential development, served by municipal sewer and water
facilities.
(4) The minimum side and rear yard setback for all accessory
structures shall be five feet.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings with attached or detached garage.
(2) Two-family dwellings with attached or detached garage.
(3) Foster homes.
(4) Family day-care homes.
(5) Community living arrangements: less than nine persons.
(6) Essential services.283
B. Conditional uses. The following uses require a conditional use permit as
specified in Article IV of the Village of Slinger Zoning Code:
(1) Community living arrangements: nine to 15 persons.284
(2) One accessory garage apartment dwelling unit per lot located in
the second story of a detached garage. On any Rd-1 lot where a
garage apartment is approved, the total number of dwelling units
shall not exceed two, including the garage apartment.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential use.
(2) Home occupations and professional home offices as specified
herein.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 14,000 square
feet and shall be not less than 90 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 70% of lot area retained as
green space for single-family uses, and 50% of lot area retained as
green space for two-family uses, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height and area.
283. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
284. Editor's Note: Original subsection 2, Home occupations/home industry in an accessory
building, which immediately followed this entry, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-24
1:509
§ 550-25. Rm-1 Multiple-Family Residential District.
The Rm-1 Residential District is intended to provide for medium-lot-sized
multiple-family residential developments limited to structures not
exceeding four units, and served by municipal sewer and water facilities.
(1) No dwelling or parts of a dwelling shall exceed 35 feet in height. No
accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height. No accessory
structure may exceed the height of the principal building.
(2) The minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 950 square feet per
dwelling unit.
(3) The sum total of the area of all accessory structures on a lot shall
not exceed 720 square feet in floor area for a single-family dwelling or 960
square feet in floor area for a two-family dwelling, whichever is larger.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 35 feet from the right-of-way of
all public roads shall be required.
(2) There shall be a minimum side yard of 10 feet to the lot line.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
(4) The minimum side and rear yard setback for all accessory
structures shall be five feet.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Multiple-family dwellings, not to exceed four units per structure,
with an:285
(a) Attached or detached 300 square foot minimum garage per
unit if the structure is constructed slab on grade.
(b) Attached or detached 200 square foot minimum garage per
unit if the structure is constructed with a basement.
(2) Foster homes.
(3) Family day-care homes.
(4) Community living arrangements for up to 15 persons.286
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Elderly housing arrangements for less than 23 persons.
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
286. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-24 SLINGER CODE § 550-25
1:510
(2) Community living arrangements more than 15 persons.
(3) Essential services.287
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential use.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum 18,000 square feet and
shall be not less than 90 feet in width at the setback.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 55% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed
35 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in
height. No accessory structure may exceed the height of the
principal building.
(2) The total minimum floor area of each unit shall be 600 square feet
for efficiency and one-bedroom units. Each additional bedroom or
area that could be converted to a bedroom shall require an
additional 200 square feet of floor area.
(3) The sum total of the area of all accessory structures on a lot shall
not exceed 480 square feet per dwelling unit.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 35 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets shall be required.
(2) There shall be a minimum side yard of the greater of 15 feet or the
height of the structure at its highest point measured from the
finished grade of the same side yard.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
H. Plans and specifications to be submitted to the Planning Commission.
To encourage and insure that multiple-family residential development is
environmentally compatible with the medium-density residential nature
and character of the Village of Slinger, zoning permits shall not be
issued until such time as plans for the development are reviewed in
accordance with Article X of this Zoning Code. Said review and
approval shall be concerned with general layout, building plans,
ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, and landscape plans.
287. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-26
1:511
§ 550-26. Rm-2 Multiple-Family Residential District.
The Rm-2 Residential District is intended to provide for medium-lot-sized
multiple-family residential developments served by municipal sewer and
water facilities.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Multiple-family dwellings, not to exceed four units per structure,
with an:288
(a) Attached or detached 300 square foot minimum garage per
unit if the structure is constructed slab on grade.
(b) Attached or detached 200 square foot minimum garage per
unit if the structure is constructed with a basement.
(2) Foster homes.
(3) Family day-care homes.
(4) Community living arrangements for up to 15 persons.289
(5) Essential services.290
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Multiple-family dwellings with more than four dwelling units.
(2) Elderly housing arrangements for less than 23 persons.
(3) Community living arrangements: more than 15 persons.
(4) Cellular and digital communication antennas and towers.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential use.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum 18,000 square feet and
shall be not less than 90 feet in width at the setback line.291
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 55% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height and area.
288. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
289. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
290. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
291. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-26 SLINGER CODE § 550-26
1:512
§ 550-27. Mh-1 Mobile Home Park Residential District.
The Mh-1 Mobile Home Park District is intended to provide for the location
of mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions in a residential setting
that is compatible with adjacent land uses. Mobile homes are declared
herein to be residential structures and entitled to the same protection from
incompatible uses as are afforded in other residential districts.
(1) No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed
35 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in
height. No accessory structure may exceed the height of the
principal building.
(2) The total minimum floor area of each unit shall be 750 square feet
for efficiency and one-bedroom units. Each additional bedroom or
area that could be converted to a bedroom shall require an
additional 200 square feet of floor area.
(3) The sum total of the area of all accessory structures on a lot shall
not exceed 480 square feet per dwelling unit.
(4) Buildings for residents age 55 and over which have indoor
underground parking shall not exceed 48 feet in height, and shall
not contain more than three stories, excluding underground
parking.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 35 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets shall be required.
(2) There shall be a minimum side yard setback of the greater of 15
feet or the height of the structure at its highest point measured
from the finished grade of the same side yard.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
H. Plans and specifications to be submitted to the Planning Commission.
To encourage and insure that multiple-family residential development is
environmentally compatible with the medium-density residential nature
and character of the Village of Slinger, zoning permits shall not be
issued until such time as plans for the development are reviewed in
accordance with Article X of this Zoning Code. Said review and
approval shall be concerned with general layout, building plans,
ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading, and landscape plans.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Individual mobile homes on lots in mobile home subdivisions.
(2) Essential services. [Added 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
B. Conditional uses.
§ 550-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-27
1:513
(1) Mobile home parks.
(a) Minimum park size shall be 10 acres.
(b) Minimum park width shall be 450 feet.
(c) Maximum number of mobile home sites shall be six per acre.
(d) Minimum green space provided shall be 45% of the
development area, exclusive of streets.
(e) Minimum lot area shall be 7,200 square feet. The mobile home
lot shall be a minimum of 60 feet.
(f) Minimum lot area for a double module mobile home shall be
6,000 square feet. The mobile home lot shall be a minimum of
50 feet wide.
(g) Minimum setback for a mobile home park shall be 50 feet from
all public streets.
(h) Minimum distance between mobile home units and all other
exterior park lot lines shall be 40 feet.
(i) Minimum distance between mobile home and service road
shall be 25 feet. Minimum distance between mobile home
trailers shall be 20 feet.
(j) All drives, parking areas, and walkways shall be surfaced with
dust-free material. There shall be two parking spaces for each
mobile home.
(k) No mobile home sales office or other business or commercial
use shall be located on the mobile home park site. However,
laundries, washrooms, recreation rooms, maintenance
equipment storage and one office are permitted.
(l) All landscaping and screening shall be approved through the
Planning Commission in accordance with Article IX, § 550-90,
of this chapter.
(m) All mobile homes shall meet the federal standards found in 42
U.S.C. §§ 5401 to 5426 (Title 42, Chapter 70, Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards). [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
(n) No mobile home site shall be rented for a period of less than 30
days.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garages and carports in mobile home subdivisions.
(2) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential use
in mobile home subdivisions.
§ 550-27 SLINGER CODE § 550-27
1:514
§ 550-28. B-1 Commercial District. [Amended 4-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 04-02-16; 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 09-02-2017; 12-3-2018 by
Ord. No. 11-01-2018; 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 07-01-2019]
The B-1 Business District is intended to provide for the orderly continuation
of the traditional central business district of the Village. The business
activities in the district are of a general retail nature and are characterized
by on-street parking.
(3) Home occupations and professional home offices in mobile home
subdivisions.
D. Lot area and width. Lots in a mobile home subdivision shall have a
minimum of 7,200 square feet in area and shall be not less than 70 feet
in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 45% of lot area designated as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(2) The minimum floor area for a dwelling shall be 600 square feet.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way of
all public streets shall be required.
(2) There shall be two side yards. Each side yard shall be not less than
10 feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Retail stores.
(2) Offices.
(3) Professional services.
(4) Medical clinics.
(5) Theaters.
(6) Taverns/restaurants.
(7) Hotels/motels.
(8) Financial/banking institutions.
(9) Single-family dwellings constructed prior to August 14, 2002.
(10) Two-family dwellings constructed prior to August 14, 2002.
§ 550-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-28
1:515
(11) Essential services.
B. Conditional uses. The following uses require a conditional use permit in
accord with procedures, requirements and criteria specified in Article
IV of this Code:
(1) Drive-through facilities.
(2) Fuel/automotive service stations.
(3) Antique and secondhand merchandise sales in accord with Village
and state licenses.
(4) Tattooing and/or body piercing establishments licensed by the
state.
(5) Multiple-family residential structures.
(6) Vehicle sales.
(7) Septic tank services and installation use existing prior to August
14, 2002.
(8) Vehicle and trailer rentals.
(9) Outdoor sales and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages, as part
of a tavern/restaurant that is licensed under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
(10) Conversion of commercial buildings (existing prior to February 18,
2013) to one- and two-family dwellings meeting requirements of
the Uniform Dwelling Code. If the Planning Commission grants a
conditional use under this subsection, the Planning Commission is
authorized to modify the provisions of Subsection C (permitted
accessory uses), Subsection F (yards) and § 550-68E (security
fences) as the Planning Commission deems appropriate to
accommodate the residential use, provided the Planning
Commission finds that doing so creates no substantial adverse
impacts on abutting property and further provided that the
modification is stated, in writing, in the conditional use permit.
(11) Youth social activity clubs.
(12) Construction services/contractor shops.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory garages for the storage of vehicles used in conjunction
with the operation of a permitted business.
(2) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(3) Residential quarters for the owner, proprietor, commercial tenant,
employee or caretaker located in the same building as the business.
If the residential quarters are located on the ground floor, they
shall not be facing upon the public street.
§ 550-28 SLINGER CODE § 550-28
1:516
§ 550-29. B-2 Commercial District. [Amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No.
07-01-2019]
The B-2 Commercial District is intended to provide for the orderly and
attractive grouping at appropriate locations along principal highway routes
of those businesses and customer service establishments which are logically
related to and dependent upon highway traffic or which are specifically
designed to serve the needs of such traffic. Certain types of residential
facilities may be permitted in the B-2 District either as second-story units
accessory to commercial buildings, or as conditional uses for specific types
of housing for the elderly.
(4) Rental efficiency, one-bedroom and two-bedroom apartments on a
non-ground floor, provided there shall be a minimum floor area of
400 square feet for an efficiency apartment, 550 square feet in floor area for a
one-bedroom apartment and 700 square feet in floor area for a two-bedroom
apartment.
(5) Garage accessory to a permitted residence.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 7,200 square
feet and shall be not less than 70 feet in width.
E. Building height. No building or part of a building shall exceed 35 feet in
height.
F. Yards.
(1) No minimum setback shall be required.
(2) No minimum side yard is required between buildings, except as
may be required by the Wisconsin Commercial Building Code.
G. Plan review. To encourage and insure that business development is
environmentally compatible with the residential nature and character
of the Village of Slinger, zoning permits shall not be issued until such
time as plans for the development are reviewed in accordance with
Article X of this chapter. Said review and approval shall be concerned
with general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading,
unloading and landscape plans.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Assisted-living facilities for the elderly.
(2) Athletic or recreation facilities, either indoor or outdoor, including
uses such as archery, batting cages, court games, swimming pools,
tennis and similar uses.
(3) Day-care facilities.
(4) Essential services.
(5) Financial/banking institutions.
§ 550-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-29
1:517
(6) Fuel/automotive service stations (constructed prior to July 1, 2002).
(7) Hotels/motels.
(8) Indoor health or fitness facilities including services such as
physical therapy, exercise, weight control, wellness, yoga and
strength training.
(9) Medical clinics.
(10) Nursing homes.
(11) Offices.
(12) Professional services.
(13) Residential care facilities for the elderly.
(14) Retail stores.
(15) Taverns/restaurants.
(16) Tattooing and/or body piercing establishments as licensed by the
state.
(17) Theaters.
B. Conditional uses. The following require a conditional use permit in
accord with procedures, requirements and criteria specified in Article
IV of this Code:
(1) Antique and secondhand merchandise sales in accord with Village
and state licenses.
(2) Cellular and digital communication antennas and towers.
(3) Community-based residential facilities.
(4) Community living arrangements.
(5) Congregate housing for the elderly.
(6) Construction services/contractor shops.
(7) Drive-through facilities.
(8) Fuel/automotive service stations (constructed after July 1, 2002).
(9) Funeral homes without crematoriums.
(10) Uses permitted in the M-1 Manufacturing District with no outside
storage.
(11) Vehicle sales.
(12) Veterinary services.
§ 550-29 SLINGER CODE § 550-29
1:518
(13) Car washes.
(14) Conference centers/banquet halls/event facilities.
(15) Enclosed connecting walkways (located in side yards).
(16) Auto body repair/restoration with outdoor storage.
(17) Vehicle towing services with outdoor storage.
(18) Vehicle and trailer rentals.
(19) Outdoor sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages, as part of
a tavern/restaurant that is licensed under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
(20) Car and light truck repair and service.
(21) Youth social activity clubs.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory garages for the storage of vehicles used in conjunction
with the operation of a permitted business.
(2) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(3) Residential units in conjunction with a permitted or conditionally
permitted use, provided the residential unit is not on the first, or
street, level of the structure. Said residential unit shall have a
minimum floor area of 600 square feet for efficiencies and onebedroom
units, plus an additional 200 square feet for each
additional bedroom.
D. Lot area and width.
(1) The total development area of a highway business use shall be not
less than 20,000 square feet.
(2) Individual shops and stores shall provide sufficient area for the
principal structure and its accessory structures, off-street parking
and loading areas, and all required yards.
(3) No business development shall be less than 90 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 25% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height. No building or parts of a building shall exceed 45 feet
in height.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 40 feet from the right-of-way of
all public streets shall be required.
§ 550-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-29
1:519
§ 550-30. B-3 Commercial District.
The B-3 Commercial District is intended to provide for the orderly and
attractive grouping at appropriate locations of professional offices.
(2) No principal building or structure shall be located closer than 20
feet to any lot line, except where property is adjacent to zoned
residential districts, where it shall be 40 feet to any residentially
zoned lot line.
H. Plan review. To encourage and insure that business development is
environmentally compatible with the residential nature and character
of the Village of Slinger, zoning permits shall not be issued until such
time as plans for the development are reviewed in accordance with
Article X of this chapter. Said review and approval shall be concerned
with general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading
and unloading, and landscape plans.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Offices.
(2) Professional services.
(3) Medical clinics.
(4) Essential services. [Added 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018]
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Laboratories.
(2) Veterinary clinics.
(3) Child-care facilities.
(4) Financial/banking institutions.
(5) Drive-through banking facilities.
(6) Athletic clubs/associated facilities.
(7) Uses permitted in the M-1 Manufacturing District with no outside
storage.
(8) Uses permitted in the B-1 and B-2 Commercial Zoning Districts.
(9) Green space requirement of 35% of lot area.
(10) Cellular and digital communication antennas and towers.
(11) Vehicle and trailer rentals.
(12) Youth social activity clubs.
C. Permitted accessory uses. Off-street parking and loading areas.
§ 550-29 SLINGER CODE § 550-30
1:520
§ 550-31. B&LM-1 Business and Light Manufacturing District.
D. Lot area and width.
(1) The total development area of a B-3 Commercial use shall be not
less than 20,000 square feet.
(2) No business development shall be less than 90 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 25% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height. No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet
in height.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 40 feet from the right-of-way of
all public streets shall be required.
(2) No use shall be located closer than 20 feet to any lot line, except
where property is adjacent to zoned residential districts, when it
shall be 40 feet to any residentially zoned lot line.
H. Plan review. To encourage and insure that business development is
environmentally compatible with the residential nature and character
of the Village of Slinger, zoning permits shall not be issued until such
time as plans for the development are reviewed in accordance with
Article X of this chapter. Said review and approval shall be concerned
with general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking loading
and unloading, and landscape plans.
A. Purpose. The B&LM-1 Business and Light Manufacturing District is
intended to provide for the development of compatible manufacturing,
warehouse, office, service business and supporting uses. The physical
and operational characteristics of uses in this district are based on
performance standards which would not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare or detrimental to the surrounding area as a
result of noise, vibration, external lighting, odor, particulate emissions,
other visible emissions, hazardous pollutants, traffic, physical
appearance, or other similar factors. All uses in this district must
comply with applicable local, state and federal codes and standards.
Uses in the district are also intended to provide ample off-street parking
and loading areas, and landscaped planting screens in areas adjacent to
or abutting residential uses or other noncommercial uses, to prevent
adverse effects upon adjacent uses.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Banks, credit unions, and similar financial institutions.
(2) Business, professional, clerical or general offices.
§ 550-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-31
1:521
(3) Medical clinics and offices.
(4) Research laboratories.
(5) Sales of industrial and construction supplies.
(6) Uses involving the manufacture and fabrication of goods conducted
entirely inside a building at all times, and in which any noise,
vibration, heat or flash produced in any process is confined within
the building at all times. Any odors produced or emitted in any
process must meet applicable federal and state regulations for air
emissions. See the performance standards for the B&LM-1 District
in § 550-91.
(7) Uses providing a service conducted entirely inside a building at all
times, and in which any noise, vibration, heat, or flash produced on
the premises by such service use is confined within a building at all
times. Any odors produced or emitted must meet applicable federal
and state regulations for air emissions. See the performance
standards for the B&LM-1 District in § 550-91.
(8) Warehouse storage buildings, where all goods and materials are
stored inside a building at all times, but not including mini
warehouse buildings. See § 550-32D(5) for mini warehouses.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Food service areas or cafeterias incidental to a permitted use, but
not restaurants.
(2) Garages or buildings used for the storage of vehicles or equipment
used in conjunction with the operation of a permitted use.
(3) Ground-mounted and building-mounted dish antennas.
(4) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(5) Outdoor storage of materials or manufactured products, trucks,
trailers and equipment accessory to the principal use. All such
outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view from nearby
public streets and from nearby residential areas in accord with an
approved site plan.
(6) Retail sales of products integral with and incidental to a service or
manufacturing business located on the same premises.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance
with the provisions of Article IV:
(1) Communication towers, antennas, structures and facilities.
(2) Day-care facilities.
§ 550-31 SLINGER CODE § 550-31
1:522
(3) Incineration in conjunction with and incidental to a service or
manufacturing use.
(4) Indoor athletic facilities.
(5) Self-storage facilities (see § 550-44E).
(6) Motels and hotels.
(7) Public or municipal buildings, and public utility structures.
(8) Restaurants.
(9) Vehicle sales and service.
(10) Veterinary offices and small animal hospitals without outdoor
kennels.
(11) Vehicle and trailer rentals.
E. Prohibited uses. In addition to other uses not expressly permitted in this
district, the following uses are specifically prohibited and are listed by
way of example, but not limitation:
(1) All types of residential uses, except guard quarters.
(2) Asphalt and concrete plants.
(3) Automobile storage, salvage, recycling yards, or similar uses.
(4) Churches, synagogues, schools, or similar institutional uses or
places of religious worship.
(5) Contractors yards and the outdoor storage of construction
equipment.
(6) Drop forges, ferrous and brass foundries, grain elevators,
refineries or tanneries.
(7) Fertilizer storage or packaging.
(8) Planing mills and sawmills.
(9) Principal uses involving the storage, utilization, or manufacture of
hazardous materials or products which decompose by detonation.
(10) Solid and liquid waste disposal, dumping, medical waste storage or
disposal, or similar waste management uses.
(11) Stockyards, slaughterhouses and rendering plants.
(12) Storage and dispensing of fuels and petroleum products.
(13) Truck terminals.
(14) Wholesale buying clubs.
§ 550-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-31
1:523
F. Performance standards. Uses in the B&LM-1 District shall comply with
the performance standards set forth in § 550-91.
G. Number of buildings per lot. Each lot shall contain a maximum of one
principal building. There shall be no limit on the number of accessory
buildings, provided the lot coverage/open space requirement described
in Subsection I are complied with.
H. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall be a minimum of 20,000 square feet in area.
(2) Lots shall not be less than 90 feet in width.
I. Lot coverage and green space. To achieve an attractive appearance and
to provide green space for stormwater management and sedimentation
control, lot coverage by buildings, accessory structures, and surface
parking and driveways shall occupy a maximum of 75% of the lot area.
Landscaped green space not covered by buildings, accessory
structures, and surface parking and driveways shall occupy a minimum
of 25% of the lot area. The green space may include stormwater
retention/detention areas.
J. Setback and yards.
(1) These shall be a minimum street yard (setback) of 40 feet from any
existing or planned public street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be a minimum interior side yard of not less than 20 feet
on a side.
(3) There shall be a minimum rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
(4) Accessory uses, accessory buildings or accessory structures shall
be located in side or rear yards only, and shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from a side or rear lot line.
(5) Outdoor storage areas shall be located in side or rear yards only,
and shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from a side or rear lot
line.
(6) Parking lots located in street yards shall be set back a minimum of
20 feet from the street right-of-way. This includes parking lots in
corner lot side yards.
(7) Parking lots located in side or rear yards shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from side or rear lot lines.
(8) Setbacks and buffer yards adjacent to residential districts or
residential uses. On B&LM-1 lots adjacent to residential districts,
all outdoor storage areas, accessory buildings, or accessory uses
including parking lots shall provide a greater setback to provide a
buffer yard. Any such uses shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet
from a property line adjacent to or abutting a residential district.
§ 550-31 SLINGER CODE § 550-31
1:524
The buffer yard area shall be landscaped or fenced, or a
combination thereof, to screen such uses in accord with a site plan
requiring such screening or fencing.
K. Building height. No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet
in height. Accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed 20 feet in
height.
L. Parking, driveways, loading and storage areas. Parking facilities,
driveways, loading and storage areas shall be paved with either
asphaltic concrete or portland cement concrete prior to the occupancy
of the building. Peripheral edge landscaping shall be installed around
the edges of parking areas visible from public streets or residential
areas. See Article V for additional requirements related to parking,
driveway, and loading facilities.
M. Loading areas and docks, garbage and trash areas. Loading areas or
docks shall be located in side or rear yards. Outdoor garbage and trash
areas shall be enclosed with a fence or wall of solid decorative material
compatible with the principal building.
N. Signs. Signs in the B&LM-1 District shall be erected and maintained in
conformity with the requirements in Article VI.
O. Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting in the B&LM-1 District shall meet
the following criteria:
(1) Exterior lighting shall be located, oriented, and shielded and of an
intensity so as to illuminate only the building or lot without
adversely affecting activity on adjacent lots or traffic on street and
highways.
(2) Exterior lighting shall be directed away from nearby residential
areas.
(3) Exterior lights or signage shall not flash, pulsate, nor impair or
hinder vision on public street rights-of-way or adjacent properties.
(4) Exterior lighting shall meet the standards promulgated by the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.
P. Site plan and architectural approval required. No building, structure or
improvement shall be constructed or placed on any lot, nor shall any
building structure or improvement be remodeled or altered until site
and architectural plans for such improvements have been approved by
the Planning Commission in accord with the requirements of Article X.
Q. Compliance with landscaping requirements and design review criteria.
Uses in the B&LM-1 District are required to comply with other
additional requirements contained in §§ 550-90 and 550-49I regarding
landscaping requirements, and in § 550-95D regarding site and
building design review criteria.
§ 550-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-32
1:525
§ 550-32. M-1 Limited Manufacturing District.
The M-1 Limited Manufacturing District is intended to provide for
manufacturing or fabrication operations, which, on the basis of physical
and operational characteristics, would not be detrimental to the immediate
surrounding area or to the Village as a whole by reason of smoke, odor,
noise, dust, flash, traffic, physical appearance, or other similar factors; and
to establish such regulatory controls as will reasonably insure compatibility
with the surrounding area in this respect.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Warehouses.
(2) All uses involving the manufacture of goods within the confines of a
building and in which any smoke, noise, dust, flash, or odor
produced in the manufacturing process is confined within the
building.
(3) All uses involving the fabrication of materials within the confines of
a building and in which any smoke, dust, flash, noise, or odor
produced in the fabrication process is confined within the building.
(4) All uses involving the provision of a service which is either
manufacturing- or fabrication-related and not permitted in
business districts, confined within a building, and in which smoke,
dust, flash, heat, noise, or odor produced by such service uses is
confined within the building.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Enclosed as well as screened areas for the storage of materials,
other than explosive or flammable materials or substances used in
the manufacturing or fabrication process.
(2) Offices normally auxiliary to the principal use.
(3) Garages for the storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the
operation of the industrial use.
(4) Auxiliary power generators.
(5) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(6) Essential services.
(7) Sale of products directly related to a service or manufacturing
business located on the same premises.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Communication towers/stations.
(2) Freight service/terminals.
§ 550-32 SLINGER CODE § 550-32
1:526
(3) Self-storage facilities (see § 550-44E).
(4) Athletic clubs/associated facilities.
(5) Salvage yards.
(6) Cellular and digital communication antennas and towers.
(7) Animal day care and boarding and grooming.
(8) Retail or wholesale sales of products not manufactured on the
premises. The retail sales shall be incidental to the principal
permitted use and shall be limited to 33% of the gross floor area of
the principal building and all accessory buildings.
(9) Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities and uses such as
amusement arcades, archery ranges, billiards, bowling, court
games, carting, gymnastics, exercise/health clubs, paint ball, roller
skating, all with related food and beverage services.
(10) Vehicle and trailer rentals.
(11) Youth social activity clubs.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square
feet and shall be not less than 90 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 25% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height. No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet
in height.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 40 feet from the right-of-way of
all public streets shall be required.
(2) No use shall be located closer than 20 feet to any lot line, except
where property is adjacent to zoned residential districts when it
shall be 40 feet to any residentially zoned lot line.
H. Plan review. To encourage and insure that business development is
environmentally compatible with the residential nature and character
of the Village of Slinger, zoning permits for permitted uses in the
manufacturing districts shall not be issued without review and approval
of the Village Planning Commission. Said review and approval shall be
concerned with general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking,
loading and unloading, and screening and landscape plans.292
292. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-33
1:527
§ 550-33. M-2 General Manufacturing District.
The M-2 Manufacturing District is intended to provide for the same type
of manufacturing and fabricating operations and uses as in the M-1
Manufacturing District plus more intensive uses. However, these operations
and uses shall be provided in those areas where the relationships to
surrounding land use would create fewer problems of compatibility. The M-2
Manufacturing District also permits those activities generally perceived as
being of a nuisance nature or considered to be hazardous. Such district
should not normally abut directly upon residential, commercial, or
institutional districts.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) All uses as permitted in the M-1 District.
(2) All manufacturing fabricating, and storage uses not permitted in
any other industrial district (except the manufacture or fabrication
of explosives, flammable liquids, chemicals, and gaseous or
vaporous substances) as long as such permitted uses are carried on
within an enclosed structure or within a totally screened yard area.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Enclosed as well as screened open storage of materials other than
explosive or flammable materials or substances used in the
manufacturing or fabrication process.
(2) Offices normally auxiliary to the principal use.
(3) Garages for the storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the
operation of the industrial use.
(4) Auxiliary power generators.
(5) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(6) Essential services.
(7) Sale of products directly related to a service or manufacturing
business located on the same premises.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Sewage treatment plants.
(2) Incinerators.
(3) Warehousing of hazardous materials.
(4) Bulk fuel storage.
(5) Self-storage facilities (see § 550-44E).
(6) Salvage yards.
§ 550-33 SLINGER CODE § 550-33
1:528
(7) Green space requirement of less than 25% of lot area.293
(8) Cellular and digital communication antennas and towers.
(9) Bus terminal and related service facilities.
(10) Vehicle sales, when the primary business is vehicle related.
(11) Electrical substations and related facilities.
(12) Animal day care and boarding and grooming.
(13) Retail or wholesale sales of products not manufactured on the
premises. The retail sales shall be incidental to the principal
permitted use and shall be limited to 33% of the gross floor area of
the principal building and all accessory buildings.
(14) Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities and uses such as
amusement arcades, archery ranges, billiards, bowling, court
games, carting gymnastics, exercise/health clubs, paint ball, roller
skating, all with related food and beverage services.
(15) Truck terminals.
(16) Vehicle and trailer rentals.
(17) Youth social activity clubs.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum of 40,000 square feet in
area and shall be not less than 150 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 25% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height. No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet
in height.
G. Yards.
(1) A minimum street yard (setback) of 40 feet from the right-of-way of
all public streets shall be required.
(2) No use shall be located closer than 20 feet to any lot line, except
where property is adjacent to zoned residential districts, when it
shall be 40 feet to any residentially zoned lot line.
H. Plan review. To encourage and insure that business development is
environmentally compatible with the residential nature and character
of the Village of Slinger, zoning permits for permitted uses in the
manufacturing districts shall not be issued without review and approval
of the Village Planning Commission. Said review and approval shall be
293. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-33
1:529
§ 550-34. P-1 Park and Recreation District.
The P-1 Park and Recreation District is intended to provide for areas where
the recreational needs, both public and private, of the community can be
met without undue disturbance of natural resources and adjacent uses.
concerned with general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking,
loading and unloading, and screening and landscape plans.294
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Amphitheaters.
(2) Amusement parks.
(3) Arenas and field houses.
(4) Art galleries.
(5) Aquariums.
(6) Auditoriums.
(7) Banquet hall and event facilities.
(8) Boat rentals and boat access sites.
(9) Botanical gardens and arboretums.
(10) Community events.
(11) Exhibition halls.
(12) Fairgrounds.
(13) Forest preserve (wildlife refuges).
(14) Forest preserves (wilderness areas).
(15) Golf course without country club facilities.
(16) Golf driving ranges.
(17) Group organized camps.
(18) Gymnasium and athletic clubs.
(19) Historic and monument sites.
(20) Ice skating.
(21) Libraries.
(22) Miniature golf.
294. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-33 SLINGER CODE § 550-34
1:530
(23) Museums.
(24) Outdoor concert events, limited to four per calendar year.
(25) Parks: general recreation.
(26) Parks: leisure and ornamental.
(27) Picnicking areas.
(28) Planetaria.
(29) Playfields or athletic clubs.
(30) Playgrounds.
(31) Play lots or tot lots.
(32) Recreation centers.
(33) Restaurants (with and without a bar).
(34) Skiing and tobogganing.
(35) Stadiums.
(36) Swimming, beaches.
(37) Swimming, pools.
(38) Tennis courts.
(39) Zoos.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Buildings accessory to permitted recreational uses.
(2) Essential services.
(3) Off-street parking areas.
(4) Retail sales in conjunction with sports and recreation uses.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Cellular and digital communication antennas and towers.
(2) Racetracks.
(3) Outdoor concert events exceeding four per calendar year.
(4) Outdoor sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages, as part of
a tavern/restaurant that is licensed under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
D. Lot area and width. Lots in the P-1 Park and Recreation District shall
provide sufficient area for the principal structure and its accessory
structures, off-street parking and loading areas, and all required yards.
§ 550-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-34
1:531
§ 550-35. I-1 Institutional District.
The I-1 Institutional District is intended to eliminate the ambiguity of
maintaining, in unrelated use districts, areas which are under public or
public related ownership and where the use for public purpose is
anticipated to be permanent.
E. Building height. No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet
in height.
F. Yards.
(1) No principal building or structure shall be erected, altered, or
moved closer than 40 feet to a lot line.
(2) Accessory buildings or accessory structures shall be located in side
or rear yards and shall be set back a minimum of five feet from a
side or rear lot line.
G. Plan review. To encourage and ensure that recreational development is
environmentally compatible with other uses and the medium-density
residential nature and character of the Village of Slinger, zoning
permits for permitted uses in the Park and Recreation District shall not
be issued without review and approval of the Village Planning
Commission. Said review and approval shall be concerned with general
layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking, loading and unloading,
and landscape plans.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Public or private schools, colleges and universities.
(2) Churches.
(3) Hospitals, sanatoriums, nursing homes, and clinics.
(4) Libraries, museums and art galleries.
(5) Public administrative offices, and public service buildings,
including fire and police stations.
(6) Public utility offices.
(7) Water storage tanks and towers.
(8) Auditoriums, theaters, and similar place of public assembly.
[Added 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 04-01-2016]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Residential quarters for caretakers or clergy.
(2) Garages for the storage of vehicles and equipment used in
conjunction with the operation of a permitted use.
§ 550-34 SLINGER CODE § 550-35
1:532
(3) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(4) Service building and facilities normally accessory to permitted
uses.
(5) Essential services.
(6) Columbarium on property of a religious association. Such use shall:
[Added 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 03-01-2016]
(a) Require a building permit.
(b) Be located in rear or side yards.
(c) Be set back at least 10 feet from a property line.
(d) Not exceed 20 feet in height.
(e) Be operated in full compliance with applicable state statutes
and requirements.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Airports.
(2) Sewerage treatment plants.
(3) Incinerators.
(4) Cemeteries.
(5) Community living arrangements.
(6) Cellular and digital communication antennas and towers.
(7) Group day-care facilities licensed by the state.
(8) Youth social activity clubs.
D. Lot area and width. Lots shall have a minimum area of 7,200 square
feet and shall be not less than 70 feet in width.
E. Green space. There shall be a minimum of 25% of lot area retained as
green space, as defined in § 550-126 of this chapter.
F. Building height. No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet
in height.
G. Yards. Most restrictive adjacent zoning district.
H. Plan review. To encourage and ensure that institutional development is
environmentally compatible with the residential nature and character
of the Village of Slinger, zoning permits for permitted uses in the
Institutional District shall not be issued without review and approval of
the Village Planning Commission. Said review and approval shall be
§ 550-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-35
1:533
§ 550-36. C-1 Conservancy District.
The C-1 Conservancy District is intended to be used to prevent destruction
of valuable natural or man-made resources and to protect watercourses,
including the shorelands of intermittent waters and areas that are not
adequately drained, where development would result in hazards to health
or safety or would deplete or destroy natural resources or be otherwise
incompatible with the public welfare.
§ 550-37. F-1 Floodplain Conservancy. [Amended 9-21-2015 by Ord.
No. 09-01-2015]
The F-1 Floodplain District is intended to preserve essentially green space
and natural use lands which are unsuitable for intensive development
purposes due to poor natural soil conditions and periodic flood inundation
and shall include all land and water area lying within the delineated forecast
one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood. The proper regulation of these
areas will serve to maintain and improve water quality, prevent flood
concerned with general layout, building plans, ingress, egress, parking,
loading and unloading, and landscape plans.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Fishing and trapping.
(2) Preservation of scenic, historic, and scientific areas.
(3) Public fish hatcheries.
(4) Public and private green space areas.
(5) Recreation trails.
(6) Sustained yield forestry.
(7) Stream bank and lake shore protection.
(8) Water retention and wildlife preserves.
(9) Continuation of farming, provided that no farm structures are
erected, altered or moved into the Conservancy District, and
further provided that cultivated areas are not extended.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Structures used in or accessory to a fish hatchery.
(2) Nonhabitable park and recreation shelters.
(3) Structures used to traverse lowlands or watercourses.
C. Conditional uses. Limited recreational uses.
§ 550-35 SLINGER CODE § 550-37
1:534
damage, protect wildlife habitat, and prohibit the location of structures on
soils which are generally not suitable for such use.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Drainage.
(2) Movement of floodwater.
(3) Navigation.
(4) Stream bank protection.
(5) Water measurement and control facilities.
(6) Any of the following uses are permitted, provided that such use
shall not involve the erecting or placing of a structure:
(a) Grazing.
(b) Horticulture.
(c) Open parking and loading areas.
(d) Open recreational uses, such as parks, sports fields, beaches,
bathing, hunting, fishing, rinks, golf courses, and driving
ranges, with Village-issued permits.295
(e) Outdoor plant nurseries.
(f) Pasturing.
(g) Sod farms.
(h) Truck farming.
(i) Utilities.
(j) Viticulture (grape growing).
(k) Wildlife preserves.
B. Conditional uses. The Village Planning Commission may authorize a
conditional use permit in accordance with Article IV of this chapter,
provided that such conditional uses and structures are found to be in
accordance with the purpose and intent of this district and Ch. NR 116,
Wis. Adm. Code. The applicant must show that such use of improvement
will not impede drainage, will not cause ponding, will not obstruct the
floodway, will not increase flood flow velocities, will not increase the
flood stage, and will not retard the movement of floodwater. When
permitted, all structures shall be floodproofed and constructed so as
not to catch or collect debris nor be damaged by floodwater.
Certification of floodproofing shall be made to the Zoning Administrator
295. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-37
1:535
and shall consist of a plan or document certified by a registered
professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent
with the flood velocities, forces, depths, and other factors associated
with the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood level for the
particular area. Such uses shall include:296
(1) Navigational structures.
(2) Bridges and approaches.
(3) Marinas.
(4) Park and recreational areas not including structures.
(5) Filling as authorized by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources to permit establishment of approved bulkhead lines.
(6) Other green space uses consistent with the purpose and intent of
the district and compatible with uses in adjacent districts, not
including structures.
(7) Municipal water supply and sanitary sewerage systems, provided
that the system is floodproofed to an elevation at least two feet
above the elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval
flood and is designed to eliminate or minimize infiltration of
floodwater into the system. Certifications of floodproofing shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator, and shall consist of a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the flood velocities,
forces, depths, and other factors associated with the one-hundredyear
recurrence interval lever for the particular stream reach.
C. Dumping and filling prohibited. Lands lying within the Floodplain
District shall not be used for dumping or be filled except as authorized
to permit establishment of approved bulkhead lines or to accommodate
bridge approaches. Normal earth grading activities to permit utilization
of the lands for green space, outdoor recreation, yard, parking, and
similar uses are permitted.
D. Dangerous materials storage prohibited. Lands lying within the
Floodplain District shall not be used for the storage of materials that
are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal, or
plant life.
E. Incompatible use prohibited. Lands lying within the Floodplain District
shall not be used for any solid waste disposal site or on-site soil
absorption sanitary sewerage system site, or the construction of any
well which is used to obtain water for ultimate human consumption.
296. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-37 SLINGER CODE § 550-37
1:536
§ 550-38. Historic Preservation District.
(Reserved)
§ 550-39. Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
F. Floodplain ordinance. See Chapter 481, Floodplain Zoning, in this
Code.
A. Purpose and authority.
(1) The Village Board of the Village of Slinger recognizes that the
people of the Village of Slinger depend exclusively on groundwater
for a safe drinking water supply and that certain land uses in the
Village of Slinger environmental setting can seriously degrade
water quality. Therefore, the designated best use of the unconfined
groundwater of the Village of Slinger is for public and private water
supply and it is the policy of the Village to maintain its groundwater
resources as near to the natural condition of purity as reasonably
possible for the safeguarding of the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(2) The purpose of the Groundwater Protection Overlay District is to
protect key groundwater recharge areas by imposing appropriate
land-use restrictions in these areas. Wisconsin Act 410 of 1983,
specifically includes groundwater protection among the purposes
for which local zoning power may be exercised.297 The restrictions
included herein are in addition to those of the underlying zoning
districts or any other provisions of the zoning or other Village
ordinance.
B. Designation of municipal or private well field groundwater protection
zones.
(1) The boundaries for the groundwater recharge protection zones for
the groundwater Protection Overlay District are as shown on the
map "Groundwater Protection Districts for the Village of Slinger
Well Fields" dated February 24, 1993. (See Fig. A1 for examples of
proposed wellhead protection zones for Well Field #5.)298
(2) Said map is hereby adopted by reference becoming a part of this
chapter as if the map were fully described herein. The groundwater
recharge basins for the designated well fields are divided into three
zones reflecting the potential for land-use activities to adversely
impact the well fields and the subsequent scope of land-use
restrictions needed.
C. Zone A, Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
297. Editor's Note: See § 62.23(7)(c), Wis. Stats.
298. Editor's Note: The map and Fig. A1 are on file in the Village office.
§ 550-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-39
1:537
(1) Zone A is the immediate area around the well field, commonly
known as the "cone of depression," in which groundwater
elevations are lowered by pumping. This area is subject to the
highest contaminant threat, and therefore, the land use restrictions
are the most severe of the recharge zones.
(2) The following uses are permitted:
(a) Parks/playgrounds.
(b) Archery ranges.
(c) Boat landings.
(d) Other natural uses:
[1] Wildlife areas.
[2] Wild crops.
[3] Non-motor trails (bike, skiing, nature, fitness).
[4] Hunting/fishing/trapping with Village-issued permit.299
(3) The following uses are permitted upon proper application as
provided in this chapter, only after such use shall have been
approved in writing by the Planning Commission. Such approval
shall be consistent with the general purpose and intent of this
chapter and shall be based upon evidence as may be presented at
such public hearings, tending to show the desirability of specific
uses from the standpoint of the public interest because of such
factors as (without limitation because of enumeration)
groundwater pollution, smoke, dust, noxious or toxic gases and
odors, noise, glare, vibration, operation of heavy machinery, heavy
vehicular traffic, increased traffic on the streets and other safety
and health factors; such uses shall meet the specific conditions
attached below and such other conditions as the Planning
Commission deems necessary in furthering the purpose of this
chapter.
(4) The following use is expressly prohibited in this zone:
(a) All uses not permitted or special exception in this section.
(5) The following standards apply to all uses in Zone A of the
Groundwater Protection Overlay District:
(a) On-site sanitary system with any type of discharge, on lots less
than 40,000 square feet.
(b) Underground tanks are prohibited.
299. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-39 SLINGER CODE § 550-39
1:538
(c) Natural vegetation not treated with fertilizers and pesticides. A
minimum of 85% of lot must be retained in natural vegetation.
(d) Lot size: 40,000 square feet per residential unit. Multiplefamily
units and cluster developments may increase density by
50% if restrictive covenant maintains natural vegetation
requirement.
(e) Pesticide/fertilizer storage and use (including septage and
sludge landspreading) are prohibited except for normal home
use and by special case-by-case review.
(f) Animal waste facility or landspreading are prohibited.
(g) Stormwater and drain discharge. Direct subsurface drainage is
prohibited. Discharge of hazardous materials is prohibited. All
surface runoff and drain construction must provide a means for
collection or containment in the event of a hazardous materials
spill.
(h) Salt storage is prohibited.
(i) Hazardous/toxic materials storage and use are prohibited
except for normal home use.
(j) Hazardous/toxic wastes. On-site treatment, transfer, or
disposal is prohibited.
D. Zone B, Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
(1) Zone B is the recharge area upgradient of Zone A to the point
where it is estimated that groundwater and contaminants will take
five years to reach the pumping well(s). This is an intermediate
zone and land use measures are slightly less restrictive than Zone A
because of the longer flow times and greater contaminant dilution
and attenuation potential.
(2) The following uses are permitted:300
(a) Residential.
(b) Parks/playgrounds.
(c) Natural uses:
[1] Wildlife areas.
[2] Wild crops.
[3] Non-motor trails (bike, skiing, nature, fitness).
[4] Hunting/fishing/trapping.
300. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-39
1:539
(3) The following uses require a conditional use permit as specified in
Article IV of this chapter:301
(a) All uses not specifically permitted or prohibited in this section.
(b) Shooting ranges.
(c) Boat landings.
(d) Campgrounds.
(4) The following uses are expressly prohibited in this zone:
(a) Landfills.
(b) Feedlots.
(c) Wastewater treatment facilities.
(d) Junkyard.
(e) Gas stations/garages.
(f) Toxic/hazardous waste facilities.
(g) Radioactive waste facilities.
(h) Bulk fertilizer/pesticide facilities.
(i) Asphalt products manufacturing.
(j) Chemical manufacture/storage/sale.
(k) Dry-cleaning facilities.
(l) Electroplating facilities.
(m) Exterminating shops.
(n) Paint/coating manufacturing.
(o) Printing/publishing facilities.
(p) All uses requiring use or storage of hazardous or toxic
materials.
(5) The following standards apply to all uses in Zone B of the
Groundwater Protection Overlay District:
(a) On-site sanitary system with any type of discharge for
residential use: one system per one acre.
(b) Underground tanks. Tanks less than 500 gallons are
prohibited; other tank installations require monitoring wells,
301. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-39 SLINGER CODE § 550-39
1:540
overflow prevention, corrosion-resistant construction, monthly
reports and inspections, and spill/leak contingency plan.
(c) Natural vegetation not treated with fertilizers and pesticides. A
minimum of 80% of lots with on-site sewage disposal must be
retained in natural vegetation. A minimum of 60% of lots with
municipal sewer must be retained in natural vegetation. A
minimum of 60% of lots with municipal sewer must be retained
in natural vegetation.
(d) Lot size for residential uses: 20,000 square feet per unit with
municipal sewer, or one acre with on-site sewage disposal.
Multiple-family and cluster developments may increase density
by 50% if restrictive covenant maintains natural vegetation
requirement in sewered areas or increases area of natural
vegetation by 10% over minimum requirement in unsewered
areas.
(e) Lot size for other uses: one acre minimum, subject to
Subsection D(5)(a) above.302
(f) Pesticide/fertilizer storage and use (including septage and
sludge landspreading) are prohibited except for normal home
use or where an agricultural best management practices plan
approved by the County Land Conservation Department guides
usage.
(g) Animal waste facility or landspreading. Waste facilities must be
permitted under the Washington County Animal Waste
Management Ordinance. A best-management practices plan
approved by the County Land Conservation Department guides
usage.303
(h) Stormwater and drain discharge. Direct subsurface drainage is
prohibited. Discharge of hazardous materials prohibited. All
surface runoff and drain construction must provide a means for
collection or containment in the event of a hazardous materials
spill.
(i) Salt storage is prohibited.
(j) Hazardous/toxic materials storage and use are prohibited
except for normal home use [also see Subsection D(5)(f)
above].
(k) Hazardous/toxic wastes. On-site treatment, transfer or
disposal is prohibited.
302. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
303. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-40
1:541
§ 550-40. PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District.
The PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District is intended to permit
developments that will, over a period of time, be enhanced by coordinated
area site planning, diversified location of structures, diversified building
types, and/or mixing of compatible uses. Such developments are intended
to provide a safe and efficient system for pedestrian and vehicle traffic;
to provide attractive recreation and green spaces as integral parts of the
developments; to enable economic design in the location of public and
private utilities and community facilities; and to ensure adequate standards
of construction and planning. The PUD Overlay District under this chapter
will allow for flexibility of overall development design with benefits from
developer and the community, while at the same time maintaining insofar as
possible, the land use density and other standards, or use requirements set
forth in the underlying basic zoning district.
A. Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a Planned Unit Development Overlay
District shall conform to uses generally permitted in the underlying
basic use district. Individual structures shall comply with the specific
building area and height requirements of the underlying basic use
district. All green space and parking requirements of the underlying
basic use district shall be complied with either individually or by
providing the combined green space and parking space required for the
entire development in one or more locations within the development.
B. Minimum area requirements. The Village Planning Commission shall be
the authority in establishing the required size of any Planned Unit
Development Overlay District. Areas designated as such shall be under
single or corporate ownership or control, and shall contain a minimum
development area of:
Principal Uses
Minimum Area of PUD
(acres)
Residential PUD 2
Business PUD 3
Industrial PUD 10
Mixed compatible use 5
C. Procedural requirements.
(1) Pre-petition conference. Prior to the official submission of the
petition for the approval of a Planned Unit Development Overlay
District, the owner or his agent making such petition shall meet
with the Village staff to discuss the scope and proposed nature of
the contemplated development.
(2) Petition. Following the pre-petition conference, the owner or his
agent may file a petition, including the information contained on
the "PUD Petition Form," available at the Village offices with the
§ 550-40 SLINGER CODE § 550-40
1:542
Village Clerk for approval of a Planned Unit Development Overlay
District. Such petition shall be accompanied by a review fee, as
required by the Village Board pursuant to § 550-120 of this chapter.
(3) Referral to Planning Commission. The petition for a Planned Unit
Development Overlay District shall be referred to the Village
Planning Commission for its review and recommendation,
including any additional conditions or restrictions which it may
deem necessary or appropriate.
(4) Public hearing. The Village Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing pursuant to the requirements of Articles XII and XIII
of this chapter. Notice for such hearing shall include reference to
the development plans filed in conjunction with the requested
Planned Unit Development Overlay District. As soon as is practical
following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall report its
findings and recommendations to the Village Board. Said
recommendations shall be included in the form of a "PUD
Development Agreement" to be entered into between the Village
Board and the developer.
D. Basis for approval of the petition.
(1) The Village Planning Commission in making its recommendation,
and the Village Board in making its determination, shall consider:
(a) That the petitioners for the proposed Planned Development
Overlay District have indicated that they intend to begin the
physical development of the PUD within nine months following
the approval of the petition and that the development will be
carried out according to a reasonable construction schedule
satisfactory to the Village.
(b) That the proposed Planned Unit Development Overlay District
is consistent in all respects to the purpose of this section and to
the spirit and intent of this chapter; is in conformity with the
adopted Comprehensive Plan or any adopted component
thereof; and that the development would not be contrary to the
general welfare and economic prosperity of the community.
(2) The Village Planning Commission in making its recommendations,
and the Village Board in making its determination shall further find
that:
(a) The proposed site shall be provided with adequate drainage
facilities for surface and stormwaters.
(b) The proposed site shall be accessible from public roads that
are adequate to carry the traffic that can be expected to be
generated by the proposed development.
§ 550-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-40
1:543
(c) No undue constraint or burden will be imposed on public
services and facilities, such as fire and police protection, street
maintenance, and maintenance of public areas by the proposed
development.
(d) The streets and driveways on the site of the proposed
development shall be adequate to serve residents of the
proposed development and shall meet the minimum standards
of all applicable ordinances or administrative regulations of
the Village.
(e) Centralized water and sewer facilities shall be provided.
(f) The entire tract or parcel of land to be included in a Planned
Unit Development Overlay District shall be held under single
ownership, or if there is more than one owner, the petition for
such Planned Unit Development Overlay District shall be
considered as one tract, lot, or parcel; and the legal description
must define said PUD as a single parcel, lot, or tract and be so
recorded with the Register of Deeds for Washington County.
(3) That in the case of a proposed Residential Planned Unit
Development Overlay District:
(a) Such development will create an attractive residential
environment of sustained desirability and economic stability,
including structures in relation to terrain, consideration of safe
pedestrian flow, ready access to recreation space, and
coordination with overall plans for the community.
(b) The total net residential density within the Planned Unit
Development Overlay District will be consistent with, and not
exceed the average intensity and density of development
permitted in the underlying basic use district. Conservancy
and Floodplain Conservancy Districts shall not comprise more
than 30% of the underlying zoning district green space
requirement.
(c) Provision has been made for the installation of adequate public
facilities, and the continuing maintenance and operation of
such facilities.
(d) Adequate continuing fire and police protection is available.
(e) The population composition of the development will not have
an adverse effect upon the community's capacity to provide
needed school or other municipal service facilities.
(f) Adequate guarantee is provided for permanent preservation of
green space areas as shown on the approved site plan, either
by private reservation and maintenance, or by dedication to
the public.
§ 550-40 SLINGER CODE § 550-40
1:544
(4) That in the case of a proposed Business Planned Unit Development
Overlay District:
(a) The proposed development will be adequately served by offstreet
parking and truck service facilities.
(b) The proposed development shall be adequately provided with
and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and
facilities such as fire and police protection, street
maintenance, and maintenance of public areas.
(c) The locations for entrances and exits have been designated to
prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient
movement of traffic on surrounding streets, and the
development will not create an adverse effect upon the general
traffic pattern of the surrounding neighborhood.
(d) The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting, and
general site development will result in an attractive and
harmonious service area compatible with, and not adversely
affecting the property values of the surrounding neighborhood.
(5) That in the case of a proposed Industrial Planned Unit Development
District:
(a) The operational character, physical plant arrangement, and
architectural design of buildings will be compatible with the
latest in performance standards and industrial development
design and will not result in adverse effect upon the property
values of the surrounding neighborhood.
(b) The proposed development shall be adequately provided with
and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and
facilities, such as fire and police protection, street
maintenance, and maintenance of public areas.
(c) The proposed development will include adequate provisions for
off-street parking and truck service areas and will be
adequately served by rail and/or arterial highway facilities.
(d) The proposed development is properly related to the total
transportation system of the community and will not result in
an adverse effect on the safety and efficiency of the public
streets.
(e) No residential structures shall be permitted in an Industrial
PUD.
(6) That in the case of a Mixed-Use Planned Unit Development Overlay
District:
(a) The proposed mixture of uses produces a unified composite
which is compatible within the underlying district and which,
§ 550-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-40
1:545
as a total development entity is compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood.
(b) The various types of uses conform to the general requirements
as hereinbefore set forth, applicable to projects of such use
and character.
(c) The proposed development shall be adequately provided with,
and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and
facilities, such as fire and police protection, street
maintenance, and maintenance of public areas.
E. Determination. The Village Board, after due consideration, may, upon
the recommendation of the Planning Commission, deny the petition,
approve the petition as submitted, or approve the petition subject to
additional conditions and restrictions. The approval of a planned unit
development overlay district shall be based upon and include as
conditions thereto the building, site and operational plans for the
development as approved by the Village Board.
F. Changes and additions.
(1) Preliminary determination. All proposed changes, revisions, and
additions to any aspect of an approved planned unit development
project shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review.
The Zoning Administrator, in collaboration with the Village
Engineer, Village Planner, and Village Administrator, shall review
the proposed change to determine if it would be considered a minor
change or a major change. In making their determination, Village
staff shall consider if the proposed change would substantially
affect the intended design of the project or would adversely affect
nearby properties or nearby uses.
(2) Minor changes. If the change is determined to be minor, Village
staff shall collaboratively review the request and may deny or
approve the change without approval by the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall be fully informed of the proposed
change at a meeting subsequent to the decision by staff to deny or
approve any minor change.
(3) Major change. If the requested change is determined by Village
Staff to be a major change because of its effect on the intended
design of the project or on neighboring uses, a public hearing shall
be held by the Planning Commission to review the request. The
Commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the Village
Board for final action.
G. Subsequent land division. The division of any land or lands within a
Planned Unit Development Overlay District for the purpose of change
or conveyance of ownership shall be accomplished pursuant to the land
division regulations of the Village and when such division is
§ 550-40 SLINGER CODE § 550-40
1:546
§ 550-41. Conservation Subdivision Overlay (CSO) District.
contemplated, a preliminary plat of the lands to be divided shall
accompany the petition for PUD approval.
H. Recordation of permit. Following approval by the Village Board, said
planned unit development agreement shall be recorded as a covenant
running with the land. Cost of recording shall be borne by the
petitioner.
A. Purpose. The Conservation Subdivision Overlay (CSO) District is
established for the following purposes:
(1) To provide an overlay district that may be used in conjunction with
an underlying residential zoning district to promote development of
conservation subdivisions.
(2) To preserve environmentally sensitive lands through permanent
preservation of open space and natural resources with housing
concentrated on portions of the site that have lower-quality natural
features.
(3) To provide open space areas that are commonly owned for passive
and/or active recreational use by residents of the development, and
where specifically established, for use by the general public.
(4) To minimize disturbance to environmentally sensitive areas,
protect biological diversity, and maintain environmental corridors
in their natural state to the extent practical.
(5) To preserve scenic views by minimizing views of new development
from existing roads.
(6) To provide buffering between residential development and
nonresidential uses.
B. Definition of conservation subdivision. A conservation subdivision is a
housing development characterized by extensive open space where
existing natural features of the land are maintained in their natural
state to the extent practical. Residential dwellings in such subdivisions
are located on portions of the site with lower-quality natural features
and should be adjacent to or overlook open space.
C. Platting methods and applicability of other regulations. Conservation
subdivisions may be created by platting methods including Certified
Survey Maps (CSMs), subdivision plats, or condominium plats. All of the
Village's land development regulations applying to each of the platting
methods shall be applicable to a conservation subdivision, except as
may be permitted in this section.
D. Uses. In a conservation subdivision, the underlying zoning district shall
determine allowable uses.
§ 550-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-41
1:547
E. Density and lot size standards. The maximum density of a conservation
subdivision shall be determined by applying the minimum lot area in
the underlying zoning district to the entire parcel proposed for
development. The minimum lot area in a conservation subdivision may
be less than that required in the underlying district, but shall not be less
than 10,000 square feet with sanitary sewer service, or not less than
30,000 square feet without sanitary service.
F. Setback and yards. The minimum setback and yard requirements in the
underlying zoning district may be modified in a conservation
subdivision to provide flexibility in the siting of homes relative to the
attributes of the individual lots or sites in the development. These
requirements shall be established on an individual development basis
and shall be determined prior to final plat approval. The minimum
setback and yard requirements shall be shown on the final plat or CSM.
G. Minimum living area and maximum building height. Shall be as
established in the underlying Zoning District.
H. Common open space. A conservation subdivision shall provide common
open space as follows:
(1) A minimum of 40% of the subject parcel shall be common open
space which shall be platted as one or more outlots. Wetlands,
floodplains, floodways, ponds or natural water bodies may
constitute a maximum of 60% of the minimum common open space
area.
(2) Prior to any final approval action on a conservation subdivision, the
Village Parks and Recreation Board shall review the proposed
common open space to determine if any public parklands or any
other public land dedication is necessary in conjunction with the
conservation subdivision.
(3) The ownership, maintenance, and stewardship of common open
space shall be accomplished by a homeowners' association and/or
condominium association in accord with Ch. 703, Wis. Stats. The
subdivision applicant shall provide a description of the bylaws of
the proposed association, and all documents governing the
ownership, maintenance, and use restriction for common facilities.
The association shall be established by the owner of the subdivision
developer prior to the sale of any lots or dwelling units in the
development. All documents to establish such association shall be
approved by the Village Attorney prior to their use by the
developer.
(4) No such owners' association shall be allowed to default and result
in the common open space being owned and maintained by the
public.
§ 550-41 SLINGER CODE § 550-41
1:548
(5) Each unit owner in a conservation subdivision shall have an
undividable fractional ownership interest in the common open
space outlot(s).
(6) A deed restriction shall be established to prevent subdividing any
common open space which is part of a conservation subdivision.
(7) A landscaping plan and a maintenance plan for common open space
areas shall be approved by the Planning Commission prior to final
plat approval.
(8) Any amendments to the common open space documents after their
initial approval shall be reviewed and approved by the Village
Attorney prior to such amendments taking effect.
(9) The following uses are permitted in common open space areas:
(a) Conservation of open land in its natural state (for example,
woodland, fallow field, or managed meadow).
(b) Silviculture, in keeping with established standards for
selective harvesting and sustained-yield forestry.
(c) Neighborhood open space uses such as common areas, picnic
areas, community gardens, trails and similar low-impact
passive recreational uses specifically excluding motorized offroad
vehicles, rifle ranges, and other uses similar in character
and potential impact as determined by the Planning
Commission.
(d) Active noncommercial recreation areas, such as playing fields,
playgrounds, courts and bikeways, provided such areas do not
encroach on environmentally sensitive areas. Playing fields,
playgrounds, and courts shall not be located within 50 feet of
abutting properties. Parking facilities for the same shall also be
permitted.
(e) Golf courses may comprise the open space land. Their parking
areas and any associated structures shall not be included
within the minimum open space requirement; their parking
and access ways may be paved and lighted.
(f) Water supply, water sources for the fire protection, sewage
disposal system, and stormwater detention areas designed,
landscaped, and available for use as an integral part of the
open space.
(g) Easements for drainage, access, or other public purposes.
(h) Underground utility rights-of-way and street rights-of-way may
traverse common open space areas but shall not count toward
the minimum required open space land.
§ 550-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-41
1:549
§ 550-42. Shoreland Zoning Overlay District. [Added 9-21-2015 by
Ord. No. 08-03-2015]
(i) Agricultural uses limited to the growing of crops outdoors
including nurseries, sod farms, orchards, forestry, commercial
vegetables, and crops for livestock consumption, but not
including dairying or the raising and feeding of livestock and
poultry.
(j) Public use of common open space may be allowed if agreed to
by the developer and the Village.
I. Required improvements and design standards. Required improvements
and design standards related to conservation subdivisions may be
modified to create a lower impact on the natural environment and
provide a greater degree of environmental protection. Infrastructure
requirements and modifications shall be reviewed on an individual
development basis to determine the appropriate infrastructure based
on each site's unique attributes.
J. Financial guarantees and impact fees. Financial guarantees, including
those required as part of a conventional subdivision development
agreement, and impact fees, shall be applied to a conservation
subdivision.
A. Purpose and statutory authorization.
(1) Uncontrolled use of shorelands and pollution of the navigable
waters of the municipality would adversely affect the public health,
safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base.
The Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all
municipalities to:
(a) Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare;
(b) Limit certain land use activities detrimental to shorelands; and
(c) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by controlling the
location of structures in shoreland areas and restricting the
removal of natural shoreland vegetation.
(2) This section is adopted pursuant to the authorization in §§ 61.35
and 61.353, Wis. Stats., and Year 2013 Wisconsin Act 80.
B. General provisions.
(1) Compliance and uses.
(a) The use of shorelands within the shoreland area of the
municipality shall be in full compliance with the terms of this
section and other applicable local, state, or federal regulations.
All permitted development shall require the issuance of a
§ 550-41 SLINGER CODE § 550-42
1:550
zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a
provision of this section.
(b) Permitted uses, accessory uses, and conditional uses shall be in
accord with underlying zoning district regulations except as
may be regulated or restricted in this section.
(2) Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are
required to comply with this section and obtain all necessary
permits. State agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis.
Stats., applies.
(3) Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(a) This section supersedes all the provisions of any other
applicable municipal ordinance, except that where another
municipal ordinance is more restrictive than this section, that
ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of
the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b) This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However,
where this section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions
of this section shall prevail.
(4) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this section shall be held to be minimum requirements
and shall be liberally construed in favor of the municipality and
shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers
granted by the Wisconsin Statutes or Wisconsin Constitution.
(5) Applicability of Shoreland District Regulations. The Shoreland
Zoning District regulations apply only to the following shorelands:
(a) A shoreland that was annexed by the Village of Slinger after
May 7, 1982, and that, prior to annexation, was subject to a
county shoreland zoning ordinance under § 59.692, Wis. Stats.;
and
(b) A shoreland that before incorporation by the Village of Slinger
was part of a town that was subject to a county shoreland
zoning ordinance under § 59.692, Wis. Stats., if the date of the
incorporation was after April 30, 1994.
C. District boundaries. The Shoreland District areas regulated by this
section shall include all the lands (referred to herein as "shorelands") in
the Village of Slinger that are:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable
lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages shall be
presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources Surface Water Data viewer
§ 550-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-42
1:551
available on the DNR website, or are shown on United States
Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning maps.
(2) Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers
or steams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever
distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as continuous waterways or
intermittent waterways on United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps. Flood hazard boundary maps, flood insurance
rate maps, flood boundary-floodway maps, county soil survey maps
or other existing county floodplain zoning maps shall be used to
delineate floodplain areas.
(3) Determinations of navigability and ordinary high water mark
location shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When
questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the
appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high
water mark.
(4) Pursuant to § 61.353(7) or 62.233, Wis. Stats., the Shoreland
Zoning District does not include lands adjacent to an artificially
constructed drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin if the drainage
ditch, or retention basin is not hydrologically connect to a natural
navigable water body.
D. Effect of existing land division, sanitary, zoning and other regulations.
The lands within the Shoreland Zoning District are subject to all
applicable provisions of the Village of Slinger Municipal Code. Where
the provisions of this section are more restrictive than other regulations
in the municipal Code, the provisions of this section shall apply.
E. Setbacks from the OHWM.
(1) Principal building setbacks.
(a) All principal building shall be set back at least 50 feet from the
ordinary high-water mark.
(b) Adjustment of shore yards. A setback less than that required by
Subsection E(1)(a) may be allowed if all of the following apply:
[1] The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or
parcel of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to
a lot or parcel of land containing a principal building; and
[2] The principal building is constructed or placed within a
distance equal to the average setback of the principal
building on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary
high water mark, whichever distance is greater.
(2) Accessory building setbacks. Buildings accessory to permitted and
conditional uses may be located within a shoreyard, but:
§ 550-42 SLINGER CODE § 550-42
1:552
(a) Shall not be closer than 25 feet to the ordinary high water
mark.
(b) Shall not be used for human habitation or animal shelter.
(c) Shall not be placed in the vegetative buffer zone required in
Subsection F.
F. Vegetative buffer zone. Pursuant to § 61.353(3), Wis. Stats., a
landowner shall maintain a vegetative buffer zone as follows:
(1) A person who owns shoreland property that contains vegetation
shall maintain that vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone along the
entire shoreline of the property and extending 35 feet inland from
the ordinary high water mark of the navigable water, except as
provided in Subsection F(2).
(2) If the vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone contains invasive
species or dead or diseased vegetation, the owner of the shoreland
property may remove the vegetation, except that if the owner
removes all of the vegetative buffer zone, the owner shall establish
a vegetative buffer zone with new vegetation.
(3) A person who is required to maintain or establish a vegetative
buffer zone under Subsection F(1) may remove all of the vegetation
in a part of that zone in order to establish a viewing or access
corridor that is no greater than 30 feet wide for every 100 feet of
shoreline frontage and extends no more than 35 feet inland from
the ordinary high water mark. On parcels with less than 100 feet of
shoreline frontage, the width of the vegetative buffer zone shall be
a minimum of 30% of the shoreline frontage.
G. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM) — The boundary along the
bank or shoreline up to which the water, by its presence, flow or wave
action, leaves a distinct mark on the bank or shoreline. The OHWM may
be indicated by erosion, destruction of or change in vegetation or other
easily recognizable characteristics. The OHWM may be delineated on
subdivision plats, certified survey maps or other survey documents.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The main building or structure on a single lot
or parcel of land and includes any attached garage or attached porch.
SHORELANDS — Has the meaning given in § 59.692 (1)(b), Wis. Stats.
SHORELAND SETBACK AREA — Has the meaning given in
§ 59.692(1)(bn), Wis. Stats.
§ 550-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-42
1:553

ARTICLE IV
Conditional Uses
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018; 8-5-2019 by Ord. No.
07-02-2019]
§ 550-43. Permits.
The Village Planning Commission may authorize the issuance of a
conditional use permit for conditional uses after public hearing and review,
provided that such conditional uses and structures are in accordance with
the purpose and intent of this chapter and are found to be not hazardous,
harmful, offensive, or otherwise adverse to the environment or the value of
the neighborhood or the community.
§ 550-44. Application, fee and supporting information.
Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the Village
Planning Commission on a form furnished by the Village Clerk, along with
the required nonrefundable fee, and shall include the following where
pertinent and necessary for proper review by the Village Planning
Commission:
A. Names and addresses.
(1) Applicant.
(2) Owner of site.
(3) Architect, professional engineer, and contractor.
B. Plat of survey. The plat of survey and/or scaled drawing of the site must
show the following information:
(1) Property location, boundaries, topography and dimensions,
including building pad.
(2) Property use.
(3) Size of existing and proposed structures and any modification to
existing structures.
(4) Location of any easements on the subject property.
(5) Ingress/egress points and parking lot layout.
(6) Location and use of all structures within 100 feet of the property
boundaries, including floor elevations.
C. A proposed "Plan of Operation" describing the proposed use(s), which
shall include measurable facts and information for consideration by the
Planning Commission, such as, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Hours and days of operation.
§ 550-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-44
1:555
(2) Intensity of use(s): number of customers, employees, size of
building(s).
(3) Adequacy of public services to serve the use.
(a) Utilities (electric, sewer, water, stormwater drainage).
(b) Public safety services (police, fire, EMS).
(c) Public school capacity available.
(4) Economic impacts: job creation, property valuation, tax base
growth.
(5) Vehicular and pedestrian traffic impacts.
(6) Parking impacts: off-street and on-street.
(7) Physical impacts: noise, vibrations, odors, air emissions, dust, light
emission.
(8) Visual impacts: indoor use, outdoor use, view obstruction,
landscaping.
D. Additional information which may be required primarily for certain new
construction projects may include, but is not limited to:
(1) Site plan(s).
(2) Architectural plan(s).
(3) Landscaping and lighting plan(s).
(4) Stormwater management plan(s).
(5) Use-specific plan(s).
E. Quality of supporting information and applicant's burden of proof:
(1) The applicant must demonstrate that the application and all
requirements and conditions established by the Village relating to
the conditional use are or shall be satisfied, both of which must be
supported by substantial evidence.
(2) "Substantial evidence" means facts and information, other than
merely personal preferences or speculation, directly pertaining to
the requirements and conditions an applicant must meet to obtain a
conditional use permit and that reasonable persons would accept in
support of a conclusion.
F. Preapplication consultation. A consultation with the Village Zoning
Administrator prior to or during the preparation of an application for a
conditional use permit is recommended.
G. Payment of Village costs incurred. Any costs incurred by the Village
related to the review of the application and the preparation of
§ 550-44 SLINGER CODE § 550-44
1:556
§ 550-45. Public hearing.
The Village Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on a
conditional use permit application, giving notice of the time, place, and the
proposed use by publication of a Class 2 notice, under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats.
§ 550-46. Review and action.
Following a public hearing, the Village Planning Commission shall review
the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring
uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation
and circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems, and the proposed
operation.
conditions shall be paid for by the applicant in accord with §§ 51-16 and
51-17 of the Village Code. Such costs may be for legal, engineering,
planning or other technical or professional services rendered in
conjunction with the application.
A. Evaluation. The Planning Commission shall evaluate the effect of the
proposed use upon:
(1) The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
(2) Existing topography, drainage, and vegetative cover.
(3) The compatibility of the use with other uses on adjacent properties.
(4) Existing and proposed vehicular and pedestrian traffic generation
and circulation.
(5) The adequacy of existing and proposed parking areas and driveway
locations.
(6) The adequacy of existing and proposed public utilities and other
public services.
(7) The compatibility of the use with the Village's Comprehensive Plan.
(8) The suitability of the subject site for the type and density or
intensity of the proposed use(s).
(9) The creation of noise, traffic, odors or other conditions that may be
detrimental to the public.
B. Approval conditions.
(1) Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of
construction, floodproofing, anchoring of structures, construction
commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing,
planting screens, operational control, hours of operations,
improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access
restrictions, increased yards or parking requirements may be
§ 550-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-46
1:557
§ 550-46.1. Additional information required for conditional use
permits. [Added 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 07-02-2019]
required by the Village Planning Commission upon its finding that
these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter.
(2) Any condition imposed must be related to the purpose of this article
and be based on substantial evidence.
(3) The requirements and conditions must be reasonable and, to the
extent practicable, measurable and may include conditions such as
the permit's duration, transfer or renewal.
C. Compliance with Zoning Code. Compliance with all other provisions of
this chapter, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking, loading,
traffic, highway access, landscaping and lighting shall be required for
all conditional uses.
D. Action. The Commission may take final action on the application at the
time of the public hearing or may continue the proceedings at its
discretion or at the applicant's request. The Commission may approve
the conditional use as originally proposed, may approve the proposed
conditional use with modifications, or may deny approval of the
proposed conditional use. The requirements and conditions described
must be reasonable and, to the extent practicable, measurable and may
include conditions such as the permit's duration, transfer or renewal.
The Commission's approval of the proposed conditional use shall be
considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed
as precedent for any other proposed conditional use.
E. Revocation. A conditional use permit shall remain in effect, provided
that the conditions of the permit are continued in the manner specified
by the permit or until the expiration of the permit as provided by its
terms. In the event the permit holder fails to comply with the conditions
specified in the permit, the same may be revoked by the Zoning
Administrator upon 10 days' notice to the permit holder. The permit
holder shall be entitled to a hearing before the Village Planning
Commission on the questions of revocation of the conditional use
permit and approval of the Village Planning Commission shall be
required for the reinstatement of any conditional use permit.
F. Conditional use permits issued prior to August 5, 2019. Any conditional
use permits issued prior to the requirements established in this section
on its adoption date shall be considered as a conforming conditional
use. Any proposed change or amendment to such an existing
conditional use permit shall be processed in accord with the procedures
and requirements in this section as if it was being newly established.
A. Salvage yards.
(1) Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as set by the Village
Board, and in addition thereto, the applicant shall pay the
§ 550-46 SLINGER CODE § 550-46.1
1:558
reasonable cost of a review of the operational and restoration plans
by the Village.
(2) The applications shall be accompanied by a detailed description of
the proposed method of operation, the manner in which materials
will be stored, the equipment proposed to be used, the method of
disposition of the end products, the manner in which adjoining
property owners will be protected, the hours of operation, the
Village streets proposed to be used, the gross weight of equipment
to be used in the hauling in and out of any of the product, and
similar information as the Planning Commission may require.
(3) The application for the operation of a salvage yard under this
section shall be accompanied by a proposed restoration plan and
illustrative drawing showing the manner in which the site will be
restored.
(4) Any permit issued under this section shall be subject to revocation
if all or any necessary state licenses or permits have been
withdrawn or revoked.
(5) No permit shall be issued until the applicant furnishes a
performance bond in such amount and on such conditions as shall
be fixed by the Village Planning Commission.
(6) Any nonconforming salvage use which had a State of Wisconsin
salvage license prior to June 7, 1983, shall immediately apply to the
Village Planning Commission for a use and occupancy permit. The
Planning Commission shall require a plan of operation, final
restoration plan, intermediate restoration plans as deemed
necessary, and may impose such restrictions upon the use of such
site or structure as may be reasonable and not unduly burdensome
or onerous under the particular circumstances that may be
required.
B. Cellular and digital communication antennas and towers.
(1) The developer shall prepare a plan showing the number and
potential location of all antenna sites needed in the Village to
complete the communication network.
(2) All antennas shall be constructed on existing structures, such as
but not limited to water towers, public buildings, existing utility
towers, or other communication towers.
(3) If it is determined by the Planning Commission that such antennas
cannot be co-located on existing structures, freestanding tower
structures may be permitted, but such structures shall be designed
to support the proposed antennas and three additional sets of
communication antennas. The developer shall agree, in writing, to
make the structure available for co-location of similar
§ 550-46.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-46.1
1:559
communication equipment operated by other companies at a
reasonable return.
(4) The developer may be required to post a bond or cash deposit to
assure maintenance of communication equipment and its
supporting structures; and to assure that if such facilities are
abandoned, sufficient resources are available for the Village to
remove such equipment and structures.
(5) Minimum setback requirements. There shall be a setback of a
sufficient radius around the antenna structure (as measured from
the extremities of the antenna base) equal to the antenna tower
height so that its collapse will be contained on the property, except
when the applicant provides evidence from a Wisconsin-registered
structural professional engineer which allows for reduced setback
requirements.
(6) Any storage/equipment building associated with a cellular tower
shall meet the setback requirements for principal buildings in the
district in which it is located. A storage building shall not be
classified as an accessory use or building.
(7) New or modified towers shall be certified by a registered engineer
to be in accordance with structural standards for antennas by the
Electronics Industries Association.
(8) Abandoned or unused towers or portion of towers shall be removed
within 18 months of the cessation of operations at the site. In the
event that a tower is not removed within 18 months of cessation of
operations at a site, the tower may be removed by the Village and
the costs of removal assessed against the property. The
replacement of portions of a tower previously removed requires the
issuance of a new conditional use permit.
(9) Tower appearance and illumination.
(a) For towers not regulated by the Wisconsin Bureau of
Aeronautics or the Federal Aviation Administration, a surface
paint or finish shall be used that reduces the visibility of the
tower.
(b) Towers shall not be illuminated except as required by the
Wisconsin Bureau of Aeronautics or the Federal Aviation
Administration. When incorporated into the approved design of
the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking
lots, or similar areas may be attached to the tower. However,
such lights shall be directional and shall not produce glare into
residential areas.
(10) The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or
equipment information is prohibited.
§ 550-46.1 SLINGER CODE § 550-46.1
1:560
(11)No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with
public safety telecommunications. All applications for new service
shall be accompanied by an intermodulation study which provides a
technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and
indicates all potential interference problems. Before the
introduction of a new service or changes in existing service,
telecommunication providers shall notify the Village at least 10
calendar days in advance of such changes and allow the Village to
monitor interference levels during the testing process.
(12) Any newly constructed communication towers shall require
building/site landscaping in accordance with § 550-90 of this
chapter, and perimeter landscaping in accordance with the
following:
(a) For towers 200 feet in height or less, a buffer area no less than
25 feet wide shall commence at the property line. At least one
row of evergreen shrubs shall be spaced not more than five
feet apart. Shrubs should be of a variety which can be expected
to grow to form a continuous hedge at least five feet in height
within two years of planting. At least one row of evergreen
trees or shrubs, not less than four feet in height at the time of
planting, and spaced not more than 15 feet apart, shall also be
planted. Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guy wires shall be
of a type that would not exceed 20 feet in mature height or
would not affect the stability of the guys should they be
uprooted, and shall not obscure the visibility of the guy anchor
from the transmission building or security facilities and staff.
(b) For towers more than 200 feet, the provisions included in
Subsection B(12)(a) above shall be followed, including the
extension of the buffer area to 40 feet with an additional row of
deciduous trees not less than 2 1/2 inches caliper measured
three feet from the ground at the time of planting, and spaced
not more than 25 feet apart.
(c) Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest
practical extent. The site plan shall show any existing native
vegetation to be removed and shall indicate the type and
location of native vegetation to be replanted.
(13) A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided on each site.
Sites with personnel routinely in attendance shall be required to
install additional parking spaces based on the number of personnel
routinely on-site.
C. Where self-storage facilities may be located as a conditional use.
(1) Self-storage facilities may be less desirable than other higher
quality uses in certain commercial and industrial zoning districts.
This is due to the lack of job creation, lower quality buildings and
§ 550-46.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-46.1
1:561
site improvements, and less desirable visual appearance than other
land uses.
(2) Therefore, self-storage facilities should be located on sites which
have locational characteristics which may be adverse to
accommodating higher quality land uses. To accomplish this
objective, the Planning Commission shall review each request and
make a finding that some of the following criteria are met before
any such use is approved:
(a) Historic lack of other higher quality development
opportunities.
(b) Lack of existing or future sanitary sewer or potable water
service.
(c) Poor soil conditions not conducive to supporting larger
buildings such as low bearing capacity or high groundwater, or
contaminated soils.
(d) Poor visibility from adjacent or nearby roadways.
(e) Poor vehicular access to adjacent roadways.
(f) High traffic noise or other adverse environmental conditions.
(g) Sites where such uses would be an appropriate buffer or
transition between different land uses.
(3) Additional conditions. In the process of considering a request for
self-storage facilities, additional conditions may be required by the
Planning Commission. Such conditions may include condominium
property use restrictions and/or deed restrictions that would
describe or limit uses or activities which could occur on the
premises, architectural design features, or landscaping treatments,
and specific security measures such as fencing and lighting.
D. Outdoor sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages. The outdoor
sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages in circumstances where
a license is required under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., may be allowed as a
conditional use as specified within the regulations of the zoning district.
Any such conditional use may be reviewed annually. Additionally, such
conditional use may be reviewed by the Planning Commission at any
time upon complaint or upon Planning Commission initiative. The
Planning Commission shall have the right to amend or further restrict
the use, after providing notice and an opportunity to be heard to the
conditional use holder.
§ 550-46.1 SLINGER CODE § 550-46.1
1:562
ARTICLE V
Traffic, Loading, Parking and Access
§ 550-47. Traffic visibility.
No obstructions such as structures, parking, or vegetation, shall be
permitted in any district between 2 1/2 feet and 10 feet above the plane
through the mean curb grades within the triangular space formed by any
two existing or proposed intersecting street or alley right-of-way lines and
a line joining points on such lines located a minimum of 15 feet from their
intersection.
§ 550-48. Loading requirements.
Every lot on which a business, trade, or industrial use is hereafter
established shall have adequate space with access to a public street or alley
for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public right-of-way. At no
time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed to extend into the rightof-
way of a public thoroughfare while the truck or van is being loaded or
unloaded.
§ 550-49. Parking requirements.
In all districts, parking lots constructed prior to adoption of this chapter
shall be considered existing nonconforming under Article VIII of this Zoning
Code. In all districts in connection with every use, there shall be provided
at the time any use is erected, enlarged, extended, or increased, off-street
parking areas for all vehicles in accordance with the following:
A. In the case of arterial streets intersecting with other arterial streets or
railways, the corner cutoff distances establishing the triangular vision
clearance space shall be increased to 50 feet.
A. Access. Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each
parking space, and driveways shall be at least 10 feet wide for one- and
two-family dwellings, and a minimum of 24 feet at the property line for
all other uses. Where necessary, the Commission may require ingress/
egress signage and/or lighting.
B. Dimensions. The minimum dimensions of each parking space shall be
nine feet by 18 feet, except for properly signed spaces provided for use
by persons with disabilities.
C. Parking spaces for use by persons with disabilities. All open, off-street
parking areas shall provide parking spaces for persons with disabilities
meeting all applicable "Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities" as documented in the Federal
Register, Vol. 56, No. 144, July 26, 1991, as amended.
D. Location. Parking spaces are to be on the same lot as the principal use
or not more than 400 feet from the principal use. No parking space or
driveway, except in residential districts, shall be closer than 25 feet to a
§ 550-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:563
residential lot line or a street right-of-way opposite a residential
district.
E. Parking surfaces. All open, off-street loading and parking spaces shall
be improved with pavement of either asphalt or concrete and
stormwater drainage facilities as approved by the Village. All parking
surfaces shall be paved within 12 months of occupancy.
F. Minimum width of off-street parking rows and aisles. [Amended by
Ord. No. 12-02-2015]
Row Type
Parallel
Spaces
(feet)
45° Angle
Spaces
(feet)
60° Angle
Spaces
(feet)
90° Angle
Spaces
(feet)
Single row and
aisle
20 38 38 42
Double row
and aisle
28 56 56 60
In off-street parking lots, the minimum width of movement aisles
(measured between the ends of the parking spaces) shall be as
follows: 1) 24 feet for two-way traffic; 2) 20 feet for one-way traffic.
G. Concrete curb and gutter required.
(1) Concrete curb and gutter meeting Village specifications shall be
required for all off-street parking areas, located in the street yards,
serving more than five vehicles in all nonresidential zoning districts
and in the Rm-1, Rm-2 and PUD Zoning Districts. This requirement
shall also apply, subject to the provisions contained in § 550-52, to
the expansion of any existing off-street parking lot, located in the
street yards, where the number of off-street parking space is
increased by 20 spaces or more.
(a) Off-street parking areas located in the side and rear yards,
subject to the provisions of § 550-49G(1), may also require
concrete curb and gutter as follows:
[1] The site designs deem it necessary in the opinion of the
Village Engineer;
[2] The site designs deem it necessary in the opinion of the
Planning Commission; and
[3] Side and rear off-street parking areas are visually open for
aesthetics.
(b) Nontraditional curbing may be required in the off-street
parking areas located in the side and rear yard areas that are
not required to have concrete curb and gutter.
§ 550-49 SLINGER CODE § 550-49
1:564
(2) Required concrete curb and gutter for off-street parking areas shall
be installed a minimum of 10 feet from a property line (as
measured from the back of curb) so as to prevent the parked
vehicles from extending over any lot lines.
H. Parking stall marking. Off-street parking stalls shall be marked by
painted lines or other approved material and shall be maintained so as
to be legible at all times.
I. Landscaping. All public off-street parking areas which serve five or
more vehicles and are created or redesigned and rebuilt subsequent to
the adoption of Article V shall be provided with accessory landscaped
areas totaling not less than 5% of the surfaces area. The minimum size
of each landscaped area shall be 100 square feet.
J. Screening. Parking areas for five or more vehicles which adjoin
residential districts and/or road right-of-way shall be visually screened
with a solid wall, fence, or evergreen planting of equivalent visual
density, or other effective means, built and maintained to a minimum
height of three feet four inches, or as determined by the Commission.
K. Planning Commission approval. The Village Planning Commission shall
approve all parking lot layouts, including the location of landscaped
areas, plant materials, protection afforded the plantings, curbing,
lighting and provision for maintenance. All plans for proposed parking
areas shall include a topographic survey and grading plan which shows
existing and proposed grades and location of improvements. The
preservation of existing trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation in
the parking area may be included in the calculation of required
minimum landscaped area.304
L. Minimum requirements. In the case of structures or uses not specified
herein, the number of spaces specified as the general standard for the
use class or the number of spaces specified for similar use shall apply.
In developments involving the establishment or addition of two or more
uses on one lot or parcel, the cumulative number of spaces required for
each use shall determine the total number of spaces required.
(1) Residential uses:
(a) Single-family and two-family units: two spaces per dwelling
unit;
(b) Multiple-family dwelling developments exceeding or equal to
three units, planned unit developments: two spaces per
dwelling unit, plus 0.5 space per unit to be designated as guest
parking, which shall be separated from garage ingress/egress.
(2) Retail sales, customer service uses, and places of entertainment:
304. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:565
(a) General standard for the above uses: one space per 250 square
feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, plus one
space per employee;
(b) Financial institutions: one space for each 150 square feet of
gross floor area of customer service, plus one space per
employee for the work shift with the largest number of
employees. Financial institutions with drive-in facilities shall
provide sufficient space for four waiting vehicles at each drivein
service lane;
(c) Funeral homes: one space for each four patrons at maximum
capacity or 25 spaces per chapel unit, whichever is greater;
(d) Grocery stores or supermarkets: one space per 150 square feet
of gross floor area of customer sales and service area, plus one
space per employee for the work shift with the largest number
of employees;
(e) Convenience grocery stores: one space per 100 square feet of
gross floor area;
(f) Motels and hotels: one space per room or suite, plus one space
per every two employees for the work shift with the largest
number of employees, plus one space per three persons, based
on maximum capacity, for each public meeting room and/or
banquet room;
(g) Lodges and clubs: one space per three persons based on the
maximum capacity of the facility;
(h) Restaurants: one space per 100 square feet of gross dining
area, plus one space per employee for the work shift with the
largest number of employees;
(i) Restaurants, drive-through or fast-food: one space per 50
square feet of gross dining area, plus one space per two
employees for the work shift with the largest number of
employees. Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall
provide sufficient space for four waiting vehicles at each drivethrough
service lane;
(j) General merchandise repair services: one space per 300
square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per employee for
the work shift with the largest number of employees;
(k) Theaters, auditoriums and other places of public assembly: one
space per three patrons based on the maximum capacity of the
facility;
(l) Personal services: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area, plus one space per employee for the work shift with the
largest number of employees;
§ 550-49 SLINGER CODE § 550-49
1:566
(m) Taverns, dance halls, night clubs and lounges: one space per 50
square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per employee for
the work shift with the largest number of employees;
(n) Motor vehicle sales establishments: two customer parking
spaces per salesperson, plus one space per employee for the
work shift with the largest number of employees;
(o) Motor vehicle repair, maintenance and service stations: three
spaces per indoor service bay plus one space per employee for
the work shift with the largest number of employees;
(p) Animal hospitals: three patron parking spaces per doctor, plus
one space per employee for the work shift with the largest
number of employees;
(q) Plant nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores: one space per
200 square feet of gross indoor sales and display area, plus one
space per 500 square feet of gross outdoor sales and display
area, plus one space per employee for the work shift with the
largest number of employees;
(r) Shopping centers (gross leasable area of at least 50,000 square
feet): five spaces per 1,000 square feet, or any part thereof, of
gross leasable area.
(3) Offices:
(a) Medical, dental and similar professional health service offices:
five patron spaces per doctor, plus one space per employee for
the work shift with the largest number of employees;
(b) Government, professional and business offices: one space per
250 square feet of gross floor area.
(4) Commercial/recreational uses:
(a) General standard: one space per four patrons based on the
maximum capacity of the facility, plus one space per employee
for the work shift with the largest number of employees;
(b) Bowling alleys: five spaces for each lane, plus one space per
employee for the work shift with the largest number of
employees;
(c) Golf courses: 90 spaces per nine holes, plus one space per
employee for the work shift with the largest number of
employees;
(d) Golf driving ranges: one space per tee, plus one space per
employee for the work shift with the largest number of
employees;
§ 550-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:567
(e) Miniature golf course: 1 1/2 spaces per hole, plus one space
per employee for the work shift with the largest number of
employees;
(f) Indoor tennis, racquetball and handball courts: three spaces
per court, plus one space per employee for the work shift with
the largest number of employees;
(g) Skating rinks, ice or roller: one space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area.
(5) Industrial and related uses:
(a) Manufacturing, processing, and fabrication operations: one
space per employee for the work shift with the largest number
of employees;
(b) Wholesale business: one space per employee for the work shift
with the largest number of employees, plus one space per
2,500 square feet of gross floor area;
(c) Warehousing: one space per employee for the work shift with
the largest number of employees, plus one space per 5,000
square feet of gross floor area;
(d) Mini-warehousing: one space per 10 storage cubicles, plus one
space per employee for the work shift with the largest number
of employees;
(e) Extractive and related operations: one space per employee for
the work shift with the largest number of employees.
(6) Institutional and related uses:
(a) Churches: one space per three seats based on the maximum
capacity of the facility;
(b) Libraries: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area or
one space per four seats based on maximum capacity,
whichever is greater, plus one space per employee for the work
shift with the greatest number of employees;
(c) Museums: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area,
plus one space per employee for the work shift with the
greatest number of employees;
(d) Rooming and boarding houses, fraternity and sorority houses,
dormitories and rectories: one space per bed;
(e) Convents and monasteries: one space per three residents, plus
one space per employee for the work shift with the largest
number of employees, plus one space per five chapel seats if
the public may attend;
§ 550-49 SLINGER CODE § 550-49
1:568
§ 550-50. Driveways.
All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended after the
effective date of this chapter shall meet the following requirements:
(f) Nursing homes/community-based residential facilities: one
space per three patient beds, plus one space per employee for
the work shift with the largest number of employees;
(g) Hospitals: two spaces per three patient beds, plus one space
per staff doctor, plus one space per employee, excluding
doctors, for the work shift with the largest number of
employees;
(h) Schools:
[1] Elementary schools, middle schools, and high schools: one
space for each teacher and staff member, plus one space
for each 10 students 16 years of age or older;
[2] Colleges, universities and trade schools: one space for
each teacher and staff member, plus one space for each
two students during the highest attendance period;
[3] Children's nursery schools and day-care centers: one
space per employee for the work shift with the greatest
number of employees, plus one space per six students at
the highest class attendance period.
A. Driveway islands. Islands between driveway openings shall be provided
with a minimum of six feet between all driveways and three feet at all
lot lines;
B. Driveway openings. Driveway openings for vehicular ingress and egress
shall not exceed 24 feet at the right-of-way line and roadway in
residential districts; and shall not exceed 30 feet at the right-of-way line
and 35 feet at the roadway in all other districts;
C. Ingress/egress. Ingress/egress to drive-in banks, motels, funeral homes,
vehicular sales, service, washing and repair stations or garages shall be
not less than 200 feet from any pedestrian entrance or exit to a school,
college university, church, hospital, park, playground, library, public
emergency shelter, or other place of pubic assembly.
D. Driveway aprons. The area between curb and sidewalk must be seven
inches of concrete.
E. Residential driveways.
(1) New homes. All residential driveways must be paved with either
asphalt or concrete within 12 months of receiving occupancy.
§ 550-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-51
1:569
§ 550-51. Temporary outdoor parking of recreational vehicles at
single-family and two-family homes. [Amended 1-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 12-01-2018]
Purpose. The following regulations are intended to maintain an attractive
visual appearance in the Village, promote harmony between residential
neighbors and prevent the accumulation of too many RV units in singlefamily
and two-family neighborhoods.
A. RV unit defined. One RV unit shall be any one of the following: a boat
with or without a trailer, a motor home, a fifth-wheel trailer, a tent
camper, a travel trailer, a utility trailer loaded with one or more
snowmobiles, jet skis, ATVs, dirt bikes, motorcycles, or any other type
of trailered unit used for recreational purposes.
B. Where applicable. The regulations in this section apply only in the
following zoning districts: Single-Family Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4,
R-5, R-6, and the Rd-1 Two-Family District and the B-1 Commercial
District.
C. At single-family and two-family homes only one RV unit per dwelling
unit may be temporarily parked seasonally as follows:
(1) In the front yard or in a side yard either on a paved driveway or off
the driveway but on a paved surface. Such RV unit shall not be
parked in the front of the residential dwelling unit.
(2) In the rear yard, one RV unit may be temporarily parked on a paved
surface.
(3) On corner lots, RV units shall not be temporarily parked in the
street side yard in any zoning district.
(4) At two-family homes, each dwelling may temporarily park one RV
unit in either the front yard, side yard or rear yard as described
above.
D. Other requirements which apply to the temporary parking of RV units.
(1) RV units shall be licensed if required by the state.
(2) RV units shall not be closer than five feet to any lot line.
(3) RV units shall not be occupied temporarily or permanently.
(4) RV units temporarily parked in driveways shall maintain a fifteenfoot
vision clearance measured from the driveway/sidewalk
intersection.
(5) RV units shall be well maintained.
(6) Residents are required to verify if any other privately imposed
restrictions or conditions apply to the subject property relative to
the temporary parking of RV units.
§ 550-51 SLINGER CODE § 550-51
1:570
§ 550-52. Highway access.
No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed
rights-of-way of expressways, nor to any controlled access arterial street
without permission of the highway agency that has access control
jurisdiction. No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the
existing or proposed rights-of-way of the following:
§ 550-53. Exceptions.
Where, in the judgment of the Village Planning Commission, it would be
inappropriate to apply literally the provisions of Article V of this chapter
E. Temporarily parking RV units seasonally. Winter RV units may be
parked outdoors as described above from November 1 to April 15, and
summer RV units may be parked outdoors as described above from
April 16 to October 31. In no case shall any RV unit be temporarily
parked outdoors as described on a year-round basis.
F. Long-term storage of RV units.
(1) One RV unit per dwelling unit may be stored in the rear yard on a
paved surface, and no additional RV units shall be temporarily
parked seasonally outdoors at that dwelling unit.
(2) RV units may be stored inside a garage without limits.
G. Enforcement. These regulations shall be enforced by the Village Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector. RV units parked in public streets
shall be regulated by on-street parking requirements in the Village
Code which shall be enforced by the Village Police Department.
H. Fees and penalties. The regulations in this section shall be subject to
fees and penalties as described in the Village Code.
A. Freeways and interstate highways. Freeways, and interstate highways
and their interchanges or turning lanes nor to intersecting or
interchanging streets within 1,500 feet of the most remote end of the
taper of the turning lanes;
B. Arterial streets. Arterial streets intersecting another arterial street
within 100 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines;
C. Access barriers. Access barriers such as curbing, fencing, ditching,
landscaping, or other topographic barriers, shall be erected to prevent
unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified streets
or highways;
D. Temporary access. Temporary access may be granted by the Village
Board after review and recommendation by the highway agencies
having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary, revocable
and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period
not to exceed 12 months.
§ 550-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-53
1:571
because exceptional or undue hardship would result, the Village Planning
Commission may grant an exception from any requirement to the extent
deemed just and proper. No exception to the provisions of this chapter
shall be granted unless the Village Planning Commission finds that all the
following facts and conditions exist and so indicates in the minutes of its
proceedings:
A. Exceptional circumstances. There are exceptional, extraordinary, or
unusual circumstances or conditions where a literal enforcement of the
requirements of Article V of this chapter would result in severe
hardship. (Such hardships should not apply generally to other
properties, or be of such a recurrent nature as to suggest that the
ordinance should be changed.)
B. Preservation of property rights. That such variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by
other properties of the same use.
C. Absence of detriment. That the variance will not create substantial
detriment to adjacent property and will not materially impair or be
contrary to the purpose and spirit of this chapter or the public interest.
D. Super majority required. A minimum of 2/3 affirmative vote of the
Village Planning Commission members at the meeting shall be required
to grant any exception of this chapter.305
305. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 5.09, Driveway aprons, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 11-01-2018.
§ 550-53 SLINGER CODE § 550-53
1:572
ARTICLE VI
Signs
§ 550-54. Determine if sign permit and fee is required.
§ 550-55. Administration.
A. No sign shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, converted, or structurally altered until a sign permit has been
issued in accordance with § 550-55 and a fee paid in accord with a fee
schedule established by the Village Board.
B. Temporary signs require registration in accordance with § 550-57. No
fee is required for temporary signs.
C. Certain types of signs do not require a sign permit and such signs are
described in § 550-56.
A. Approval of sign permits.
(1) The Building Inspector shall approve all sign permits. Certain signs
along state trunk highways may also require the approval of the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation.
(2) In the administration of these sign regulations, the Building
Inspector may consult with the Commission and/or the Zoning
Board of Appeals for interpretations on these regulations.306
B. Recording. The Building Inspector shall record and file all applications
for permits with any accompanying plans and documents, make
inspections of signs in the Village, and issue orders of noncompliance
for signs as may be required.
C. Computations. The following definitions shall control the computation
of sign area and sign height.
(1) Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face
(which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only
one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem, or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which
it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing or
decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets
zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display
itself.
306. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-55
1:573
(2) Computation of area of multi-faced signs. The sign area for a sign
with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the
area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical
sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be
viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces
are part of the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed
by the measurement of one of the faces.
(3) Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as
the distance from the base of the sign at existing grade to the top of
the highest attached component of the sign. Existing grade shall be
the lower of: the grade prior to construction; or the newly
established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling,
berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating
the sign. In cases in which the existing grade is not reasonable for a
sign location, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that
the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to
the elevation of the nearest point of the center line of a public
street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the
principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower.
D. Sign permit application for permanent signs. A sign permit application
(provided by the Village) shall be completed and submitted with the
required fee to the Village Clerk. The application shall include the
following information:
(1) Consent of owner. Written consent of the owner or lessee of the
building, structure, or land to which or upon which the sign is to be
erected.
(2) Scaled drawing(s) of sign. Scaled drawing of the sign indicating the
dimensions, the materials to be used, the type of illumination, if
any, and the method of construction and attachment.
(3) Site plan. Site plan, drawn to scale, of the location and position of
such sign in relation to structures and/or buildings, public right-ofway,
and any utility pedestrian easements.
(4) Master signage plan.
(a) Prior to approval of any sign permit in a commercial or
manufacturing district, particularly for multi-tenant buildings
or sites with multiple uses, the Planning Commission shall
approve a Master Signage Plan (MSP) for developments
approved after October 22, 2007. The purpose of the MSP is to
provide standards for design consistency on a site and avoid
cluttered and uncoordinated signage.
(b) The MSP shall include the following components:
§ 550-55 SLINGER CODE § 550-55
1:574
§ 550-56. Signs not requiring permit.
The following signs are permitted without a sign permit, subject to the
following regulations:
[1] A scaled site plan showing all buildings, parking and drive
areas, landscaping and the location type of all proposed
signs placed on the ground.
[2] A scaled building elevation(s) showing the location and
size of all proposed wall signs.
[3] Computation of the maximum total sign area within the
site, the area of each individual sign, the height of each
sign or its components.
[4] Color scheme, lettering or graphic style, lighting,
materials and location of each sign placed on a building or
in window areas. Where specific tenants are unknown,
generic information shall be shown.
[5] Design and/or maintenance standards, features or
restrictions proposed by the owner(s) or developer.
(c) The MSP may be submitted and processed in conjunction with
site plan approval. The MSP may be amended by submittal of a
revised plan. After approval of a MSP, all signs shall be placed
in accord with the MSP, which may be enforced as a provision
of this code.
A. Real estate signs. Which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which said signs are temporarily located shall not
exceed eight square feet for residential properties and shall not exceed
32 square feet for commercial, industrial or institutional properties;
B. Address signs. Ground signs identifying the name and address of the
resident not to exceed two square feet in area when located on the
premises;
C. Signs for public, charitable or religious institutions. Bulletin boards on
ground signs or wall signs for public, charitable, or religious
institutions not to exceed 50 square feet in area located on the
premises. Portable signs displayed by public, charitable or religious
institutions may be displayed for up to 14 consecutive days, not more
than three times in any twelve-month period. Such signs shall meet the
setback requirement of the district in which they are located;
[Amended by Ord. No. 12-01-2015]
D. Building identification signs. Memorial signs, tablets, names of
buildings, and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or
when constructed of metal and affixed flat against a structure;
§ 550-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-56
1:575
E. Public information signs. Official ground signs, such as traffic control,
parking restrictions, information and notices;
F. Flags. Flags of the United States, the State of Wisconsin or the Village
of Slinger, provided that such a flag does not exceed 60 square feet in
area and flown on a pole not more than 40 feet in height. U.S. flags shall
be flown in accord with protocol established by the U.S. Congress for
U.S. flags.
G. Political campaign signs. Political campaign signs may be permitted in
any zoning district provided that permission is obtained from the
property owner, renter, or lessee; and provided that the signage is not
placed or erected prior to the first day of the "election campaign period"
as defined in § 12.04, Wis. Stats., Communication of Political Messages,
and shall be removed within four days following the election;
H. Job site signs for contractors or lenders. Such signs not to exceed 32
square feet in area, and posted no longer than one week after
completion of the project;
I. Rummage sale signs. Rummage sale signs used for the purpose of
advertising the sale of merchandise at a private residence by at least
one occupant of said residence, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Such signs shall be posted only on the day(s) of the sale;
(2) Signs shall not be attached to or displayed on traffic or regulatory
signs, light poles, parkway/terrace trees or other public property.
J. Window and door signs and vinyl window graphics.
(1) Window and door signs shall be permitted in business, commercial
and manufacturing districts. In such districts, only the inside
surfaces of any window or door may be used for the attachment of a
temporary sign(s), provided that the total area of such sign(s) shall
not exceed 75% of the total window or door area in which the
sign(s) is placed and shall not be placed on door windows or other
windows needed to be clear for pedestrian safety.
(2) Exterior or interior mounted signs or lettering on windows or doors
shall be considered permanent signs, and such window signs or
lettering shall be limited to name, address, hours of operation or
similar information but shall not contain advertising messages.
Such signage shall be included in the 75% maximum allowable total
area of window and door signs.
(3) Vinyl window graphics depicting products sold or serviced on the
premises may be placed in business, commercial or manufacturing
districts. Such graphics shall comply with the same area
regulations noted above for window and door signs, and shall be
included in the 75% maximum total area of window and door signs.
The 25% uncovered window area shall be located to maximize sight
§ 550-56 SLINGER CODE § 550-56
1:576
§ 550-57. Temporary signs in certain zoning districts.
Temporary signs, flags or banners may be permitted in business,
manufacturing and institutional districts in accord with the following:
§ 550-58. Signs permitted in business, manufacturing or residential
districts which require sign permit.
lines into the building(s) for occupant security and pedestrian
safety.
A. Registration of temporary signs, flags or banners. No permit or fee is
required for a temporary sign. However, prior to the display of any such
temporary signs, flags or banners, the property owner or business
tenant or organization intending to display such signs shall contact the
Village Building Inspector's office by phone, fax, e-mail or in person to
state their intentions and describe the proposed sign, its location, and
its display period. Such contact shall constitute registration of the
sign(s) by the Village Building Inspector, who shall maintain a written
record of the information to achieve compliance with applicable
requirements.
B. Frequency of display. A temporary sign may be displayed for not more
than 45 consecutive days at any one time and shall not be displayed for
more than 180 days per calendar year.
C. Number and size of temporary signs. A maximum of six temporary signs
may be displayed on any one premises at any one time. The maximum
size (area in square feet) of a temporary sign(s) on one premises shall
be limited to 5% of the area of the building facade facing any street and
shall not exceed a maximum of 96 square feet total for all temporary
signs on any one premises.
D. Placement. Temporary signs may be placed on building wall(s) or lawn
areas, and shall not obscure the vision of motorists using the premises.
There is no minimum setback for temporary signs. Such signs shall not
be located in the public right-of-way.
E. Materials and condition. Temporary signs shall be made of durable
weatherproof materials and shall be maintained to appear in new
condition. Signs which are damaged, weathered, unreadable, or in poor
condition shall be removed as soon as practicable.
F. Violations. Violators of temporary sign requirements shall be notified in
writing by the Village of noncompliance conditions. If compliance is not
achieved, the Village may initiate action to cease a violation of these
requirements in accord with Article XV of this chapter.
A. In business and manufacturing districts, the maximum total area of all
individual permanent signs on each business premises shall not exceed
200 square feet. This maximum total area does not include portable or
§ 550-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-58
1:577
temporary signs, flags or banners. Certain multi-tenant buildings may
exceed the 200 square foot maximum area in accord with § 550-60A(4).
B. A master signage plan shall be submitted in accord with § 550-55D(4)
for developments which contains multiple uses on a lot or group of lots,
or for multi-tenant buildings.
C. The following signs are permitted in business and manufacturing
districts, subject to the following restrictions and in accord with a
master signage plan where applicable:
(1) Wall signs.
(a) Wall signs placed against the exterior walls of buildings shall
not extend more than 12 inches outside of a building's wall
surface, shall not exceed 200 square feet in area for any one
premises, and shall not exceed the roofline.
(b) On multi-tenant buildings, one exterior wall sign may be
installed for each individual tenant, and any such individual
tenant wall sign shall not exceed 60 square feet in area and
shall not exceed two feet in height in business districts, and
shall not exceed three feet in height in manufacturing districts.
See § 550-60A for larger signs as a conditional use.
(c) On corner lots or sites with multiple street frontages, wall
signs may be permitted on any wall facing a street or highway.
(2) Ground signs. Ground signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height as
defined in § 550-55C, shall not exceed 100 square feet on one side
with a maximum 200 square feet total, and shall meet the minimum
setback and yard requirements for the district in which it is
located, except that in the B-1 Commercial District, the setback
shall be five feet from the right-of-way, and that in all other
business and manufacturing zoning districts, the setback shall be
10 feet from the right-of-way. Ground signs located at street or alley
intersections may require a greater setback to comply with
§ 550-47 to provide safe traffic visibility at such locations. On
corner lots or sites with multiple street frontages, one ground sign
may be permitted along each street or highway.
D. Portable signs. Portable signs may be permitted by the Building
Inspector for advertising purposes, provided that the portable sign will
not be located in any public right-of-way, will not be located closer than
10 feet to an adjacent property, and will not cause a hazard to traffic or
adjoining properties. Portable sign permits shall not be granted for a
period of more than 14 days per occurrence and will not exceed three
occurrences in any twelve-month period. The permit shall be in the
same form as defined in § 550-55 of this chapter.307
307. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-58 SLINGER CODE § 550-58
1:578
§ 550-59. Signs in institutional and park districts which require
sign permit.
§ 550-60. Signs requiring conditional use permit.
There are certain types of signs which, because of their unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as unrestricted permitted uses
in any particular zoning district or districts. Such signs may be necessary
or desirable to be allowed in a particular district, provided that due
consideration is given to locations, size and design. Such signs are classified
as conditional uses. Such signs may only be erected following the issuance
of a conditional use sign permit as outlined in Article IV of this chapter. Prior
to the granting of any conditional use sign permit, the Planning Commission
may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
locations, size, construction, color, maintenance, and operation of the sign
as deemed necessary to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
E. Subdivision or development signs. Sign identifying the name of a
subdivision or a development may be approved by the Planning
Commission and Village Board, who may impose conditions on such
signs.
F. Traffic directional signs. Traffic Directional signs not exceeding 10
square feet in area (per side) may be placed at driveway entrances to
direct traffic to businesses served by the driveway. Such signs shall
contain the business name or logo only and shall not contain any
advertising message. A maximum of two such signs may be located per
driveway regardless of the number of businesses served by a driveway.
Such signs shall be located on private property and shall comply with
vision triangle clearance requirements contained in § 550-47.
G. Subdivision lot sales signs or other residential unit sales signs.
Subdivision lot sales signs or other residential unit sales signs relating
to the sale of land in a newly developed subdivision or relating to a
residential project may not exceed 32 square feet in area; not more
than one per primary street serving the development; located not less
than 10 feet from the property line. Along county, state, or U.S.
highways, such signs may not exceed 96 square feet in area, and be
located not less than 10 feet from any right-of-way line. Such signs shall
be removed no later than the date on which all lots in the subdivision or
residential units in the project have been sold at least once.
A. Institutional and park name signs. Institutional and park name signs are
permitted in the I-1 and P-1 Districts when approved by the Planning
Commission.
B. P-1 Park and Recreation Districts. All permanent signs on public or
private lands which are zoned P-1 may be permitted as a conditional use
as described in § 550-60A(8).
§ 550-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-60
1:579
A. Conditional use sign permit required. The following signs may be
allowed with a conditional use permit, as provided in Article IV of this
chapter:
(1) Search lights or balloons may not be used on a permanent basis. A
permit for such an advertising device may be issued for up to five
days and may not exceed a total of 25 days or five permits per year.
(2) Advertising vehicles may not be parked on any public right-of-way.
A permit may be issued for an on-premises advertising vehicle for a
period of time not to exceed five days and no more than three
permits per location may be issued per year.
(3) Changing message/electronic signs in all zoning districts The
Planning Commission may approve a changing message electronic
sign, provided the following findings can be made by the
Commission:
(a) The sign regulations applicable to the zoning district would
allow a static message sign of identical size and placement as
the proposed changing message electronic sign.
(b) Proximity of the changing message electronic sign to nearby
traffic signals would not adversely affect public safety by
distracting or confusing motorists.
(c) Visibility of the changing message sign from nearby residential
properties would not create a nuisance for nearby residents.
(d) That the intensity of the changing message lights shall not
create a nuisance.
(4) Combination of signs may be permitted for Business and Industrial/
Manufacturing multiple-tenant buildings as follows:
(a) Master identification signage may be provided which displays
the name of the shopping center, and may also include
information such as, but not limited to: names or lists of
individual stores, hours of operation, and/or special sales
information. One master identification sign may be permitted
along each roadway abutting a multiple tenant building. Each
such sign shall not exceed 300 square feet in total area and 20
feet in height.
(b) Exterior wall signage. Each tenant business in a multiple
tenant building which has an exterior front wall may have
exterior wall signage not exceeding 60 square feet in area or
exceeding two feet in height.
(5) Billboards/highway signs that exceed the size requirements as
established in Article VI of this chapter, not exceeding 500 square
feet.
§ 550-60 SLINGER CODE § 550-60
1:580
(6) Signs exceeding height limitations.
(a) Signs identifying business establishments within 1,000 feet of
a U.S. highway interchange may exceed the height limitation of
Article VI, but in any case shall not exceed a height of 75 feet.
(b) Ground signs identifying business establishments with
frontage along a state highway may exceed the height
limitation of Article VI, but in any case shall not exceed a
height of 30 feet.
(7) In public parks which are zoned P-1, temporary signs or banners
may be permitted. Such signs or banners may have either a
commercial advertising message or a community activity or
community organization message. Such signs shall be mounted on
a fence or other permanent structure, and shall be easily
removable. The area of any one such sign shall not exceed 40
square feet per side. Requirements such as the length of term for
displaying such signs, removal requirements, permit fees, and the
number of signs allowed under any one conditional use permit shall
be determined by the Planning Commission as conditions of
approval.
(8) In all lands which are zoned P-1, permanent signs may be permitted
as a conditional use. The height, size, location, total sign area,
number of signs, color, materials, maintenance requirements, and
all other physical characteristics of such signs shall be determined
on a case-by-case basis, and shall be in accord with a master
signage plan for each premises. Permanent signs on P-1 zoned
parcels which were in existence prior to September 1, 2004, and
which were legally constructed in accord with applicable
regulations in effect at the time of their installation, may remain
and may be maintained including wording changes, but shall not be
increased in area.
(9) Projecting signs, defined as signs attached to a building wall and
extending outward therefrom more than 12 inches, may be
permitted as a conditional use in any commercial, business or
manufacturing district. Such projecting signs shall comply with the
following requirements:
(a) Only one projecting sign may be located on a premises.
(b) The area shall not exceed 20 square feet per side or 40 square
feet total per sign.
(c) Such signs shall not project over any lot line into any public
right-of-way.
(d) Such signs shall be mounted firmly, and no component on the
sign may swing, rotate or move freely.
§ 550-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-60
1:581
§ 550-61. Facing.
No sign except those permitted in §§ 550-55 and 550-57 shall be permitted
to face a residential or park district within 100 feet of such district
boundary.
§ 550-62. Lighting and color.
Signs shall not resemble, imitate, or approximate the shape, size, form, or
color of railroad or traffic signs, signals, or devices. Signs shall not obstruct
or interfere with the effectiveness of railroad or traffic signs, signals or
devices. Signs shall not be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. Signs shall
neither be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility, nor be
lighted in such a way as to cause glare or impair driver visibility upon public
ways. Signs may be illuminated, but nonflashing.
§ 550-63. Construction specifications.
(e) In the B-1 District, such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet
per side, or 24 square feet total, and shall be spaced a
minimum of 20 feet apart.
A. Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All signs and other
advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand
wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square foot of area and
shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the Village of
Slinger Code or state or federal requirement.308
B. Supporting members or braces. Supporting members or braces of all
projecting or wall signs shall be constructed of galvanized iron,
properly treated steel, copper, brass or other noncorrosive,
noncombustible material. All projecting signs, if placed at right or other
angle to the wall or roof of any building, shall be attached by such
noncorrosive metal bolts, anchors, cable or other metal attachments as
shall insure permanent and safe construction and shall be maintained
from rust or other defects. Every means or device used for attaching
any sign shall extend through the walls or roof of the building, should
the Building Inspector determine that the safe and permanent support
of such sign so requires, and shall be securely anchored by wall plates
to the inside of the walls or to bearings on the underside of two or more
roof or ceiling joists in accordance with instructions given by the
Building Inspector.
C. Improper braces. No signs or any part thereof or sign anchors, braces
or guide rods shall be attached, fastened or anchored to any fire escape,
fire ladder or standpipe and no such sign or any part of any such sign or
any anchor, brace or guide rod shall be erected, put up or maintained so
308. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-60 SLINGER CODE § 550-63
1:582
§ 550-64. Installation and maintenance.
as to hinder or prevent ingress or egress through such door, doorway
or window or so as to prevent the raising or placing of ladders against
such building by the Slinger Fire Department.
D. Plans. At the time of permit applications, plans shall be filed with the
Building Inspector for footings for signs eight feet to 20 feet, methods
of attachment of projecting signs, and engineering specifications and
calculations as required by the Building Inspector.
A. Safety. All signs shall be installed and maintained in a workmanlike
manner using equipment which is adequate and safe for the task. This
section recognizes that one of the greatest perils to the public safety is
improper performance of sign contractors in the use of adequate
equipment. As such, the Building Inspector may deny a sign permit if
the sign contractor does not have or does not arrange for use of
adequate equipment. The Building Inspector may also cite the sign
contractor for violation of this section if he fails to use proper
equipment in the maintenance of signs.
B. Electrical signs. An electrical permit shall first be obtained before an
electrical sign is installed. Electrical signs shall comply with Village,
state and NEC electrical codes. Electric sign contractors and their
employees are hereby authorized to perform the following tasks:
(1) Install exterior electric signs, ballasts or high voltage transformers
to sockets or outline lighting tubes, and may connect said signs to
primary branch circuit, if said circuit already exists outside of the
building;
(2) Install interior electric signs, but may not connect said signs to the
primary branch circuit;
(3) Maintain and replace any electric component within the sign, on its
surface or between the sign and building for exterior signs only.
This section prohibits the electric sign contractor or its employees
from performing work on electric signs in contradiction to
established electrical codes.
C. Maintenance and repair. Every sign, including but not limited to those
signs for which permits are required, shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable and good structural condition at all times, including
replacement of defective parts, burned out lighting elements, painting
(except when a weathered or natural surface is intended), repainting,
cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of said sign. In
addition, the premises on which the sign is erected shall be kept in a
clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all noxious
substances. The Building Inspector, shall require compliance with all
standards of this section. If the sign is not modified to comply with
safety standards outlined in this section, the Building Inspector shall
§ 550-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-64
1:583
§ 550-65. Existing signs.
Signs lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this
chapter may be continued although the size or location does not conform
to this chapter. However, all nonconforming signs shall be deemed
nonconforming uses or structures and the provisions of Article VIII of this
chapter shall apply.
§ 550-66. Abandoned signs.
All signs or sign messages shall be removed by the owner or lessee to
the premises upon which a sign is located when the business it advertises
is no longer conducted. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign,
the Building Inspector shall give the owner a thirty-day written notice by
certified mail to remove said sign. Upon failure to comply with the first
notice, the Building Inspector shall, by certified mail, send a second notice
giving the owner an additional 48 hours to remove the sign. Upon failure
to comply with the second notice, the Village shall cause the removal to be
executed, the expenses of which shall become a lien against the property
as provided in § 66.0703(13), Wis. Stats., on the property on which the sign
is located as of the date of the removal of the sign and shall automatically
be extended upon the current or next tax roll as a delinquent tax against
the property. All proceedings related to the collection, return and sale of
property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply.
require its removal in accordance with this section, or the sign shall
be removed under the authority of the Building Inspector, and costs
incurred shall be paid by the owner of the premises on which such sign
is located. Signs removed for maintenance and repair for over 30 days
shall be required to reapply for a sign permit before re-erecting the
sign, unless the Planning Commission has first granted an extension of
time.
D. Protection of the public. The temporary occupancy of a sidewalk or
street or other public property during construction, removal, repair,
alteration or maintenance of a sign is permitted, provided the space
occupied is roped off, fenced off or otherwise isolated.
§ 550-64 SLINGER CODE § 550-66
1:584
ARTICLE VII
Modifications
§ 550-67. Height.
The Zoning Administrator may permit the height limit to be exceeded, but
such modification shall be in accordance with the following:
§ 550-68. Yards.
The Zoning Administrator may permit that certain yard requirements be
modified, but such modification shall be in accord with the following:
A. Architectural projections. Architectural projections such as spires,
steeples, belfries, parapet walls, cupolas, domes, flues and chimneys
may be exempted from the height limitations of this chapter.
B. Special structures. Special structures such as elevator penthouses,
observation towers, scenery lofts, manufacturing equipment and
necessary mechanical appurtenances and substations may be exempted
from the height limitations of this chapter.
C. Essential services. Essential services, utilities, water towers, electric
power and communication transmission lines may be exempted from
the height limitations of this chapter.
D. Public or semipublic facilities. Public or semipublic facilities such as
schools, churches, hospitals, monuments, sanitariums, libraries,
governmental offices and stations, may be erected to a height of 60 feet,
provided all required yards are increased not less than one foot for each
foot the structure exceeds the district's maximum height requirement.
A. Decks, patios, stairs, landings, and fire escapes. Uncovered decks,
patios, stairs, landings, and fire escapes may project into any required
yard; but such projections shall not extend more than six feet into any
such yard, and shall not be closer than three feet to any lot line.
B. Architectural projections. Architectural projections such as chimneys,
flues, sills, eaves, belt courses, and ornaments, may project into any
required yard; but such projection shall not extend more than three feet
into any such yard, and shall not be closer than three feet to any lot
line.
C. Residential fences. Residential fences with a permit are allowed on the
property lines or in the rear or side yards of residential districts, but
shall not in any case exceed a height of six feet and shall not be closer
than two feet to any public right-of-way. Structural posts and any
supporting members shall be located on the property side of the
permittee. Residential fences, other than decorative fences as defined
in Subsection D below, are not permitted in street yards. [Amended
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 02-02-2017]
§ 550-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-68
1:585
§ 550-69. Additions.
Additions in the street yard of existing structures shall not project beyond
the average of the existing street yards on the abutting lots or parcels.
§ 550-70. Average street yards.
The required street yards may be decreased or increased in any residential
or business districts to the average of the existing street yards of the
abutting structures on each side, but in no case less than 15 feet in any
residential district and five feet in any business district.
§ 550-71. Corner lots.
The side yard requirement for corner lots shall be the same as the side yard
requirement for the next adjacent lot fronting on the street that the side
yard of the corner lot faces.
§ 550-72. Existing substandard lots.
D. Decorative fences. Decorative fences including gates, which are more
than 50% open and less than three feet in height, such as split-rail
fences used for ornamental purposes, are allowed without a permit.
Chain link, agricultural and industrial type fences are not considered to
be decorative fences. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
02-02-2017]
E. Security fences. Security fences are permitted on the property lines in
all districts except residential districts, but shall not exceed 10 feet in
height and shall be of an open type similar to woven wire or wroughtiron
fencing.
F. Accessory uses. Accessory uses and detached accessory buildings are
permitted in the rear or side yards; they shall not be more than 20 feet
high and shall not be nearer than three feet to any lot line, except
where a private garage has an entrance facing an alley, such entrance
shall be located not less than 15 feet from the nearest alley line.
G. Landscaping. Accessory structures and vegetation used for landscaping
and decorating may be placed in the required street yard and side
yards. Permitted structures and vegetation include flag poles,
ornamental light standards, lawn furniture, sun dials, bird baths, trees,
shrubs, flowers, and ornamental fencing.
H. Essential services. Essential services, utilities, electric power, and
communication transmission lines are exempt from the yard and
distance requirements of this chapter.
A. A lot which does not contain sufficient area to conform to the
dimensional requirements of this chapter, but which is at least 50 feet
wide and 6,000 square feet in area may be used as a single-family
dwelling site, provided that the use is permitted in the zoning district,
§ 550-68 SLINGER CODE § 550-72
1:586
§ 550-73. Noise.
Sirens, whistles, and bells which are maintained and utilized solely to serve
a public purpose are exempt from the sound level standards set forth in
§ 550-84 of this chapter.
§ 550-74. Special exceptions.
The Village Board is authorized to grant a special exception to waive or
modify any requirements of this chapter if, in the judgment of the Village
Board, it would be inappropriate to apply literally the provisions of this
chapter due to exceptional circumstances, to the extent deemed just and
proper on a case-by-case basis. The procedures and standards to be applied
are as follows.
provided the lot is on record in the County Register of Deed's Office
prior to the effective date of this chapter, and provided that the lot
is in separate ownership from abutting lands. A zoning permit for the
improvement of a lot with lesser dimensions and requisites than those
stated above shall be issued only after a variance is granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Substandard lots shall be required to meet the setbacks and other yard
requirements of this chapter.
A. Procedures.
(1) Petition. A party seeking a special exception shall file a petition
with the Village Clerk.
(2) Petition data required. The petition shall include all of the
following:
(a) A plot map drawn to scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch
showing the land in question, its location, the length and
direction of each boundary thereof, the location and existing
use of all buildings on such land and the principal use of all
properties within 300 feet of such land.
(b) The names and addresses of the owners of all properties within
300 feet of any part of the land included in the proposed
change.
(c) A detailed description of the intended development or use.
(d) Any further information as required by the Village Staff or
Village Board to facilitate the making of an evaluation of such
request, such as a site plan depicting proposed buildings,
parking, traffic impact, landscaping treatment, drainage,
sanitary sewer, erosion control and other factors as would be
pertinent including the impact on public facilities.
§ 550-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-74
1:587
(3) Hearing. The Village Board shall hold a public hearing upon receipt
of such petition. Notice of such public hearing shall be provided as
described in Article XIV of this chapter.
(4) Fee. The petition shall be accompanied by a fee payment as set
from time to time by the Village Board to defray the cost of
publication, notification, and holding a public hearing,
administrative expenses and expenses of Board members. The
petitioner shall also pay reimbursement to the Village for all costs
incurred for legal, planning, engineering, and administrative work
necessary to administer the application and oversee the project.
B. Basis of approval. An application for a special exception may be
approved, denied, or approved with conditions. In order to approve the
special exception, the Village Board must find that the applicant has
demonstrated all of the following:
(1) That the petition seeks approval of a structure that was
constructed pursuant to a building permit issued by the Village of
Slinger Building Inspector, in accordance with the plans filed with
the permit application and all conditions of the permit approval,
and only after completing construction was the structure found to
be in violation of the yard, building height and area, or green space
requirements of this chapter.
(2) That there are exceptional, extraordinary, or unusual
circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel, structure,
use, or intended use, such that a literal enforcement of the
requirements of this chapter would result in a severe burden; and,
also, that such circumstances do not apply generally to other
properties or uses in the same district, or are of such a recurrent
nature as to suggest that the Zoning Ordinance should be changed.
(3) That the special exception is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by the applicant
and is not inconsistent with substantial property rights possessed
by other properties in the same vicinity.
(4) That the special exception will not create substantial detriment to
adjacent property or the general desirability of the Village and its
environs, and will not materially impair or be contrary to the
purpose and spirit of this chapter, or the adopted Village of Slinger
Comprehensive Plan, or the public interest.
C. Determination. The action of the Village Board shall be stated in writing
and shall include findings of facts setting forth the basis for the
decision. If a special exception is granted, or is conditionally granted, it
shall be subject to the written approval of the applicant, and upon such
approval it shall be recorded at the office of the Washington County
Register of Deeds. The decision of the Village Board shall be final and
shall not be subject to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 550-74 SLINGER CODE § 550-74
1:588
ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 02-01-2017]
§ 550-75. Existing legal nonconforming uses.
The lawful nonconforming use of a structure, land or water, existing at
the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be continued,
although the use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter,
however:
§ 550-76. Legal conforming uses on a conforming lot or legal
nonconforming lot containing legal nonconforming structures.
A. Only that portion of the land or water in actual use may be so continued.
Such uses may not be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, substituted,
moved, or structurally altered except when required to do so by law or
order or so as to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. No structure containing a legal nonconforming use or, on lands
containing a legal nonconforming use, may be extended, enlarged,
rebuilt, substituted, intensified, moved, or added to except when
required to do so by law or until the legal nonconforming use has been
made to conform with this chapter.
C. Total lifetime structural repairs or alterations to a structure containing
a legal nonconforming use shall not exceed 50% of the assessed value of
the structure unless it is permanently changed to conform to the use
provisions of this chapter.
D. Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals if such equipment will reduce the incompatibility of the
nonconforming use with the neighboring uses.
E. If a legal nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for a period
of 12 months, any future use of the structure, land or water shall
conform to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
F. No lot on lands containing a legal nonconforming use, may be reduced
in size, modified, increased in size or changed in any manner except
when required to do so by law or until the legal nonconforming use has
been made to conform to this chapter.
A. A legal nonconforming structure with a conforming use existing at the
time of the adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance may be
continued although the structure's size, location, height, parking,
loading or access does not conform with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance.
B. Such structure shall not be extended, enlarged, or moved except when
required to do so by law or order or so as to comply with the provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 550-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-76
1:589
§ 550-77. Legal conforming uses on legal nonconforming lots
containing structures.
The conforming use of a conforming structure existing at the time of the
adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance may be continued
although the lot does not conform to the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance with the following conditions:
§ 550-78. Changes and substitutions.
Once a legal nonconforming use or structure has been changed to conform
with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, it shall not revert back to
a legal nonconforming use or structure. The Zoning Board of Appeals
may permit the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming use for
an existing legal nonconforming use. Once the Zoning Board of Appeals
has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming use,
the existing use shall lose its status as a legal nonconforming use. The
substituted use shall be subject to all the conditions required by the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
C. A legal nonconforming structure with a legal conforming use may be
repaired, maintained, renovated, or remodeled in ways that do not
extend or enlarge the structure subject to building code and other
applicable requirements. There are no limits on the costs of such work.
D. Notwithstanding Subsections A, B, and C, above, repair, maintenance,
renovation, remodeling and restoration of such legal nonconforming
structure can be conducted under circumstances allowed by
§ 62.23(7)(hb) or (hc), Wis. Stats., in full compliance with statutes. This
Subsection D is intended to comply with § 62.23(hb) and (hc), Wis.
Stats.
A. Additions or enlargements to such structures are permitted provided
they conform to the established setback, offset, height, parking, loading
and access provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Existing conforming structures on legal nonconforming lots which are
damaged or destroyed by violent wind, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold or
infestation may be restored to the size, location and use it had
immediately before the damage or destruction occurred. A larger size
than previously existed is also permitted if and to the extent necessary
for the structure to comply with applicable state or federal
requirements.
§ 550-76 SLINGER CODE § 550-78
1:590
ARTICLE IX
Performance Standards
§ 550-79. Compliance.
This chapter permits specific use in specific districts and these performance
standards are designed to limit, restrict, and prohibit the effects of those
uses outside their premises or district. All structures, lands, air, and waters
shall hereafter, in addition to their use, site, and sanitary regulations,
comply with the following performance standards.
§ 550-80. Air pollution.
No person or activity shall emit any fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists, or
gases in such quantities so as to substantially contribute to exceeding state
or federal air pollution standards.
§ 550-81. Fire and explosive hazards.
All activities involving the manufacturing, utilization, processing or storage
of flammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety
devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and with adequate
firefighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices that are standard in
the industry. All materials that range from active to intense burning shall be
manufactured, utilized, processed, and stored only in completely enclosed
buildings which have incombustible exterior walls and an automatic fire
extinguishing system. The aboveground storage capacity of materials that
produce flammable or explosive vapors shall not exceed 50,000 gallons.
§ 550-82. Glare and heat.
No activity shall emit glare or heat that is visible or measurable outside
its premises except activities which may emit direct or sky reflected glare
which shall not be visible outside their district. All operations producing
intense glare or heat shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not to be visible
outside their premises.
§ 550-83. Water quality protection.
A. No activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any
treated, untreated, or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid
materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or
temperature that might run off, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or
subsurface waters so as to contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters or
cause nuisances such as objectionable shore deposits, floating or
submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness or be
harmful to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life.
B. In addition, no activity shall withdraw water or discharge any liquid or
solid materials so as to exceed, or contribute toward the exceeding of
§ 550-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-83
1:591
§ 550-84. Noise.
the minimum standards and those other standards and the application
of those standards set forth in Ch. NR 102, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. No activity in an M-1 or M-2 Manufacturing District shall produce a
sound level outside the district boundary that exceeds the following
sound level measured by a sound level meter and associated octave
band filter:
Octave Band Frequency
(cycles per second)
Sound Level
(decibels)
0 to 75 79
75 to 150 74
150 to 300 66
300 to 600 59
600 to 1,200 53
1,200 to 2,400 47
2,400 to 4,800 41
Above 4,800 39
B. No other activity in any other district shall produce a sound level
outside its premises that exceeds the following:
Octave Band Frequency
(cycles per second)
Sound Level
(decibels)
0 to 75 72
75 to 150 67
150 to 300 59
300 to 600 52
600 to 1,200 46
1,200 to 2,400 40
2,400 to 4,800 34
Above 4,800 32
C. All noise shall be so muffled or otherwise controlled as not to become
objectionable due to intermittence, duration, beat frequency, impulse
character, periodic character or shrillness.
§ 550-83 SLINGER CODE § 550-85
1:592
§ 550-85. Traffic noise limitations.
No owner of land adjacent to an existing freeway or adjacent to a planned
transportation corridor shall commence or cause to be commenced
construction of any structure that will be subject to traffic noise levels that
exceed the following sound level measured by a sound level meter:
A. Construction restrictions for habitable and institutional structures:
(1) No new single or two-family residential structure shall be approved
for construction (excluding substantial repair or alteration) if any
exterior hourly traffic sound level (Leq[h]) anywhere within the
proposed outdoor living area is projected to be equal to or in excess
of 67 db(A) upon completion of the structure or anytime thereafter.
(2) No new multifamily residence, dormitory, mobile home park,
transient lodging, school, hospital, nursing home or similar
structure, or substantial modification of such existing structure,
shall be approved if any exterior hourly traffic level (Leq[h])
anywhere within the proposed outdoor living area on the site is
projected to be equal to or in excess of 67 db(A) upon completion of
the structure or anytime thereafter.
(3) Construction otherwise prohibited shall be permitted if there are
no outdoor use areas on the site of the proposed structure
projected to be exposed to an hourly traffic sound level (Leq[h])
equal to or in excess of 67 db(A), provided that there is
incorporated into the design and construction of the structure such
sound attenuation measures as are necessary to reduce the
maximum interior hourly traffic induced sound level (Leq[h]) in a
habitable room to 52 db(A) upon completion of the structure or
anytime thereafter.
B. Construction restrictions for commercial and industrial structures:
(1) No new commercial or industrial structure, or substantial
modification of such existing structure, shall be approved if any
exterior hourly traffic sound level (Leq[h]) anywhere on the site is
projected to be equal to or in excess of 72 db(a) upon completion of
the structure or anytime thereafter.
(2) Construction otherwise prohibited shall be permitted if there are
no outdoor use areas on the site of the proposed structure (except
parking lots and storage areas) projected to be exposed to an
hourly traffic sound level (Leq[h]) equal to or in excess of 72 db(A),
provided that there is incorporated into the design and
construction of the structure such sound attenuation measures as
necessary to reduce the maximum interior hourly traffic induced
sound level (Leq[h]) in an interior work or public area to 59 db(A)
upon completion of the structure or anytime thereafter.
C. Noise attenuation plans:
§ 550-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-85
1:593
(1) If the Village of Slinger Planning Commission has reason to believe
that a report is necessary to determine whether a project will be
exposed to excessive traffic induced sound levels, such report shall
be made by the permit applicant prior to the approval of any
subdivision, zoning, or building permit approval. The report shall
be prepared by a registered professional engineer or other
qualified noise control consultant, and shall contain the following
information and any other information the Planning Commission
may reasonably require:
(a) The existing maximum hourly traffic sound level (Leq[h]) for a
representative sample of locations, measured in accordance
with guidelines set forth in "Sound Procedure for Measuring
Highway Noise: Final Report," dated August 1981, published
by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA), Arlington, VA, or modeled according
to a methodology consistent with the methodology set forth in
the FHWA Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model (Report No.
FHWA-RD-77-108);
(b) The projected future (Leq[h]) at the site resulting from future
traffic increases; and
(c) Where applicable, plans for sound attenuation measures on the
site and/or within the structure proposed to be constructed or
altered, and the amount of sound attenuation anticipated as a
result of these measures. Sound attenuation may be achieved
by separation from noise sources, berms, barriers,
landscaping, building construction materials, insulation, and
other building measures, or any combination thereof.
(2) In determining whether an applicant should be required to submit
a noise attenuation plan pursuant to § 550-85C of this chapter, the
Planning Commission shall consider the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation's Administrative Code Ch. Trans 405, Wis. Am.
Code, and the Federal Highway Administration's Procedures for
Abatement of Highway Traffic Noise and Construction Noise, Title
23 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter J, Part 772.
D. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Village of Slinger
Planning Commission to prohibit a use or structure by reason of its
excessive hourly traffic sound level (Leq[h]) or by a decision of the
Planning Commission to require a Noise Attenuation Plan may appeal
such decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Article
XII of this chapter. Such appeal shall be made within 30 days following
the Planning Commission decision.
§ 550-85 SLINGER CODE § 550-86
1:594
§ 550-86. Odors.309
No activity shall emit any odorous matter of such nature or quantity as to
be offensive, obnoxious, or unhealthful outside their premises. The guide for
determining odor measurement and control shall be Ch. NR 429, Wis. Adm.
Code, and amendments thereto.
§ 550-87. Radioactivity and electrical disturbances.
No activity shall emit radioactivity or electrical disturbances outside its
premises that are dangerous or would adversely affect the use of
neighboring premises.
§ 550-88. Vibration.
No activity in any district shall emit vibrations which are discernible without
instruments outside its premises. No activity shall emit vibrations which
exceed the following displacement measured with a three-component
measuring system:
Cycles Per Second Outside the Premises Outside the District
0 to 10 0.0020 0.0004
10 to 20 0.0010 0.0002
20 to 30 0.0006 0.0001
30 to 40 0.0004 0.0001
40 to 50 0.0003 0.0001
50 and over 0.0002 0.0001
§ 550-89. Lighting.
No exterior lighting used for parking lots, recreational facilities, product
display, or security shall be permitted to spill over on operators of motor
vehicles, pedestrians, and uses of land in the vicinity of light source. These
requirements shall not apply to lighting placed in a public right-of-way for
public safety.
A. Orientation. No exterior lighting fixture shall be oriented so that the
lighting element (or a transparent shield) is visible from a property in a
residential district. Light rays shall not be directed into street rights-ofway
or upward into the atmosphere. The use of shielded luminaries, or
luminaries with cutoff optics, and careful fixture placement is
encouraged so as to facilitate compliance with this requirement.
B. Minimum lighting standards. All areas designated on approved site
plans for vehicular parking, loading, or circulation and used for any
such purpose after sunset shall provide artificial illumination in such
309. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-89
1:595
§ 550-90. Landscaping. [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
05-04-2018]
areas at a minimum intensity of 0.4 footcandle, exclusive of approved
antivandal lighting.
C. Intensity of illumination. The intensity of illumination measured at the
property line shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle.
D. Location. Light fixtures shall not be permitted within required setbacks.
E. Flashing, flickering, and other distracting lighting. Flashing, flickering
and other distracting lighting which may distract motorists are
prohibited.
F. Accent lighting. Accent lighting and low-voltage lighting (12 volts or
less) is exempt from these requirements.
G. Nonconforming lighting. All lighting fixtures approved prior to the
adoption of this chapter shall be treated as and regulated as legal
nonconforming uses.
A. The Village of Slinger requires all new developments, including
substantial exterior modifications of existing developments, to submit
and have approved a landscape plan as specified in Article X, § 550-93.
Development review information. Approved landscape plans shall be
completed within 12 months of an occupancy permit being granted,
unless otherwise set forth in an agreement between the developer and
the Village.
B. A landscape plan submitted in conjunction with any development shall
include the following information:
(1) Location, map and scale.
(2) Description of the landscape materials, including scientific and
common names, quantities, spacing and size at installation and
maturity.
C. Basic requirements.310
§ 550-89 SLINGER CODE § 550-90
1:596
D. Requirement specifications.
(1) Green space: Areas without structures, parking surfaces, patios,
decks, pools, driveways, accessory structures and shall include
lands in the Conservancy, Floodplain and Shoreland Zoning
classifications. However, Conservancy, Floodplain and Shoreland
classified areas shall only comprise 30% of total green space
required by this section.
(2) Street trees: Required plantings dependent upon zoning
classification utilizing the recommended species or cultivars listed
in Appendix A “Recommended Street Trees”311 at a minimum 2 1/2
inch caliper size, balled and burlapped. The overuse of any tree
type should be avoided.
(a) The Planning Commission reserves the right to substitute with
species not in Appendix A if deemed necessary.
(b) Developer may substitute with an equivalent species upon
receiving written notification from a professional landscaper or
landscape architect. The notification should state the reason
for the substitution and a description of the new species in
comparison to the original approval.
[1] Written notification of a substitution will be reviewed by
Village staff and filed with the original approval made by
the Planning Commission.
[2] Village Staff may return the developer to the Planning
Commission for final approval of this amendment if
necessary.
[3] Front yard plantings: Based upon the requirements
contained in Subsection C, trees shall be planted of a
minimum 2 1/2 inch caliper size, balled and burlapped.
[4] Front building corners: Each building corner shall have a
minimum landscaped area of 50 square feet. The
landscaped area shall include any combination of
deciduous/evergreen shrubs, flowering trees, and annual
plantings.
[5] Front yard foundations: Shall be “broken-up” with the
planting of low- to medium-sized deciduous/evergreen
shrubs whereas no expanse of foundation visible shall
exceed 10 feet.
310. Editor's Note: See Basic Landscaping Requirements Table, included as an attachment at
the end of this chapter.
311. Editor’s Note: Appendix A, Recommended Street Trees, is on file in the Village office.
§ 550-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-90
1:597
§ 550-91. B&LM-1 District performance standards.
[6] Front yard building entry: Shall be framed with any
combination of deciduous/evergreen shrubs, flowering
trees and annual plantings.
[7] Landscaped parking islands: Shall include a combination
of low to medium shrubbery and medium trees.
[8] Side yard foundation: Shall be "broken-up" with the
planting of low- to medium-sized deciduous/evergreen
shrubs whereas no expanse of foundation visible shall
exceed 20 feet.
[9] Dumpster area: Shall be densely screened with any
combination of privacy fencing and medium-sized
deciduous/evergreen shrubs.
[10] Buffer to more restrictive uses:
[a] Commercial to residential: Shall be buffered utilizing
a dense screen of medium-sized deciduous/evergreen
shrubs.
[b] Manufacturing to residential: Shall be buffered
utilizing a minimum finished elevation three-foot
earthen berm, with a dense screen of medium- to tallsized
deciduous/evergreen shrubs, or medium
evergreen trees.
[c] Manufacturing to commercial: Shall be buffered
utilizing a minimum dense screen of medium-sized
deciduous/evergreen shrubbery.
A. Intent and compliance. It is the intent of this chapter to describe
performance standards for the regulation of industrial and commercial
uses in the B&LM-1 Business and Light Manufacturing District. These
performance standards are intended to restrict the impacts of those
uses to their premises and restrict and prohibit their impacts outside
the B&LM-1 Zoning District. In addition, these performance standards
are intended to comply with other applicable, local, state and federal
codes and standards. All uses, structures, land, air and water in the
B&LM-1 District shall hereafter comply with the following performance
standards.
B. Control of hazardous air pollutants and emissions. Operations or
activities which emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable
source any matter that will affect air quality shall perform in accord
with the limitations and procedures established in Chs. NR 400 through
NR 449, Wis. Adm. Code, or other applicable laws or regulations.
Hazardous pollutants are specifically controlled in accord with Ch. NR
445.
§ 550-90 SLINGER CODE § 550-91
1:598
C. Control of particulate emissions and dust.
(1) Operations or activities which emit into the ambient air from any
direct or portable source any particulate emissions shall perform in
accord with the limitations and procedures established in Ch. NR
415, Wis. Adm. Code, or in accord with other applicable laws or
regulations which regulate particulate emissions.
(2) Fugitive dust and other types of emissions and air pollution from
sources such as storage areas, outdoor operation yards and roads
or parking lots shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate paving,
spraying/watering, application of suitable chemicals, landscaping,
or other acceptable and environmentally safe methods in accord
with § NR 415.04, Wis. Adm. Code, or other applicable laws or
regulations.
D. Control of odors. No operation or activities shall emit any substance or
combination of substances in such quantities that create an
objectionable odor as defined in Ch. NR 429, Wis. Adm. Code, or other
applicable laws or regulations.
E. Control of fire and explosive hazards.
(1) All uses involving the manufacturing, utilization, processing or
storage of flammable and explosive materials shall be provided
with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and
explosion and with adequate fire fighting and fire suppression
equipment and devices as may be required by the Fire Code and/or
Fire Department.
(2) All materials that range from active to intense burning shall be
manufactured, utilized, processed and stored only in completely
enclosed buildings which have noncombustible exterior walls and
an automatic fire extinguishing system.
(3) The storage of fuels and other materials that produce flammable or
explosive vapors shall be permitted only after review and approval
by the Fire Department and in accord with their requirements to
minimize fire and explosive hazards.
F. Glare, heat and external lighting.
(1) No operation or activity shall produce any intense lighting, glare or
heat with the source directly visible beyond the boundary of the
B&LM-1 District. Operations producing light, glare, or heat shall be
conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
(2) External lighting shall be shielded so that light rays do not
adversely affect adjacent uses.
G. Water quality standards.
§ 550-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-91
1:599
(1) No activity shall locate, store, or permit the discharge of any
treated, untreated, or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid
materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity or
temperature that might run off, seep, percolate, or wash into
surface or subsurface waters so as to contaminate, pollute or harm
such waters or cause nuisances such as objectionable shore
deposits, floating or submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor,
taste or unsightliness, or be harmful to human, animal, plant or
aquatic life.
(2) No activity shall withdraw water or discharge any liquid or solid
materials so as to exceed or contribute toward exceeding the
minimum standards and those other standards and the application
of those standards set forth in Ch. NR 102, Wis. Adm. Code, or in
other applicable laws or regulations which regulate water quality.
(3) Operations in the B&LM-1 District which may discharge
wastewater other than toilet wastewater to the municipal
wastewater treatment plant shall install a sampling manhole to
allow monitoring of wastewater discharges.
H. Noise. No operation or activity shall transmit any noise beyond the
boundaries of the B&LM-1 District so that it becomes a nuisance. Also
see § 550-85 for traffic noise limitations that may apply to uses in
B&LM-1 that may be subject to traffic noise.
I. Vibration.
(1) No operation or activity shall transmit any physical vibration that is
above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or
beyond the property line of the source. Vibration perception
threshold means the minimum ground- or structure-borne
vibrational motion necessary to cause a person to be aware of the
vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by
touch or visual observation of moving objects.
(2) Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user and
vibrations from temporary construction or maintenance activities
shall be exempt from the above standard.
J. Invasive plants. New development and/or redevelopment will be
required to permanently eliminate invasive plants which are classified
under invasive species as defined in Wis. Stats. 23.22. [Added
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 05-04-2018]
§ 550-91 SLINGER CODE § 550-91
1:600
ARTICLE X
Development Control
§ 550-92. Purpose; intent; compliance; applicability.
§ 550-93. Development review information.
The following development review information shall be required by the
Planning Commission for developments in all zoning districts, excluding
single-family and two-family districts, to aid in the determination of whether
a development is aesthetically compatible with the character of existing
development and desired development:
A. Purpose and intent. This article is adopted for the purpose of promoting
development that is aesthetically compatible with the character of
existing development in the Village, and to further stabilize property
values and prevent their depreciation.
B. Compliance.
(1) No person shall commence development of or alter any building,
structure or site in a manner which is in conflict with the principles
set forth in § 550-94 and the criteria set forth in § 550-95 of this
chapter, subject to the following:
(2) The requirements, criteria and standards contained in this article
shall apply to:
(a) New (first-time) development of any building, structure or site
in the Village.
(b) Expansions or additions to any building, structure or site in the
Village.
(c) Redevelopment or reuse of any building, structure or site in
the Village. However, where full compliance is not practicable
or would cause an undue economic hardship, the Planning
Commission may, at its discretion, waive full compliance as the
Commission finds necessary, provided the purpose and intent
described in § 550-92A is met.
A. Site plan (one twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch and seven eleven-inchby-
seventeen-inch sets of plans required).
(1) Area map depicting proximity to nearest roadway intersection.
(2) Plot plan of proposed development/parcel and all abutting parcels
indicating zoning, building location, parking and driving surfaces,
lighting, utility easements, and surface water flow patterns.
(3) Two-foot interval topography of subject parcel.
§ 550-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-93
1:601
§ 550-94. Design review principles.
To implement and define criteria for the purposes set forth in § 550-92, the
following principles are established:
(4) Lands abutting an existing freeway or adjacent to a planned
transportation corridor shall review and apply the requirements of
§ 550-85 of this chapter if applicable.
B. Building plans (one twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch and seven
eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch sets of plans required).
(1) Elevations of proposed structure or modified structure.
(2) An accurate twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch color rendition of
proposed structure or modified structure.
(3) Sample colors and building materials shall be submitted by the
applicant for review by the Planning Commission. In addition, a
listing of all exterior materials shall be submitted which shall
include the following: type of material, manufacturer of material,
style and specific color. All physical samples of building materials
shall be retained by the applicant after approval of the Planning
Commission.
(4) Landscape plan, including common and species names, sizes, and
type of planting stock.
A. No building shall be permitted which is of such unorthodox or abnormal
character in relation to its surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive
to generally accepted taste and community standards.312
B. No building shall be permitted a design or exterior as to create
excessive monotony or drabness.
C. No building shall be permitted where any exposed facade is not
constructed or faced with a finished material which is aesthetically
compatible with the other facades and presents an attractive
appearance to the public and to surrounding properties.
D. No building or sign shall be permitted to be sited on the property in a
manner which would unnecessarily destroy or substantially damage the
natural beauty of the area, particularly insofar as it would adversely
affect values incident to ownership of land in that area; or which would
unnecessarily have an adverse affect on the beauty and general
enjoyment of existing structures on adjoining properties.
E. Buildings and uses shall maintain existing topography, drainage
patterns, and vegetative cover insofar as is practical.
312. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-93 SLINGER CODE § 550-94
1:602
§ 550-95. Design review criteria.
In accordance with § 550-94, the Planning Commission will utilize the
following design review criteria:
F. Buildings and uses shall provide for safe traffic circulation and safe
driveway locations.
G. Buildings and uses shall provide adequate parking and loading areas.
H. Buildings and uses shall be provided with adequate public services.
A. Rm-1 and Rm-2 Residential Zoning Districts.
(1) Public or private street yard elevations of principal structures shall
be constructed of a minimum 30% brick or stone veneer or
decorative block or other decorative masonry material such as
EIFS or Dryvit® or HardiePlank® or other similar decorative
cement siding material (calculations to be provided by developer/
applicant with submittal).
(2) Refuse and recycling areas shall be screened with appropriate
vegetation or privacy fencing of a material compatible with the
principal structure and the surrounding area.
(3) Mechanical equipment shall be screened from the public view from
any elevation.
B. B-1, B-2 and I-1 Zoning Districts.
(1) All elevations of principal structure fronting a public street shall be
constructed of a minimum 30% brick, stone veneer or decorative
block facing or decorative block or other decorative masonry
material such as EIFS, or Dryvit® or HardiePlank® or other similar
decorative cement siding material excluding windows and
doorways.
(a) Expansion walls shall be exempt from the above masonry
material requirements.
(b) The developer or applicant shall provide calculations showing
how each elevation complies with the above requirements.
Such calculations shall be provided on the elevation plan
sheet(s) submitted for approval.
(2) Parking surfaces shall be constructed in conjunction with the
criteria established in Article V of this chapter.
(3) Landscaping shall be done in accordance with a plan approved by
the Planning Commission in conjunction with Article IX, § 550-90,
of this chapter.
§ 550-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-95
1:603
(4) Refuse and recycling areas shall be screened with appropriate
vegetation or privacy fencing of a material compatible with the
principal structure and the surrounding area.
(a) Refuse receptacles installed and maintained for patrons are
required for all food establishments located in these districts
as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. In addition,
during plan review, the Commission will determine:313
[1] Site location;
[2] Total number of receptacles; and
[3] Will require a minimum thirty-gallon container.314
(b) All refuse receptacles must be dumped regularly and
maintained to sufficiently store refuse at all times.
(5) Mechanical equipment shall be screened from the public view from
any elevation.
C. B-3 Commercial Zoning District.
(1) Elevations of principal structure shall be constructed of a minimum
30% brick, stone veneer or decorative block facing, or decorative
block or other decorative masonry material such as EIFS or
Dryvit® or HardiePlank® or other similar decorative cement
siding material, excluding windows and doorways.
(a) Expansion walls shall be exempt from the above masonry
material requirements.
(b) The developer or applicant shall provide calculations showing
how each elevation complies with the above requirements.
Such calculations shall be provided on the elevation plan
sheet(s) submitted for approval.
(2) Other elevations of principal structure (except rear elevation) not
fronting a public street shall be constructed of a minimum 20%
brick, stone veneer or decorative block facing, excluding windows
and doorways (calculations to be provided by developer/applicant
with submittal). Rear elevation of a principal structure shall be
constructed with a minimum four-foot brick or decorative block
fascia, excluding windows and doorways.
(3) Parking surfaces shall be constructed in conjunction with the
criteria established in Article V of this chapter.
313. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
314. Editor's Note: Original subsection (b), pertaining to existing businesses, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-95 SLINGER CODE § 550-95
1:604
(4) Landscaping shall be done in accordance with a plan approved by
the Planning Commission in conjunction with Article IX, § 550-90,
of this chapter.
(5) Refuse and recycling areas shall be screened with appropriate
vegetation or privacy fencing of a material compatible with the
principal structure and the surrounding area.
(a) Refuse receptacles installed and maintained for patrons are
required for all food establishments located in these districts
as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. In addition,
during plan review, the Commission will determine:315
[1] Site location;
[2] Total number of receptacles; and
[3] Will require a minimum thirty-gallon container.316
(b) All refuse receptacles must be dumped regularly and
maintained to sufficiently store refuse at all times.
(6) Mechanical equipment shall be screened from the public view from
any elevation.
D. M-1, M-2 and B&LM-1 Zoning Districts.
(1) Elevations of principal structure fronting a public street shall be
constructed of a minimum 30% brick, stone veneer or decorative
block facing, or decorative block or other decorative masonry
material such as EIFS or Dryvit® or HardiePlank® or other similar
decorative cement siding materials, excluding windows and
doorways.
(a) Expansion walls shall be exempt from the above masonry
material requirements.
(b) The developer or applicant shall provide calculations showing
how each elevation complies with the above requirements.
Such calculations shall be provided on the elevation plan
sheet(s) submitted for approval.
(2) Other elevations of principal structure not fronting a public street
shall be constructed of a minimum 20% brick, stone veneer or
decorative block facing, excluding windows and doorways
(calculations to be provided by developer/applicant with submittal).
315. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
316. Editor's Note: Original subsection (b), pertaining to existing businesses, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-95
1:605
§ 550-96. Development bond.
To ensure the completion of an approved project within this Article X, a
cash bond shall be submitted to the Village of Slinger prior to the issuance
of a building permit to warrant the fulfillment of the conditions established
therefor.
(3) Rear elevations of principal structure shall be constructed with a
minimum four-foot brick or decorative block fascia, excluding
windows and doorways.
(4) Parking surfaces shall be constructed in conjunction with the
criteria established in Article V of this chapter.
(5) Landscaping shall be done in accordance with a plan approved by
the Planning Commission in conjunction with Article IX, § 550-90,
of this chapter.
(6) Refuse and recycling areas shall be screened with appropriate
vegetation or privacy fencing of a material compatible with the
principal structure and the surrounding area.
(7) Mechanical equipment shall be screened from the public view from
any elevation.
(8) Outside storage of inventory, materials, equipment, supplies, scrap,
etc., utilized in the day-to-day operation of the principal use shall
be screened from public view with appropriate vegetation or
privacy fencing of a material compatible with the principal
structure and the surrounding area.
A. Bond. A minimum cash bond as set from time to time by the Village
Board shall be required.317
B. Completion time. The Planning Commission shall establish a reasonable
time for the completion of each project. Upon satisfactory completion,
the bond shall be returned to the developer upon approval of the
Building Inspector.318
C. Bond forfeiture.
(1) Failure of the developer to complete the building and its conditions
in the allotted time shall cause the cash bond to be forfeited. Upon
cause shown by the developer to the Commission, it may grant the
developer additional time to complete the building as approved.
(2) Forfeiture shall not relieve the developer of completion of the
project.
317. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
318. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-95 SLINGER CODE § 550-97
1:606
§ 550-97. Administration.
§ 550-98. Approval of minor accessory structures.
Minor accessory structures being constructed as an addition to an existing
development may be permitted without approval by the Planning
Commission after review and approval by Village staff. Such approval for
minor accessory structures may include uses such as, but not limited to
storage sheds, patios, decks, trash enclosures, flag poles, and mechanical
equipment.
§ 550-99. Administrative appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Commission in regard to
this article may appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals within
30 days after the Planning Commission has filed its decision. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Planning
Commission.
A. The Planning Commission shall review site and architectural plans for
compliance with this article. The Planning Commission's review shall
apply to all new or existing buildings, major building additions or
improvements and site improvements, except for single- and two-family
dwellings which are approved as indicated in § 550-97D. The Planning
Commission shall approve plans only after determining that the
buildings and structures are consistent with the principles and criteria
set forth in §§ 550-94 and 550-95 of this chapter. The Planning
Commission may deny approval of building plans but shall inform the
permit applicant of any decision in writing.
B. Duration and lapse of site plan approval. Within one year of the date of
initial approval, the developer of the project shall obtain a building
permit and shall begin construction of the project. If a permit is not
obtained and construction is not started within one year, the site plan
approval shall lapse. Upon application by the developer, the Planning
Commission may renew its approval of the site plan as initially
approved or may require changes deemed appropriate.319
C. Single- and two-family dwellings. The Zoning Administrator shall
review and approve all single- and two-family dwelling unit building and
site plans consistent with the principles set forth in § 550-94.
319. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 10.06C, Retroactivity, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-99
1:607

ARTICLE XI
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control320
(See Chapter 526, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control, of the
Vilage's Code.)
320. Editor's Note: Original Art. XI, Erosion Control, was repealed by Ord. No. 03-01-99 and recreated
as Ch. 33 of the former Code.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-99
1:609

ARTICLE XII
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 550-100. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals for the Village of
Slinger for the purpose of hearing appeals and applications and granting
variances and exceptions to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 550-101. Membership.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the
Village President and confirmed by the Village Board.
§ 550-102. Organization.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall organize and adopt rules of procedure
for its own government in accordance with the provisions of the chapter.
A. Terms shall be for staggered three-year periods.
B. Chairperson shall be designated by the Village President.
C. Two alternate members must be appointed by the Village President for
staggered terms of three years, and an alternate member shall act only
when a regular member is absent or refuses to vote because of
interest.321
D. Zoning Administrator shall attend all meetings for the purpose of
providing technical assistance when requested by the Board.
E. Official oaths shall be taken by all members in accordance with § 19.01,
Wis. Stats., within 10 days of receiving notice of their appointment.
F. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the same manner as
appointments for a full term.
A. Meetings. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and
shall be open to the public.
B. Official record. Minutes of the proceedings and a record of all actions
shall be kept, showing the vote of each member upon each question, the
reasons for the Board's determination, and its finding of facts. These
records shall be immediately filed in the office of the Clerk and shall be
public record.322
C. Quorum. A quorum is a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
321. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
322. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-102
1:611
§ 550-103. Powers.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
§ 550-104. Appeals and applications.
Appeals from the decision of the Zoning Administrator concerning the
literal enforcement of this chapter may be made by any person aggrieved
D. Voting. If a quorum is present, the concurring vote of a majority of the
members present shall be necessary to correct an error, grant a
variance, make an interpretation, and permit a utility, unclassified, or
substituted use.
A. Errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning
Administrator.
B. Variances. To hear and grant appeals for variances as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship, so that the spirit and purpose of this chapter shall be
observed and the public safety, welfare, and justice secured. Use
variances shall not be granted.
C. Interpretations. To hear and decide application for interpretations of
the zoning regulations and the boundaries of the zoning districts after
the Village Planning Commission has made a review and
recommendation.
D. Substitutions. To hear and grant applications for substitution of more
restrictive nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses,
provided no structural alterations are to be made and the Village
Planning Commission has made a review and recommendation.
Whenever the Board permits such a substitution, the use may not
thereafter be changed without application.
E. Floodplain mapping disputes. To hear and decide upon the delineation
of the F-1 Floodplain District where it is alleged there is a difference
between the elevation of the floodplain and lands shown within the
floodplain based upon field surveys, or for determining the precise
location of the floodplain in unnumbered A zones.
F. Permits. The Board may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, modify the
requirements appealed from, and may issue or direct the issuance of a
permit.
G. Assistance. The Board may request assistance from other Village
officers, departments, commissions, and boards.
H. Oaths. The Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses.
§ 550-102 SLINGER CODE § 550-104
1:612
or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the Village. Such appeals
shall be filed with the secretary within 30 days after the date of written
notice of the decision or order of the Zoning Administrator. Applications
may be made by the owner or the lessee of the structure, land, or water to
be affected at any time and shall be filed with the secretary. Such appeals
and applications shall include the following:
§ 550-105. Hearings.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall set a reasonable time and place for the
required public hearing, and shall give notice as specified in Article XIV
of this chapter. At the hearing, the appellant or applicant may appear in
person, by agent, or by attorney.
§ 550-106. Findings.
No variance to the provisions of this chapter shall be granted by the Board
unless it finds that all the following facts and conditions exist and so
indicates in the minutes of its proceedings.
A. Name and address of the appellant or applicant and all abutting and
opposite property owners of record.
B. Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor, or a location
sketch drawn to scale, showing all of the information required under
§ 550-10 for a zoning permit.
C. Additional information required by the Village Planning Commission,
Village Engineer, Zoning Board of Appeals, or Zoning Administrator.
A. Preservation of intent. No variance shall be granted that is not
consistent with the purpose and intent of the regulations of the district
in which the development is located. No variance shall have the effect
of permitting a use in any district that is not a stated permitted use,
accessory use, or conditional use in that particular district.
B. Exceptional circumstances. There must be exceptional, extraordinary,
or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel,
structure, use, or intended use that do not apply generally to other
properties or uses in the same district and the granting of the variance
would not be of so general or recurrent nature as to suggest that the
Zoning Ordinance should be changed.
C. Economic hardship and self-imposed hardship not grounds for variance.
No variance shall be granted solely on the basis of economic gain or
loss. Self-imposed hardships shall not be considered as grounds for the
granting of a variance.
D. Preservation of property rights. The variance must be necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by
other properties in the same district and same vicinity.
§ 550-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-106
1:613
§ 550-107. Mapping disputes.
The following procedure shall be used by the Zoning Board of Appeals in
settling disputes of a floodplain zoning district boundary:
§ 550-108. Decision.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals and applications
within 30 days after the final hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the
Board's decision to the appellant or applicant, Zoning Administrator, and
Village Planning Commission.
E. Absence of detriment. No variance shall be granted that will create
substantial detriment to adjacent property and will materially impair or
be contrary to the purpose and spirit of this chapter or the public
interest.
F. Additional requirements in the F-1 Floodplain District. No variance
shall be granted where:
(1) Filling and development contrary to the purpose and intent of the
F-1 Floodplain District would result.
(2) A change in the boundaries of the F-1 Floodplain District would
result.
(3) A lower degree of flood protection than a point two feet above the
one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood for the particular area
would result.
(4) Any action contrary to the provisions of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm.
Code, would result.323
A. The flood district boundary shall be determined by uses of the flood
profiles contained in an engineering study, or where such information is
not available, by flood maps or any other evidence available to the
Board.
B. The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be
given the opportunity to present his own technical evidence. Where it is
determined that the floodplain is incorrectly mapped, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall advise the Village Planning Commission of its findings,
and the Planning Commission shall proceed to petition the Village
Board for a map amendment.
A. Conditions may be placed upon any zoning permit ordered or
authorized by this Board.
323. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-106 SLINGER CODE § 550-108
1:614
§ 550-109. Notice to DNR.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit a copy of each application
for a variance to floodland regulations to the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) for review and comment. Final action on the
application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its
recommendations, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions relating to
variances to floodland regulations shall be transmitted to the DNR within
10 days of the effective date of such decision.
§ 550-110. Review by court of record.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals may present to the court of record a petition duly verified, setting
forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality.
Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing
of the decision in the office of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Variances, substitutions, or use permits granted by the Board shall
expire within six months unless substantial work has commenced
pursuant to such grant.
§ 550-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-110
1:615

ARTICLE XIII
Changes and Amendments
§ 550-111. Authority.
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good
zoning practice requires, the Village Board may, by ordinance, change
the district boundaries or amend, change, or supplement the regulations
established by this chapter or amendments thereto. Such change or
amendment shall be subject to the review and recommendation of the
Village Planning Commission.
§ 550-112. Initiation.
A change or amendment may be initiated by the Village Board, Planning
Commission, or by a petition of one or more of the owners of property within
the area proposed to be changed.
§ 550-113. Petitions.
Petitions for any change to the district boundaries or amendments to the
regulations shall be filed with the Village Clerk, describe the premises to
be rezoned or the regulations to be amended, list the reasons justifying the
petition, specify the proposed use and have attached the following:
§ 550-114. Recommendations.
The Village Planning Commission shall review all proposed changes and
amendments within the Village limits and shall recommend that the petition
be granted as requested, modified, or denied. The recommendation shall be
made at a meeting subsequent to the meeting at which the petition is first
submitted and shall be made in writing to the Village Board.
§ 550-115. Hearings.
The Village Planning Commission shall hold a Public Hearing upon each
recommendation, and shall give notice as specified in Article XIV of this
chapter.
§ 550-116. Village Board's action.
Following such hearing and after careful consideration of the Village
Planning Commission's recommendations, the Village Board shall vote on
the passage of the proposed change or amendment.
A. Plot plan drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, showing the area
proposed to be rezoned, its location, its dimensions, the location and
classification of adjacent zoning districts, and the location and existing
use of all structures within 200 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned.
B. Additional information required by the Village Planning Commission or
Village Board.
§ 550-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-117
1:617
§ 550-117. F-1 Floodplain District boundary changes limited.
The Village Board shall not permit changes to the floodland district
boundaries that are inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter;
or in conflict with the applicable rules and regulations of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
A. Changes in the F-1 Floodplain District Boundaries shall not be
permitted where the change will increase the flood stage elevation in
excess of 1.0 foot. Flood stage increases exceeding 0.1 foot in height
shall not be permitted unless the petitioner has made appropriate legal
arrangements with all affected units of government and all property
owners affected by the stage increase. Petitions for floodland district
changes shall show the effects of the change utilizing both the equal
degree of hydraulic encroachment principle, and the equal degree of
hydrologic encroachment principle, and shall provide adjusted water
surface profiles and adjusted floodland limits to reflect the increased
flood elevations. It shall be the policy of the Village of Slinger that any
area removed from the floodland district shall be contiguous to lands
lying outside the floodlands, and where floodlands are removed, an
equivalent area and volume of floodland shall be added in the vicinity of
the removal.
B. Removal of land from the F-1 Floodland District shall not be permitted
unless the land has been filled to an elevation at least two feet above
the elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood.
C. Amendment of unnumbered A Zones shall not be permitted unless the
petitioner provides the Village with engineering data showing the flood
profile, necessary river cross-sections, flood elevations, and any effect
the establishment of a floodway/flood fringe will have on flood stages.
The effects shall be limited as set forth in Subsection A of this section to
no more than 0.1 foot increase in flood stage unless appropriate legal
arrangements have been made. If the unnumbered A Zone is less than
five acres in area and where the cost of the proposed development is
less than $75,000, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) will assist the petitioner in determining the required flood
elevations.
D. No river or stream shall be altered or relocated until a floodland zoning
change has been applied for and granted in accordance with the
requirements of this section, and until all adjacent communities have
been requested to review and comment on the proposed alteration or
relocations. The flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
E. A copy of all notices for amendments or rezoning in the floodland
district shall be transmitted to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA). No amendments to the floodland district boundaries or
§ 550-117 SLINGER CODE § 550-117
1:618
§ 550-118. Protest.
In the event of a protest against a district change or amendment to the
regulations of this chapter, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners
of 20% or more either of the areas of the land included in such proposed
change or by the owners of 20% of more of the land immediately adjacent
extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20% or more of the land
directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of
such opposite land, such changes or amendments shall not become effective
except by the favorable vote of 3/4 of the full Village Board.
regulations shall be effective until approved by the DNR and the FEMA.
In the case of floodland district boundary changes, an official letter of
map amendment from FEMA shall also be required.
§ 550-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-118
1:619

ARTICLE XIV
Public Hearing
§ 550-119. Notices.
Notice of any public hearing which the Village Board, Planning Commission,
or Zoning Board of Appeals is required to hold under the terms of this
chapter shall specify the date, time, and place of said hearing. Notice shall
be published by the Village Clerk in a newspaper of general circulation at
least once each week for two consecutive weeks and the hearing shall not
be held until at least seven days following the last publication. The Village
Clerk shall also give at least 10 days' prior written notice to all property
owners within 200 feet of the property for which an amendment, conditional
use, variance or appeal is being sought. Failure of any notice to be received
by any property owner shall not, however, invalidate the action taken by
the Village Board, the Village Planning Commission, or the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
§ 550-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-119
1:621

ARTICLE XV
Fees and Penalties
§ 550-120. Petition and permit application fees.
All persons, firms, or corporations who petition for approval of a zoning
text or map amendment, Comprehensive Plan amendment, planned
development district, variance or appeal, and all persons, firms, or
corporations performing work which by this chapter requires the issuance
of a permit, shall, upon filing, pay a fee to the Village to help defray
the cost of administration, investigation, advertising, and processing of
such petitions and permit applications. The fee for petitions and permit
applications shall be as set by the Village Board of the Village of Slinger by
a duly enacted resolution.
§ 550-121. Double fee.
A double fee shall be charged by the Zoning Administrator if work is started
before a permit is applied for and issued. Such double fee shall not release
the applicant from full compliance with this chapter nor from prosecution
for violation of this chapter.
§ 550-122. Violations.
§ 550-123. Remedial action.
Whenever an order of the Village Planning Commission has not been
complied with within 30 days after written notice has been mailed to the
owner, resident, agent or occupant of the premises, the Village Board,
the Village Planning Commission, or the Village Attorney may institute
appropriate legal action or proceedings to prohibit such owner, agent, or
occupant from using such structure, land or water.
A. It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land, or to use
water or air in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. In case
of any violation, the Board of Trustees, the Village Planning
Commission or any property owner who would be specifically damaged
by such violation, may institute appropriate action or proceeding to
enjoin a violation of this chapter or cause a structure to be vacated or
removed.
B. Every structure, fill or development placed or maintained within any
floodland area in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the
creation thereof may be enjoined and maintenance thereof may be
abated by action at suit of the state, the county, the Village or any
citizen thereof.
§ 550-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:623
§ 550-124. Violations and penalties.324
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions
of this chapter or any order of the Village Planning Commission issued in
accordance with this chapter or resists enforcement shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as set forth in § 1-2, the general penalty, of the Code.
Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
324. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-124 SLINGER CODE § 550-124
1:624
ARTICLE XVI
Terminology
§ 550-125. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or phrases shall have
meanings that either vary somewhat from their customary dictionary
meanings or are intended to be interpreted to have a specific meaning.
Words used in the present tense in this chapter include the future. The
word "person" includes a firm, association, partnership, trust, company, or
corporation, as well as an individual. The word "shall" is mandatory, the
word "should" is advisory, and the word "may" is permissive. Any words not
defined in this section shall be presumed to have their customary dictionary
definitions.
§ 550-126. Definitions.325
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or detached structure
subordinate to the principal use of a structure, land or water and located
on the same lot or parcel serving a purpose customarily incidental to the
principal use or the principal structure.
ALLEY — A special public right-of-way affording only secondary access to
abutting properties.
AQUIFER — A saturated permeable geologic formation that contains and
will yield significant quantities of water.
ARTERIAL STREET — A public street or highway used or intended to
be used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets and
highways shall include freeways and expressways, as well as highways and
parkways.326
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean
elevation of the finished lot grade along the street yard face of the structure
to the highest point of the roof.
CELLULAR AND DIGITAL COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS AND TOWERS
— Licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including
cellular, personal communication services, specialized mobilized radio
(SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar
services that are marketed to the general public.
COMMUNITY-BASED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY (CBRF) — A community
living arrangement licensed and operated under the authority of the State
325. Editor's Note: The definitions of "A Zones," "flood," "flood profile," "flood protection
elevation," "floodproofing" and "regional flood," which originally appeared in this section,
were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II); see
§ 481-37 in the Floodplain Management chapter of the Code for definitions of those terms.
326. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-126
1:625
of Wisconsin, and subject to requirements as defined and described in
Wisconsin statutes. Said requirements in Wisconsin statutes as may be
applicable to CBRFs are incorporated herein for purposes of regulation of
such facilities under this section.
COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS (CLA) — A facility licensed and
operated under the authority of the State of Wisconsin including group
homes for children, foster homes, treatment foster homes, adult family
homes, and community-based residential facilities, but not including
nursing homes or day-care facilities.
CONDITIONAL USES — Use of a special nature as to make impractical its
predetermination as a principal use in a district.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — A roughly conical concavity (or dimple) in the
water table (unconfined aquifer) around a pumping well.
CORNER LOT — A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection,
provided that the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of 135° or
less, measured on the lot side. Corner lots shall have two street yards and
two side yards. Corner lots with three street yards shall have only one side
yard.
DECKS, POOL — Any structure which serves as a raised horizontal platform
on a floor constructed of wood or other materials, attached or adjacent to
the exterior wall of a pool.
DECKS, UNCOVERED — Any structure which serves as a raised horizontal
platform on a floor constructed of wood or other materials, attached or
adjacent to the exterior wall of a building without enclosing walls or roof.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to construction of or additions or
substantial improvements to buildings, other structures, or accessory uses,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations,
or deposition of materials.
DISTRICT — A part or parts of the Village for which the regulations of this
chapter governing the use and location of land and buildings are uniform
(such as residential, commercial, and industrial district classifications).
DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT — A parcel of land other than a corner lot,
with frontage on more than one street or with frontage on a street and a
navigable body of water. Double-frontage lots shall be deemed to have two
front yards and no rear yard.
DOUBLE-WIDE MOBILE HOME — A double-wide mobile home is a mobile
home consisting of two mobile home sections combined horizontally at
the site while still retaining their individual chassis for possible future
movement.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family which is a minimum of 24 feet in width,
has a roof with a minimum slope of 3:12, and is on a permanent foundation
meeting the state one- and two-family dwelling code. This definition
§ 550-126 SLINGER CODE § 550-126
1:626
includes manufactured homes but excludes mobile homes constructed prior
to June 15, 1976.327
EQUAL DEGREE OF HYDRAULIC ENCROACHMENT — The effect of any
encroachment into the floodway must be computed by assuming an equal
degree of hydraulic encroachment on the other side of a river or stream
for a significant hydraulic reach. This computation assures that property
owners up, down, or across the river or stream will have the same rights
of hydraulic encroachment. Encroachments are analyzed on the basis of the
effect upon hydraulic conveyance, not upon the distance the encroachment
extends into the floodway.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services provided by public and private utilities,
necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal
structure. These services include underground, surface, or overhead gas,
electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, stormwater drainage, and
communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers,
wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins,
storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, pump lift stations, and hydrants.328
FAMILY — One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit as a
traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional family. It shall
be a rebuttable presumption that four or more persons living together in
a single dwelling unit who are not related by blood, adoption or marriage
do not constitute the functional equivalent of a traditional family. In
determining the functional equivalent of a traditional family, the following
criteria shall be present:329
This definition is not intended to prohibit group homes or community
living arrangements that are determined to be protected by the Federal
Fair Housing Law, provided that such facilities are licensed and permitted
under the authority of the State Department of Health Services or the State
Department of Children and Families or other state department or agency.
A. The group shares the entire dwelling unit.
B. The group lives and cooks together as a single housekeeping unit.
The group shares expenses for food, rent, utilities or other household
expenses.
C.
The group is permanent and stable and not transient or temporary in
nature.
D.
Any other factor reasonably related to whether the group is the
functional equivalent of a family.
E.
327. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
328. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
329. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-126
1:627
FLOOD STAGE — The elevation of the floodwater surface above an officially
established datum plane, which is mean sea level datum (National Geodetic
Vertical Datum), 1929 Adjustment.
FLOODLAND — All lands contained in the "regional flood" or one-hundredyear
recurrence interval flood.
FRONTAGE — The smallest dimension of a lot abutting another lot or a
public street measured along the appropriate lot line or street right-of-way
line. For lots abutting a lake or stream, the smallest dimension measured
along the shoreline.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A structure primarily intended for, and used for, the
enclosed storage or shelter of the private motor vehicles of the families
resident upon the premises. Carports are considered garages.
GARAGE, PUBLIC OR COMMERCIAL — Any garage other than a private
garage.
GREEN SPACE — Areas defined as green space throughout this chapter
shall refer to areas without structures, parking surfaces, patios, decks,
pools, driveways, accessory structures and shall include lands in the
Conservancy, Floodplain and Shoreland Zoning and designated out lots
within any zoning districts. However, Conservancy, Floodplain and
Shoreland classified areas and designated out lots shall only comprise 30%
total green space required by this chapter. Developers may provide common
green space in any subdivision, business park, or industrial park to partially
offset individual lot requirements. The developer will be required to provide
documentation as to how this common green space is to be divided amongst
the lots.
GROUP HOME — A household unit of more than five unrelated persons
living in a single dwelling unit under the supervision of a responsible adult
or married couple. Such households may also be referred to as "halfway
houses."
HALF STORY — The space under any roof except a flat roof, which, if
occupied for residential purposes, shall be counted as a full story.
HAZARDOUS/TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any substance which is ignitable,
corrosive, acute hazardous, reactive, EPA toxic, or toxic as defined in the
Ch. NR 181, Wis. Adm. Code.
HOME INDUSTRY — A home industry that is carried out in a structure
separate from the principal structure; or the manufacture or assembly of
a product, often on a contract basis, in a residence; or an occupation of a
more intense nature than is normally defined as a home occupation; and
shall be limited by the standard for home occupations set forth in § 550-13E.
HOME OCCUPATION AND PROFESSIONAL HOME OFFICES — A business,
profession, occupation or trade conducted for compensation entirely inside
a residential dwelling or inside a structure accessory thereto. Such use shall
be accessory to the use of the dwelling as a residence and shall not change
the residential character of the dwelling.[Amended 9-21-2015 by Ord.
No. 08-02-2015]
§ 550-126 SLINGER CODE § 550-126
1:628
JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD — An area consisting of buildings, structures,
or premises where junk waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including
automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking and structural steel materials
and equipment yards, but not including the purchase or storage of used
furniture and household equipment or used cars in operable condition.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A dwelling or other structure
that existed lawfully at the time of effective date of the Zoning Ordinance or
amendments thereto which does not conform with one or more provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance for the district in which it is located.[Added
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 02-01-2017]
LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE — A use of land, water, or of a dwelling or
other structure that existed lawfully at the time of the effective date of the
Zoning Ordinance or amendments thereto which does not conform to the
use restrictions of the Zoning Ordinance.[Added 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
02-01-2017]
LOADING AREA — A completely off-street space or berth on the same lot
for the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and
egress to a public street or alley for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading cargo.
LOT — For the purposes of this chapter, a lot shall be defined as a parcel
of land on which a principal building and its accessory building are placed,
together with the required open spaces, provided that no such parcel shall
be bisected by a public street and shall not include any portion of a public
right-of-way. No lands dedicated to the public or reserved for roadway
purposes shall be included in the computation of lot size for the purposes of
this chapter.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a parcel of land measured at the setback line.
MOBILE HOME — A mobile home is a transportable structure, being eight
feet or more in width (not including the overhang of the roof) or 32 feet
or more in length (not including the overhang of the roof), built on a
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile
home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land which has been developed for
the placement of mobile homes and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust,
partnership, public or private association, or corporation. Individual lots
within a mobile home park are rented to individual mobile home users.
MOTEL — A series of attached, semiattached, or detached sleeping units
for the accommodation of transient guests.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A residential building designed for, or
occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence
not to exceed the number of dwelling units provided.
§ 550-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-126
1:629
NONCONFORMING USES OR STRUCTURES — Any structure, land, or
water lawfully used, occupied, or erected at the time of the effective date
of this chapter or amendments thereto which does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter or amendments thereto. Any such structure
conforming in respect to use but not in respect to frontage, width, height,
area, yard, parking, loading, or distance requirements shall be considered a
nonconforming structure and not a nonconforming use.
NORMAL HIGH-WATER MARK — A line of reference commonly identified
as being where the land is coterminous to the normal high-water elevation.
For the purposes of this chapter, the normal high-water mark is defined as
the line where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic
to predominantly terrestrial.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below
the top of the areola, or the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state even if completely or opaquely covered.
OFFICIAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT — Official notification from
the Federal Emergency management Agency (FEMA), that a Flood Hazard
Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map has been amended.
PARKING LOT — A structure or premises containing 10 or more parking
spaces. Such spaces may be for rent for a fee.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Includes all abutting property owners, all
property owners within 100 feet and all property owners of opposing
frontage.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — Offices where professional business is
conducted in a singular or multiple use setting.
REACH — A longitudinal segment of a stream generally including those
floodlands wherein flood stages are primarily and commonly controlled by
the same man-made or natural obstructions to flow.
REAR YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal
structure. This yard shall be opposite the street yard.
RECHARGE AREA — The total area relative to a point of groundwater use
in which water falling on or discharging to the ground may move via ground
or surface waters to that point of use.
RETAIL SALES — Sale of material stocked and/or manufactured on site to
the public.
ROW HOUSE or TOWNHOUSE — A row of two to eight attached, onefamily,
party-wall dwellings, each having individual entrances and not more
than three rooms in depth measured from the building line.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of buildings in a controlled
access and fenced compound that contains individually controlled access
§ 550-126 SLINGER CODE § 550-126
1:630
storage units. Such units may be owned or leased only for the storage
of household or personal goods, vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats,
business supplies, or contractor supplies. No sales, service, repair,
fabrication or manufacturing activities are permitted in such storage units
or on the premises.
SETBACK or STREET YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the
lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between
the existing or proposed street or highway line and a line parallel thereto
through the nearest point of the principal structure. Corner lots shall have
two such yards.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts or simulated acts of masturbation,
homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's
clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person is a
female, breasts.
SIDE YARD — A yard extending from the street yard to the rear yard of the
lot, the width of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between
the side lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the
principal structure.
SIGNS — Any words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences,
emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks by which anything
is made known and which are used to advertise or promote an individual,
firm, association, corporation, profession, business, commodity, or product
and which is visible from any public street or highway.
STORAGE CAPACITY — The volume of space available above an area of
floodplain fringe and for the temporary storage of flood water.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of a floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above it,
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — A public right-of-way not less than 50 feet wide providing
primary access to abutting properties.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members of
a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
STRUCTURE — Any erection or construction, such as buildings, towers,
masts, poles, booms, signs, carports, machinery, and equipment.330
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the present equalized value of the structure either before the improvement
or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged, and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however,
included either: any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a
330. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-126
1:631
structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the Wisconsin
State Historical Society or listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs,
modifications or additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include
internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the replacement
of doors, windows, and other nonstructural components.
SUSTAINED YIELD FORESTRY — Management of forested lands to provide
annual or periodic crops of forest products.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached building containing two separate
dwelling (or living) units, designed for occupancy by not more than two
families.
UTILITIES — Utility structures associated with the provision of sewer,
water supply electrical or telephone service or other similar services.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except for vegetation. The street and
rear yards extend the full width of the lot.
§ 550-126 SLINGER CODE § 550-126
1:632
ARTICLE XVII
Adoption and Effective Date
§ 550-127. Public hearings.
The Village of Slinger Planning Commission held public hearings on this
proposed ordinance on the 12th day of June 1996.
§ 550-128. Planning Commission recommendation.
The Planning Commission recommended the adoption of this chapter at a
meeting held on the 12th day of June 1996.
§ 550-129. Village Board approval.
The Village Board of the Village of Slinger concurred with the
recommendations of the Planning Commission and proceeded to adopt the
Zoning Ordinance at a meeting held on the 17th day of June 1996.
§ 550-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-129
1:633
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of Village's prior Municipal Code to 2018
Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Section from Prior Municipal
Code
Location in 2018 Code
Ch. 1, The Village Board
Secs. 1.01 to 1.10, village board Ch. 134
Sec. 1.11, records access Ch. 116, Art. I
Sec. 1.12, records maintenance Ch. 116, Art. II
Secs. 1.13 to 1.15, village board Ch. 134
Sec. 1.16, fair housing Ch. 45
Ch. 2, Elected Officials and Offices
Secs. 2.01 to 2.06, general provisions Ch. 93, Art. I
Sec. 2.07, elected officials Ch. 93, Art. II
Sec. 2.08, Plan Commission Ch. 14, Art. I
Sec. 2.09, Board of Review Ch. 14, Art. II
Sec. 2.10, Park, Recreation and Forestry
Board
Ch. 14, Art. III
Sec. 2.12, Zoning Board of Appeals Ch. 14, Art. IV
Sec. 2.13, Election Board Ch. 14, Art. V
Sec. 2.14, Housing Authority Ch. 69
Sec. 2.15, Library Board Ch. 14, Art. VI
Sec. 2.18, Police Commission Ch. 14, Art. VII
Secs. 2.21, 2.23 and 2.26, Police Department Ch. 99
Sec. 2.27, Administrative Review Appeals
Board
Ch. 14, Art. VIII
Sec. 2.28, residency requirement Ch. 93, Art. III
§ 550-129 SLINGER CODE § DT-1
1:634
Chapter/Section from Prior Municipal
Code
Location in 2018 Code
Sec. 2.50, Municipal Court Ch. 29
Sec. 2.71, Administrator Ch. 128
Ch. 3, Police and Civil Defense
Secs. 3.01 to 3.05, Police Department Ch. 99
Sec. 3.06, Alarms Ch. 167
Ch. 3.10, Emergency Management Ch. 36
Ch. 4, Finance and Taxation Ch. 51
Ch. 5, The Fire Department
Secs. 5.01 to 5.04, Fire Department Ch. 56
Sec. 5.05, outdoor solid-fuel-burning
furnaces prohibited
Ch. 271
Sec. 5.06, alarms Ch. 167
Ch. 6, Traffic Code
Secs. 6.01 to 6.05, traffic regulations Ch. 460
Sec. 6.06, abandoned vehicles Ch. 453
Secs. 6.07 and 6.08, traffic regulations Ch. 460
Sec. 6.09, play vehicles on streets and
sidewalks
Ch. 198, Art. II
Sec. 6.10, traffic regulations Ch. 460
Sec. 6.11, registration of bicycles Ch. 198, Art. I
Secs. 6.12 to 6.16, traffic regulations Ch. 460
Ch. 7, Public Health and Sanitation
Secs. 7.01 to 7.05, health officer and
regulations
REP
Sec. 7.06, regulating refuse collection Ch. 412, Art. I
Sec. 7.07, recycling Ch. 412, Art. II
Ch. 8, Public Works
Sec. 8.01, street and sidewalk grades Ch. 425, Art. I
Sec. 8.02, sidewalk construction and repair Ch. 425, Art. II
Sec. 8.03, curb and gutter construction Ch. 425, Art. III
Sec. 8.04, street excavations Ch. 425, Art. IV
Sec. 8.05, obstructions and encroachments Ch. 425, Art. V
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:635
Chapter/Section from Prior Municipal
Code
Location in 2018 Code
Sec. 8.06, removal of ice and snow from
sidewalks
Ch. 425, Art. VI
Sec. 8.07, building numbering Ch. 341
Sec. 8.08, use of sidewalks Ch. 425, Art. V
Sec. 8.09, culvert installation and roadway
access
Ch. 425, Art. VII
Sec. 8.10, assessments for public works
installation
Ch. 425, Art. VIII
Ch. 9, Public Peace and Good Order
Sec. 9.00, prohibited use of Village-owned or
-leased land
Ch. 382, Art. I
Sec. 9.01, firearms Ch. 259, Art. I
Sec. 9.02, throwing or shooting of arrows,
stones prohibited
Ch. 259, Art. II
Sec. 9.03, fireworks Ch. 266
Sec. 9.04, street use, obstructions and
encroachments
Ch. 425, Art. V
Sec. 9.041, play vehicles Ch. 198, Art. II
Sec. 9.05, loud and unnecessary noise
prohibited
Ch. 329
Sec. 9.06, loitering prohibited Ch. 313
Sec. 9.065, storage of junk, etc. REP
Sec. 9.07
(A), littering prohibited Ch. 307
(B), removal of ice and snow from
sidewalks
Ch. 425, Art. VI
Sec. 9.08, peace and good order Ch. 370
Sec. 9.09, open cisterns, wells, etc. Ch. 336
Sec. 9.10, abandoned or unattended ice
boxes, etc.
REP
Sec. 9.11, curfew Ch. 320, Art. I
Sec. 9.12, peace and good order Ch. 370
Sec. 9.13, Library regulations REP
Sec. 9.14, truancy Ch. 320, Art. II
§ DT-1 SLINGER CODE § DT-1
1:636
Chapter/Section from Prior Municipal
Code
Location in 2018 Code
Sec. 9.15, abandoned vehicle Ch. 453
Sec. 9.16, public consumption of alcohol Ch. 171, Art. I
Sec. 9.17, drug paraphernalia Ch. 239, Art. I
Sec. 9.18, smoking prohibition Ch. 404, Art. I
Sec. 9.19, purchase and possession of
tobacco products by minor
Ch. 320, Art. III
Sec. 9.20 to 9.23, peace and good order Ch. 370
Sec. 9.24, scavenging Ch. 412, Art. III
Sec. 9.25, Police Department Ch. 99
Sec. 9.26, synthetic cannabinoid prohibited Ch. 239, Art. II
Ch. 10, Public Nuisances
Secs. 10.01 to 10.05, nuisances Ch. 336, Art. I
Sec. 10.06, weed control Ch. 206, Art. I
Secs. 10.10, 10.11 and 10.20, abatement Ch. 336
Ch. 11, Parks and Public Waters Ch. 356
Ch. 12, Publicly Owned Treatment Works and
Collection System
Ch. 398
Ch. 13, Regulations of Animals
Sec. 13.01, regulation of dogs and cats Ch. 184, Art. I
Sec. 13.02, animals: littering Ch. 184, Art. II
Sec. 13.03, keeping exotic or wild animals Ch. 184, Art. III
Ch. 14, Utilities
Secs. 14.01 to 14.04, administration of
municipal utilities
Ch. 468, Art. I
Sec. 14.05, mandatory connection Ch. 468, Art. II
Sec. 14.06 and 14.07, administration of
municipal utilities
Ch. 468, Art. I
Sec. 14.08, cross connections Ch. 468, Art. III
Sec. 14.09, private wells Ch. 468, Art. IV
Secs. 14.10 to 14.12, connections See now § 398-6B
Sec. 14.13, water emergency Ch. 468, Art. V
Ch. 15, Stormwater Utility Ch. 419
Ch. 16, Licenses and Permits
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:637
Chapter/Section from Prior Municipal
Code
Location in 2018 Code
Secs. 16.01 and 16.02, alcohol beverage
licenses
Ch. 171, Art. II
Sec. 16.03, cigarette licenses Ch. 233
Sec. 16.04, dog and cat licenses Ch. 184, Art. I
Sec. 16.05, peddlers', canvassers' and
transient merchants' licenses
Ch. 377
Sec. 16.06, show licenses REP
Sec. 16.07, operator's license Ch. 171, Art. II
Sec. 16.08, amusement devices Ch. 178
Sec. 16.09, parade permits Ch. 349
Sec. 16.10, fires regulated Ch. 224
Sec. 16.11, adult-oriented businesses Ch. 160
Sec. 16. 12, fireworks Ch. 266
Sec. 16.13, new lawn establishment Ch. 206, Art. II
Sec. 16.15, pawnbrokers, second hand
dealers
Ch. 363
Ch. 17, Forestry Trees and Shrubs Ch. 441
Ch. 18 (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 19 (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 20 (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 21, Construction and Effect of Ordinances
Secs. 21.01 and 21.04, Construction and
Penalties
Ch. 1, Art. I
Secs. 21.02, 21.03 and 21.05 to 21.08 NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
Sec. 21.09 Ch. 23
Ch. 22, Administrative Appeals Ch. 5
Ch. 23, Impact Fees Ch. 486
Ch. 24 (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 25 (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 26 (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 27 (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 28 (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 29 (Reserved) Omitted
§ DT-1 SLINGER CODE § DT-1
1:638
Chapter/Section from Prior Municipal
Code
Location in 2018 Code
Ch. 30, Building Code
Secs. 30.00 to 30.031, standards adopted Ch. 215, Art. I
Secs. 30.04 to 30.12, inspections, permits
and certificates
Ch. 215, Art. II
Secs. 30.20 to 30.25, private swimming
pools regulated
Ch. 432
Sec. 30.255, grading and excavation Ch. 279
Secs. 30.26 to 30.28, pool requirements Ch. 432
Sec. 30.47, inspections, permits and
certificates
Ch. 215, Art. II
Secs. 30.49 to 30.51, inspections, permits
and certificates
Ch. 215, Art. II
Sec. 30.52, electrical contractors' licenses REP
Sec. 30.53, inspections, permits and
certificates
Ch. 215, Art. II
Ch. 31, Zoning Code Ordinance Ch. 550
Ch. 32, Land Division Ordinance Superseded by Ord. No.
05-01-2015; see Ch. 495
Ch. 33, Erosion Control and Stormwater
Management
Superseded by Ord. No.
3-1-2017; see Ch. 526
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
08-02-2015
9-21-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
08-03-2015
9-21-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
08-04-2015
8-17-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:639
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
09-01-2015
9-21-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
12-01-2015
Zoning amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
12-02-2015
Zoning amendment Ch. 550
1-14-2016 Land Division and
Development
amendment
Ch. 495
Ord. No.
03-01-2016
4-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
03-02-2016
4-18-2016 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
04-01-2016
4-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
04-02-2016
4-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
11-01-2016
12-5-2016 Animals: Regulation
of Dogs and Cats
amendment
Ch. 184, Art. I
Ord. No.
02-01-2017
3-20-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
02-02-2017
3-20-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
03-01-2017
3-6-2017 Stormwater
Management
Ch. 526
Ord. No.
04-01-2017
5-1-2017 Sex Offenders
Residency
Restrictions
Ch. 401
Ord. No.
09-01-2017
9-5-2017 Brush, Grass and
Weeds: new lawn
establishment permit
amendment
Ch. 206, Art. II
Ord. No.
09-02-2017
10-16-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
11-01-17
11-20-2017 Finance and Taxation
amendment
Ch. 51
Ord. No.
11-02-2017
11-20-2017 Comprehensive Plan
adoption
NCM
§ DL-1 SLINGER CODE § DL-1
1:640
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
12-01-2017
12-4-2017 Finance and Taxation
amendment
Ch. 51
Ord. No.
03-01-2018
3-19-2018 Minors: Sale,
Purchase and
Possession of
Electronic Nicotine
Delivery System
Vapor Products
Ch. 320, Art. IV
Ord. No.
04-01-2018
5-7-2018 Parades Amendment Ch. 349
Ord. No.
04-02-2018
5-21-2018 Brush, Grass and
Weeds Amendment
Ch. 206
Ord. No.
05-04-2018
6-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
06-01-2018
7-9-2018 Animals: Dogs and
Cats Amendment
Ch. 184, Art. I
Ord. No.
06-02-2018
7-9-2018 Property Maintenance Ch. 381
Ord. No.
11-01-2018
12-3-2018 Adopting Ordinance Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. No.
11-02-2018
11-19-2018 Officers and
Employees: General
Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I
Ord. No.
12-01-2018
1-7-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
03-02-2019
4-15-2019 Firearms and
Weapons Amendment
Ch. 259
Ord. No.
05-01-2019
5-6-2019 Peddlers, Canvassers
and Transient Retail
Merchants
Amendment
Ch. 377
Ord. No.
07-01-2019
8-5-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
Ord. No.
07-02-2019
8-5-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:641
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
07-03-2019
8-19-2019 Records: Public
Records Access
Amendment
Ch. 116,
Art. I
4
Ord. No.
09-01-2019
9-3-2019 Parades Amendment Ch. 349 4
Ord. No.
10-01-2019
11-4-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550 4
Ord. No.
10-06-2019
11-4-2019 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
Amendment
Ch. 398 4
Ord. No.
10-07-2019
10-21-2019 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
Amendment; Impact
Fees Amendment
Ch. 398; Ch.
486
4
§ DL-1 SLINGER CODE § DL-1
1:642