CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF TOMAH, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council, 2008 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TOMAH, WISCONSIN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Allan Ed Thompson 
Mayor 
____________ 
George Wright 
Ronald Olsen 
Ted Schleicher 
Pete Peterson 
Nellie Pater 
Dennis Workman 
John Cram 
Joanne Westpfahl 
City Council 
____________ 
John Rusch 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Richard Radcliffe 
and 
Penny Precour-Berry 
City Attorneys 
____________ 
JoAnn Cram 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Tomah, Wisconsin. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1993 Code, as supplemented through September 10, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1993 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation that represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Lisa Stevens, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to John Rusch, City Administrator; JoAnn Cram, City Clerk; and Penny Precour-Berry, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tomah, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tomah, Wisconsin. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tomah, Wisconsin. 2008. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2008-05-05-D 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF TOMAH, WISCONSIN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Tomah, Wisconsin," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 52, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 10, 2007, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 10, 2007, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon passage and publication. 
/s/   
      George Wright, Presiding Council President   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      JoAnn M. Cram, City Clerk   1 st Reading: May 13, 2008 
2 nd Reading: May 13, 2008 
Publication: May 22, 2008 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities, Wis. Stats. chs. 59-68; general charter law, Wis. Stats. § 62.01 et seq.; home rule, charter ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0101. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Tomah, Wisconsin," and may be cited as the "Tomah Code," the "Code of Tomah," or other like combinations of terms referenced to this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1993, § 25.07) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt a code of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0103. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    All words and phrases in this Code shall be construed according to common and approved usage, except technical words and phrases and others that have a peculiar meaning in the law shall be construed according to such meaning. In addition, the following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
    Charter ordinances. The term "charter ordinances" means the Charter Ordinances of the City of Tomah, Wisconsin, adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0101 et seq. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Tomah, Wisconsin. 
    Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances, City of Tomah, Wisconsin. 
    Common council, council, city council. The terms "common council," "council," and "city council" mean the common council of the City of Tomah, Wisconsin. 
    Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Monroe County, Wisconsin. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females, firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Gender, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(2). 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(8). 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month unless otherwise expressed. 
State Law reference- Month, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(21). 
    Number. Terms in the singular include the plural; terms in the plural include the singular. 
State Law reference- Singular and plural, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(1). 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes the term "affirmation" in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Oath, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(24). 
    Officers, departments, etc. Whenever reference is made to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees, etc., it means and refers to those of the City of Tomah, Wisconsin. 
    Ordinances. The term "ordinances" means the ordinances of the City of Tomah and all amendments thereto, including this Code. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
    Person. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, joint stock company, joint adventure, any receiver, executor, trustee, conservator, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
State Law reference- Person, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(26). 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
State Law reference- Personal property, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(27). 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real property and personal property. 
State Law reference- Property, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(31). 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein. 
State Law reference- Real property, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(35). 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline or lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for pedestrian use. 
    Signature and subscription by mark. The terms "signature" and "subscription by mark" include a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write. In such situations, such person's name shall be written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near such person's name. 
State Law reference- Signature, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(38). 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Wisconsin. 
    Street. The term "street" means the entire width of a way held by the city in fee or by easement or dedication that has a part open for public use for vehicular travel. The term does not include a designated state or federal highway or road or a designated county road. 
State Law reference- Highway, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(12). 
    Tense. Terms in the past or present tense shall also include the future. 
    Wis. Admin. Code. Any reference to "Wis. Admin. Code" means and refers to the latest edition or supplement of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
    Wis. Stats. Any reference to "Wis. Stats." means and refers to the latest edition or supplement of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
    Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- Written, in writing, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(48); definitions and rules of construction, Wis. Stats. §§ 990.001, 990.01. 
(Code 1993, § 25.01) 
Sec. 1-3. - Computation of time. 
    In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the following rules of construction apply: 
(1)  The time within which an act is to be done or proceeding had or taken shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last; and when any such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday and of any legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
(2)  If the last day within which an act is to be done or proceeding had or taken falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, the act may be done or the proceeding had or taken on the next secular day. 
(3)  When the last day within which a proceeding is to be had or taken or an act done, which consists of any payment to or the service upon or the filing with any officer, agent, agency, department or division of the state or of the county, or a city, town, school district or other subdivision of the state, of any money, return, statement, report, notice or other document, falls on a Saturday and the duly established official office hours of such officer, agent, agency, department or division to which such payment is to be made or upon which such service is to be made or with which such return, statement, report, notice or other document is required to be filed, do not include any office hours thereof on such Saturday, such proceeding may be had or taken or such act may be done on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. 
(4)  Regardless of whether the time limited in any ordinance for the taking of any proceeding or the doing of an act is measured from an event or from the date or day on which such event occurs, the day on which such event took place shall be excluded in the computation of such time. 
(5)  The expression "legal holiday" as used in this section means any statewide legal holiday provided in Wis. Stats. § 995.20. When an act is permitted to be done by the use of the postal service, and the last day within the time prescribed by law for performing such act falls on a legal public holiday under federal law, or other holiday designated by the president such that the postal service does not receive registered mail or make regular deliveries on that day, the day shall be considered a legal holiday for purposes of this section. 
State Law reference- Computation of time for state procedures, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(4). 
Sec. 1-4. - Scope; applicability; jurisdiction. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, this Code applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of the city. Provisions of this Code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law, where the law confers power on the city to regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
State Law reference- Headings of statutes, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(6). 
Sec. 1-6. - Notes and references. 
(a)  History notes. The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the legislative history of that section. 
(b)  Editor's notes; references. Editor's notes, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  References to Code subparts. All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters or sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-7. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. This Code does not affect prior offenses, acts, penalties or rights. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1993, § 25.06) 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal, Wis. Stats. § 990.03. 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street or public way. 
(6)  Any ordinance adopting the budget or any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones. 
(9)  Any land use, development, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessments for such improvements. 
(12)  Any ordinance regarding plats, land divisions or subdivisions. 
(13)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance amending the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, establishing pension or employee benefits, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations or indemnifications policies, or otherwise related to employees. 
(15)  Any ordinance on investment and other financial policies. 
(16)  Any ordinance calling an election. 
(17)  Any ordinance relating to the acquisition of lands by the city by condemnation proceedings. 
(18)  Any ordinance levying a fee, rate, deposit or charge. 
(19)  Any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(20)  Any ordinance adopted by reference by any section of this Code and not included in this Code. 
(21)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(b)  All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. All ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  This Code shall not be deemed to repeal any preamble, recital or finding of fact contained in any ordinance included in this Code, but all such matters shall be deemed incorporated in the sections derived from such respective ordinances. 
(Code 1993, § 25.05) 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  As each ordinance or resolution affecting this Code becomes effective, the city clerk shall forward such ordinance or resolution to the revisor, who shall incorporate it into the Code. The revisor shall make no substantive changes to such ordinances and resolutions but may renumber, rearrange and edit them without first submitting them to the city council; and such rearranging, renumbering and editing shall not affect the validity of such ordinances and resolutions or the provisions of this Code affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code shall be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Tomah, Wisconsin, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall be set out in full. 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language shall be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Tomah, Wisconsin, is hereby created to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall be set out in full. 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specially by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 25.08) 
State Law reference- Adoption of municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 62.11. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the common council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement as necessary to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. In no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance provisions included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Clerk to file documents incorporated by reference. 
    Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation of other written or printed matter, other than the state statutes or other sections of this Code are adopted by reference, they shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth in this section, and the city clerk or applicable department head is hereby directed and required to file, deposit and keep in his office a copy of the code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any persons during the city's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations which the city clerk or appropriate department head may prescribe for their preservation. 
(Code 1993, § 25.03) 
Sec. 1-13. - Conflict and severability. 
(a)  If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter. If provisions of this Code contravene or conflict with codes, rules, laws, or other provisions that are adopted in this Code by reference, the provisions that are most stringent and impose the greatest degree of regulation shall prevail. 
(b)  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof. The board hereby declares that they would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Code 1993, § 25.02) 
State Law reference- Severability, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(11). 
Sec. 1-14. - Penalties. 
(a)  General penalty. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to the penalties of subsections (b)-(e) of this section, and such penalties may be more particularly established in a municipal bond schedule, to be modified from time to time by the common council. 
(b)  First offense. Any person who shall violate any ordinance or provision of this Code subject to a penalty shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $5.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(c)  Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of this Code who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance or Code provision shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,500.00 for each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months. 
(d)  Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the city from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(e)  Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of any ordinance of the city, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs. 
(f)  Suspension of defendant's driver's license. The court may suspend the defendant's operating privilege, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40), until restitution is made and the forfeiture, assessments and costs are paid, if the defendant has not done so within 60 days after the date the restitution or payments, or both, are to be made and has not notified the court that he is unable to comply with the judgment, as provided under Wis. Stats. § 800.095(4)(a), except that the suspension period may not exceed two years. The court shall take possession of the suspended license and shall forward the license, along with a notice of the suspension, clearly stating that the suspension is for failure to comply with a judgment of the court, to the department of transportation. This subsection does not apply if the forfeiture is assessed for violation of an ordinance that is unrelated to the violator's operation of a motor vehicle. 
(g)  Court authority to impose alternative juvenile dispositions and sanctions. 
(1)  For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, a court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 and 938.344, in accordance with the provisions of those statutes. 
(2)  For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a condition of a dispositional order of the court under Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 or 938.344, the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in Wis. Stats. § 938.355(6)(d), in accordance with the provisions of those statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-02-D, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
State Law reference- Municipal penalties, Wis. Stats. § 66.0109 et seq.; fines and costs of municipal courts, Wis. Stats. § 814.65. 
Sec. 1-15. - Citation method employed. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Wis. Stats. § 66.0113, the city elects to use the citation method of enforcement of ordinances, including those for which a statutory counterpart exist. City citations shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Issuance of citations. Any law enforcement officer, the building inspector, and the code enforcement officer may issue citations for enforcement of any ordinances authorized under this section. The building inspector and/or the code enforcement officer shall consult with the city attorney prior to issuing a citation. 
(2)  Violator's options. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0113, relating to violator's options and procedure on default, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(3)  Other proceedings. Adoption of this section in no way precludes the adoption of any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or any other matter. The issuance of a citation under this section in no way precludes the proceeding under any other law or ordinance relating to the same or any other matter. 
(Code 1993, § 25.04; Ord. No. 2017-07-10-D, § 1, 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 1-16. - Cash deposit schedule. 
    A schedule of cash deposits is established for use with citations, to be in such amounts as established from time to time by ordinance or resolution. Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or check to the city treasurer, who shall provide a receipt therefor. 
Sec. 1-17. - Uniform citation form. 
    The citation form shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator. 
(2)  Factual allegations describing the alleged violation. 
(3)  The time and place of the offense. 
(4)  The section of the ordinance violated. 
(5)  A designation of the offense in such manner as can readily be understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so. 
(6)  The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court. 
(7)  A statement that in essence informs the alleged violator: 
a.  That a cash deposit based on the schedule established in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 345.26(2)(a), or by this section may be made. The cash deposit shall be delivered or mailed to the city treasurer prior to the time of the scheduled court appearance. The deposit schedules will be kept on file with the city treasurer. 
b.  That if a cash deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary unless subsequently summoned. 
c.  That if the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and does not appear in court, he either will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture, not to exceed the amount of the deposit, or will be summoned into court to answer the complaint if the court does not accept the plea of no contest. 
d.  That if the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and does not appear in court at the time specified, the court may issue a summons or a warrant for the defendant's arrest or consider the nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enter judgment as permitted by law. 
e.  That if the court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that prohibits conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment or both, and that the violation resulted in damage to the property of or physical injury to a person other than the alleged violator, the court may summon the alleged violator into court to determine if restitution shall be ordered under Wis. Stats. § 800.093. 
(8)  Such other information as the city deems necessary. 
Sec. 1-18. - Failure of officers to perform duties. 
    The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this Code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this Code unless a penalty is specifically provided for such act or omission. 
Sec. 1-19. - Responsibility for acts; aiding and abetting. 
    Every person concerned in the commission of any act prohibited by this Code, whether he directly commits the act or prosecutes, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and, upon conviction, is punishable as if he had directly committed such act. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Form of government. 
    The city operates under the mayor-council form of government. 
(Code 1993, § 1.11) 
Sec. 2-2. - Aldermanic districts and wards. 
    The boundaries of the eight aldermanic districts of the city together with the 16 aldermanic wards are hereby established in accordance with the legal description together with the map showing the boundaries, a copy of which is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk, and which are specifically incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1993, § 1.01(4)) 
Secs. 2-3-2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Eligibility for office, Wis. Stats. § 66.0501; common council, Wis. Stats. § 62.11. 

Sec. 2-23. - Election; terms. 
(a)  Mayor. The mayor shall be elected in the even-numbered years for a term of two years, commencing on the third Tuesday in April in the year of his election. 
(b)  Alderpersons. There shall be eight alderpersons, one representing each aldermanic district of the city. Alderperson for the Second, Fourth, Sixth and Eighth Aldermanic Districts shall be elected in the even-numbered years. Alderperson for the First, Third, Fifth and Seventh Aldermanic Districts shall be elected in the odd-numbered calendar years. Alderpersons shall serve a term of two years, commencing on the third Tuesday of April in the year of their election. 
(Code 1993, §§ 1.01(3), 1.11) 
Sec. 2-24. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Regular council meetings of the city shall be held at the time and place established from time to time by the city council Should a regular meeting fall on an election day, it may be held on the next business day or at such other time and place as is determined by the council. 
(b)  Special meetings. Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor by his giving notice thereof in writing to each member, delivered to him personally or left at his usual abode at least six hours before the meeting. 
(c)  Organization meetings. Following a regular city election, the new council shall first meet on the third Tuesday in April. 
(d)  Place of meetings. All meetings of the council, including special and adjourned meetings shall be held in the city hall. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1993, § 2.01(1)-(4)) 
State Law reference- Meetings, Wis. Stats. § 62.11. 
Sec. 2-25. - Order of business. 
    The business of the city council shall be conducted as provided by the monthly agenda posted in the municipal building. 
(Code 1993, § 2.02) 
Sec. 2-26. - Presiding officer. 
    The mayor shall preserve order and conduct the proceedings of the meeting. If the mayor is absent at any meeting, the president of the council shall call the meeting to order and preside thereafter. 
(Code 1993, § 2.03) 
State Law reference- Presiding officer, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.09, 62.11. 
Sec. 2-27. - Quorum. 
    Two-thirds of the aldermen shall constitute a quorum. A lesser number may compel the attendance of absent members and adjourn. A majority of all of the members shall be necessary to a confirmation. In case of a tie, the mayor shall have a vote. 
(Code 1993, § 2.01(5)) 
State Law reference- Quorum, Wis. Stats. § 62.11. 
Sec. 2-28. - General procedure. 
    Ordinances, resolutions, bylaws, communications and other matters submitted to the council shall be read by title and author and referred to the appropriate committee. No ordinance, resolution or bylaw shall be considered, unless presented in writing by an alderman. Unless requested by an alderman before the final vote is taken, no ordinance, resolution or bylaw need be read in full. All ordinances shall be read at two separate council meetings prior to passage. 
(Code 1993, § 2.05) 
Sec. 2-29. - Rules of order. 
    The deliberation of the council shall be conducted in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, which is hereby incorporated in this section by reference. No ordinance, resolution or other motion shall be discussed or acted upon unless it has been seconded. No motion shall be withdrawn or amended without the consent of the person making the same and the person seconding it. 
(Code 1993, § 2.06) 
Sec. 2-30. - Public appearance policy. 
    Any person, other than a member, wishing to address the council must do so pursuant to the public appearance policy as established by the common council. 
(Code 1993, § 2.06) 
Sec. 2-31. - Suspension or amendment of rules. 
    These rules or any part of these rules and any and all rules incorporated by reference may be temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of two-thirds of the members present. These rules and any and all rules incorporated by reference may be amended at any regular meeting of the council with a concurrence of two-thirds of the members present, provided the amendment be introduced in writing at a previous meeting. 
(Code 1993, §§ 2.07, 2.08) 
Sec. 2-32. - Committee of the whole. 
(a)  Established; purpose. There is established the committee of the whole, that shall be advisory to the mayor and common council to assist in the performance of their duties to the city. It shall serve as a venue to thoroughly investigate and debate issues involving city operations. 
(b)  Membership. The committee shall consist of the members of the common council. 
(c)  Meetings; quorum. Meetings shall be held at least once each month. The president of the common council shall be the presiding officer of the committee. Five members shall constitute a quorum and all actions shall require an affirmative approval of a majority of all of the members. 
(Code 1993, § 2.04(1)-(3)) 
Sec. 2-33. - Powers and duties of the committee. 
    The committee of the whole shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To consider and prepare proposed annual budget of the city; 
(2)  To review and recommend the transfer of appropriations to the city council; 
(3)  To consider personnel issues, including but not limited to employment, compensation, job descriptions, conditions of employment, promotion, discipline, training, union negotiations and insurance; 
(4)  To review proposed contracts for the purchase of goods or services necessary in the operation and management of the city; 
(5)  To approve and audit all bills, investments and cash reports; 
(6)  To consider all delinquent bills and taxes owed to the city; 
(7)  To certify any and all claims against the city; 
(8)  To review all applications to the city for licenses and permits; 
(9)  To discuss and review any and all proposed ordinances or resolutions and make recommendations to the city council regarding their necessity and appropriateness; 
(10)  To review service priorities and capital budget priorities of each city department; 
(11)  To serve as a liaison between the community and the city on public safety issues; 
(12)  To review annually and make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding the annual work plans and long-range goals of each city department; 
(13)  To complete the evaluations of the department heads, including the chiefs of the police and fire departments, in cooperation with the city administrator; 
(14)  To review issues that may arise from time to time involving telecommunications, specifically including cable television; and 
(15)  To review any other miscellaneous business that may come before the city from time to time and recommend a course of action to the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 2.04(4)) 
State Law reference- Power of common council, Wis. Stats. § 62.11. 
Secs. 2-34-2-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09; eligibility for office, Wis. Stats. § 66.0501; authority of council to create and abolish officers, Wis. Stats. § 64.32; elections, Wis. Stats. § 5.01 et seq. 

Sec. 2-55. - Elected officials. 
    Elected officials of the city shall be a mayor, eight alderpersons and a municipal judge. 
(Code 1993, § 1.01(1)) 
Sec. 2-56. - Nomination papers. 
    The city has elected, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.09 and Wis. Stats. ch. 66, that all candidates for city office shall apply for nomination papers from the city clerk. Prior to distribution of any nomination paper for city office, the clerk shall insert the name of the candidate and the office for which he is a candidate upon the nomination paper. 
(Code 1993, § 1.07) 
Sec. 2-57. - Primary elections. 
    Whenever three or more candidates file nomination papers for a city office, a primary election to narrow the candidates down to the number of two shall be held. The city clerk shall have the authority to determine the date for the primary election. 
(Code 1993, § 1.01(2)) 
Sec. 2-58. - Appointed officials. 
    Officials of the city shall be appointed as provided by the personnel policy manual, a copy of which is available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1993, §§ 1.02, 1.10) 
Sec. 2-59. - Oaths and bonds. 
    Elected and appointed officials shall take and file the official oath within five days after notice of their election or appointment as provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4) and shall execute and file the official bond as required by the state law and this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 1.03) 
Sec. 2-60. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Elected officials. Elected officials may be removed by the city council as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.13(2) or by the judge of the circuit court for cause under Wis. Stats. § 17.13(3) or Wis. Stats. § 17.16. 
(b)  Appointed officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.13(1), (3) and 17.16 or as provided by the city's personnel policy manual. 
(Code 1993, § 1.04) 
Sec. 2-61. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies in elected and appointed positions are caused as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.03 and 17.035. Such vacancies in elected and appointed offices shall be filled as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.24. 
(Code 1993, § 1.05(1)) 
Sec. 2-62. - Salaries. 
    The salaries of all elected and appointed officials, including members of boards and commissions, shall be as determined by the city council from time to time, provided the salary of the mayor and members of the council shall not be increased during their terms of office. 
(Code 1993, § 1.06) 
State Law reference- Salaries of officers, Wis. Stats. § 64.31. 
Sec. 2-63. - Municipal judge. 
    The municipal judge shall be elected at large in the spring election commencing with the April 1968 election for a term of two years commencing on May 1 succeeding his election. 
(Code 1993, § 1.12) 
State Law reference- Municipal court, Wis. Stats. § 755.001. 
Sec. 2-64. - City attorney. 
(1)  Appointment. The city attorney shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve a one-year term commencing on the third Tuesday in April in the year of election. He shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(2)  Defense of city officers or employees. The city attorney's office and/or its designee shall be authorized to defend actions brought against any officer or employee of the City of Tomah, or of any board, committee or commission of the city, which grew out of any acts done in the course of employment, or out of any alleged breach of duty as an officer or employee. This authorization shall neither apply to any such actions which are brought to determine the right of such officer or employee to hold or retain that person's office or position, nor to actions brought by the city against any such officer or employee. Any such representation commenced pursuant to this authorization shall first be approved by the mayor and/or city administrator. 
(Code 1993, § 1.14; Ord. No. 2009-11-13D, § 1, 11-9-2009) 
Sec. 2-65. - City administrator. 
(a)  Office established; purpose. To provide the city with a more efficient, effective and responsible government under a government system of a parttime mayor and council, there is hereby created the office of city administrator. 
(b)  Appointment; term. The city council shall appoint the city administrator who shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to suspension or removal for cause by the council. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The city administrator shall have the authority and duty formerly exercised by the city comptroller, which office has been abolished. Specifically, the powers and duties of the city administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following. The city administrator shall: 
(1)  Recommend to the mayor and council to appoint, suspend, remove or discipline all department heads in a manner that is not inconsistent with state law, this Code, and the ordinances of the city; 
(2)  Carry out directives of the city council involving administrative implementation or direction and coordination of the various city departments; 
(3)  Direct, coordinate and expedite the activities of all city departments, except for the authority vested by the state law in certain boards and commissions; 
(4)  Have responsibility for the administration of all day-to-day operations and services provided by the city, including the supervision of all departments in the monitoring and enforcement of all city ordinances, resolutions, state statutes and council directives; 
(5)  Have responsibility for establishing and implementing administrative procedures to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of city government operations that are fully consistent with approved policies established by the city council; 
(6)  Represent the city in matters involving legislative and inter-governmental affairs as required; 
(7)  Submit, as deemed necessary, recommendations or suggestions for improving the health, safety or welfare of the city, its employees and its citizens; 
(8)  Promote economic well-being and growth of the city through public and private sector cooperation; 
(9)  Keep the mayor and council informed about activities of city departments through oral and written reports; 
(10)  Serve as city personnel officer, which shall include the development, implementation, interpretation and enforcement of all city personnel rules and regulations as approved by the council, including recommending revision of the personnel policy when necessary, recommending salary and wage scales for all city employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements, and directing and overseeing the process whereby personnel problems and grievances are promptly resolved; 
(11)  Be a member of the city management negotiation team that is responsible for the negotiation of all collective bargaining agreements with city-recognized bargaining units; 
(12)  Coordinate and supervise all negotiations with developers seeking annexation or rezoning; 
(13)  Be an ex officio member of the planning commission; 
(14)  Attend all council meetings and all other committee and commission meetings as directed by the mayor or council; 
(15)  Direct and coordinate the preparation of the annual city budget and administer same; 
(16)  Direct and oversee the city's purchasing policy; 
(17)  Work closely with department heads to assure that employees receive adequate opportunities for training to maintain and improve their job-related knowledge and skills and to act as the approving authority for requests by employees to attend conferences, meetings, training schools, and similar events, provided funds have been budgeted for these activities; and 
(18)  In coordination with the mayor and the clerk, cause to be prepared the agenda for all meetings of the council, together with the supporting material as may be required with nothing herein being so construed as to give the administrator authority to limit or in any way prevent matters from being considered by the city council. 
(Code 1993, §§ 1.17(2), 1.19) 
Sec. 2-66. - City clerk. 
    The city clerk shall be appointed, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the members of the city council. The city clerk shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to suspension or removal by the council for cause. 
(Code 1993, § 1.17(1)) 
State Law reference- Appointment, powers, and duties of clerk, Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 
Sec. 2-67. - Treasurer. 
    The city council shall appoint the treasurer who shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to suspension or removal by the council for cause. 
(Code 1993, § 1.18) 
Sec. 2-68. - Director of public works and utilities. 
    The director of public works and utilities shall be selected by a panel consisting of the mayor, city council, city administrator and chairperson of the committee of jurisdiction with appointment being at the discretion of the city council for an indefinite term. 
(Code 1993, § 1.15; Ord. No. 2013-10-10-D, § 1, 10-8-2013) 
Sec. 2-69. - Parks and recreation director. 
(a)  Appointment; duties. The parks and recreation director shall be appointed by the city council and shall perform the duties as the commission or the city council shall determine. 
(b)  Agent for city. The parks and recreation director is designated as the representative of the city for the purpose of filing applications for federal grants for park and recreation purposes and for financial assistance under the state statutes, and he is further authorized and empowered to do all necessary things and take all necessary steps in connection with the applications. Such applications shall be approved by the council before filing. 
(Code 1993, § 1.21) 
Sec. 2-70. - City forester. 
    The city forester shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation of the council, and shall receive such salary as may be authorized by the council. Until otherwise provided, the forester shall be the director of the parks and recreation department. 
(Code 1993, § 10.07) 
Sec. 2-71. - Building inspector. 
    The city has established the department of building inspection to be administered by the building inspector appointed from time to time by the city council. The building inspector shall have such duties as are assigned from time to time by the city council including, but not limited to, the enforcement of the provisions of this Code relating to fire prevention and protection (chapter 20) and flood prevention (chapter 22). 
(Code 1993, § 14.01) 
Sec. 2-72. - Other city offices. 
    There shall be such other city offices as may be established from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the city council, upon such terms and with such authority as determined by the council. 
Secs. 2-73-2-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-103-2-132. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 2-133. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a board of appeals for the purpose of hearing appeals and applications and granting variances and exceptions to the building and other land use provisions of this Code in harmony with the purpose and intent of the chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 17.80(1)) 
Sec. 2-134. - Membership. 
    The board of appeals shall consist of five members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(1)  Terms shall be for staggered three-year periods. 
(2)  Chairman shall be designated by the mayor. 
(3)  Two alternate members may be appointed by the mayor for a term of three years and shall act only when a regular member is absent or refuses to vote because of interest. 
(4)  One member shall be a member of the plan commission and one member shall be a registered architect, registered professional engineer, builder or real estate appraiser. 
(5)  The board shall have an established officer of secretary. The secretary shall be elected by the board at the annual meeting. 
(6)  The building inspector shall attend all meetings for the purpose of providing technical assistance when requested by the board. 
(7)  Official oaths shall be taken by all members in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 19.01, within ten days of receiving notice of their appointment. 
(8)  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as appointments for a full term. 
(Code 1993, § 17.80(2)) 
Sec. 2-135. - Rules; meetings; quorum. 
    The board of appeals shall organize and adopt rules of procedure in accordance with this chapter. 
(1)  Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and shall be open to the public. 
(2)  Minutes of the proceedings and a record of all actions shall be kept by the secretary, showing the vote of each member upon each question, the reasons for the board's determination and its finding of facts. These records shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(3)  When a quorum is present, the board of appeals may take action by a majority vote of the members present. 
(Code 1993, § 17.80(3); Ord. No. 2007-09-08-C, § 10, 9-10-2007) 
Sec. 2-136. - Powers. 
    The board of appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning inspector. 
(2)  To hear and grant appeals for variances that will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit and purposes of this Code shall be observed and the public safety, welfare and justice be secured. Use variances shall not be granted. 
(3)  To hear and decide applications for interpretations of the zoning districts after the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(4)  To hear and grant applications for substitution of more restrictive nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses, provided no structural alterations are to be made and the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. Whenever the board permits such a substitution, the use may not thereafter be changed without recommendation. 
(5)  To hear and grant applications for unclassified and unspecified uses, provided that such uses are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district and the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(6)  To hear and grant applications for temporary uses in any district, provided that such uses are a temporary nature; do not involve the erection of a substantial structure; are compatible with the neighboring uses; and the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. The permit shall be temporary, revocable, subject to any conditions required by the board of appeals, and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. Compliance with all other provisions of this Code shall be required. 
(7)  The board may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, modify the requirements appealed from, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(8)  The board may request assistance from other officers, departments, commissions and boards. 
(9)  The chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(Code 1993, § 17.80(4)) 
Sec. 2-137. - Appeals and applications. 
    Appeals from the decision of the zoning inspector concerning the literal enforcement of this Code may be made by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau. Such appeals shall be filed with the secretary within 30 days after the date of written notice of the decision or order of the zoning inspector. Applications may be made by the owner or lessee of the structure, land or water to be affected at any time and shall be filed with the secretary. Such appeals and application shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the appellant or applicant and all abutting and opposite property owners of record within 200 feet of such property. 
(2)  Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing all of the information required under section 52-8 for a zoning permit. 
(3)  Additional information required by the plan commission, city engineer, board of appeals or zoning inspector. 
(4)  Fee receipt from the city treasurer in the amount set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1993, § 17.80(5)) 
Sec. 2-138. - Hearings. 
    The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing, give public notice as a class I notice at least ten days prior and shall give due notice to the parties in interest, the building inspector and the plan commission. At the hearing the appellant or applicant may appeal in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(Code 1993, § 17.80(6)) 
Sec. 2-139. - Findings. 
    No variance to the provisions of this Code shall be granted by the board unless it finds beyond a reasonable doubt that all the following facts and conditions exist and so indicates in the minutes of its proceedings. 
(1)  Exceptional circumstances. There must be exceptional, extraordinary or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel, structure, use or intended uses that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same district and the granting of the variance would not be of so general or recurrent a nature as to suggest that this chapter should be amended. 
(2)  Preservation of property rights. That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other properties in the same district and the same vicinity. 
(3)  Absence of detriment. That the variance will not create substantial detriment to adjacent property and will not materially impair or be contrary to the purpose and spirit of this chapter or the public interest. 
(Code 1993, § 17.80(7)) 
Sec. 2-140. - Decisions. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall decide all appeals and applications within 30 days after the final hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the board's decision to the appellant or applicant, building inspector and plan commission. 
(b)  Conditions may be placed upon any zoning permit ordered or authorized by this board. 
(c)  Variances, substitutions or use permits granted by the board shall expire within six months, unless substantial work has commenced pursuant to such grant. 
(Code 1993, § 17.80(8)) 
Sec. 2-141. - Review by court of record. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of appeals may present to the court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds of such illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board of appeals. 
(Code 1993, § 17.80(9)) 
Secs. 2-142-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF REVIEW 

Sec. 2-166. - Membership. 
    The board of review shall consist of the mayor, city clerk and three alderpersons. The members other than the mayor and clerk shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council and shall hold office for the year appointed. The members of the board, except the members who are employees and officers of the city, shall receive compensation in an amount determined from time to time by the council. 
(Code 1993, § 1.22) 
State Law reference- Appointment, Wis. Stats. § 70.46; proceedings, Wis. Stats. § 70.47; removal, Wis. Stats. § 17.14. 
Secs. 2-167-2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LIBRARY BOARD 

Sec. 2-186. - Library board. 
    The operation, maintenance and administration of the public library shall be vested in the library board consisting of six citizen members who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council, and who shall serve three-year terms commencing May 1 in the year of appointment. The mayor shall appoint a seventh member to the board who shall be a school administrator or his representative from the school district or districts in which the public library is located. The creation of the library board and its administration of the public library shall be governed by Wis. Stats. ch. 43. 
(Code 1993, § 1.25) 
State Law reference- Library boards, Wis. Stats. § 43.54. 
Secs. 2-187-2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SENIOR AND DISABLED SERVICES BOARD 

Sec. 2-211. - Senior and disabled services board. 
(a)  Composition; residency; compensation. The senior and disabled services board shall consist of the mayor, two members of the common council, and five citizens and one nonvoting member who is the senior and disabled services director. One of the citizen members may reside outside the city limits, provided he resides in the county. The aldermanic and citizen members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the common council. No compensation shall be paid for serving on the senior and disabled services board. 
(b)  Terms of office. The term of citizen members shall be two years each. The term of the aldermanic members shall be coextensive with his term as councilperson. Each member shall serve until his successor shall be appointed. 
(c)  Meetings; rules and regulations. The members of the senior and disabled services board shall elect the officers, hold the meetings and establish the rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper for carrying on its functions. 
(d)  Duties and goals. The work of the senior and disabled services board shall be advisory to the mayor and the common council to assist them in addressing the needs of the aged and disabled of the city through the use of citizen resources. The senior and disabled services board shall work toward the goals of developing revenues through grants and other resources and assessing and addressing the needs of the aged and disabled. 
(e)  Budget. The senior and disabled services board shall submit to the common council an estimate of the expenditures required for the subsequent calendar year in order to carry out the duties and goals set forth in this division. The final operating budget of the board shall be approved by the common council. 
(f)  Senior center. The common council shall provide and dedicate a building to be used as the Tomah Area Senior Center. The senior and disabled services board shall be responsible for management of the Tomah Area Senior Center subject to the control and supervision of the common council. The operating budget of the senior and disabled services board shall include a separate provision for all necessary maintenance, repairs, improvements and operational expenditures related to the Tomah Area Senior Center. The common council shall control the size and space of any building to be used as the Tomah Area Senior Center, and the common council shall also control any use, lease or rental of any space not utilized by the Tomah Area Senior Center. All lease or rental proceeds from the Tomah Area Senior Center shall be segregated from general city revenues and shall be deposited into one of the segregated funds established for the benefit of the Tomah Area Senior Center as set forth below. The name of the Tomah Area Senior Center shall be established by resolution. 
(g)  Operational fund. There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Tomah Senior and Disabled Services Operational Fund that shall be used for the purposes of financing and exercising the operational duties and goals provided in this section. Such fund shall consist of the sums of money as may be hereafter appropriated and provided for by the common council, and of all grant money, donations or monies from other resources specifically provided to fund the duties and goals set forth herein. Monies donated to the fund for a specific purpose shall only be used for the designated purpose. The fund shall be held and processed by the city treasurer and audited on an annual basis in the same manner as the other public funds. 
(h)  Building fund. There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Tomah Senior and Disabled Services Building Fund that shall be used for the purposes of making repairs and improvements to the Tomah Area Senior Center. Such fund shall consist of the sums of money as may be hereafter appropriated and provided for by the common council, and of all grant money, donations or monies from other resources specifically provided to fund the center. Monies donated to the fund for a specific purpose shall only be used for the designated purpose. The fund shall be held and processed by the city treasurer and audited on an annual basis in the same manner as the other public funds. 
(Code 1993, § 1.30) 
Secs. 2-212-2-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ETHICS BOARD 

Sec. 2-231. - Created. 
(a)  Established; appointment; compensation. There is created a city ethics board, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council, and who shall serve without compensation or compensatory time off. 
(b)  Composition. The membership of the ethics board shall consist of three citizen members: one designee of the mayor; one member of the council; and one city employee. The ethics board shall elect its own chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. The city clerk shall provide needed staff assistance and the city attorney shall provide needed legal advice and assistance. 
(c)  Terms of office. Terms of office for members of the ethics board shall be three years, except that when initial appointments are made following the board's creation, two of the members shall be appointed for three years, two members for two years and two members for one year. The term of a board member appointed as the designee of the mayor shall expire with the expiration of the mayor's term in office; the term of a board member representing the city council shall expire with the expiration of the member's term as a member of the council; the term of a board member representing city employees shall expire with the member's termination of employment as a city employee. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities. The ethics board shall: 
(1)  Develop and adopt reasonable rules of procedure. 
(2)  Administer and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Make declarations of economic interest filed with the board available for public inspection and copying during normal city office hours and compile an index of all statements on file with the board to facilitate public access. 
(4)  Issue advisory opinions regarding the propriety of any matter to which an individual subject to this section is or may become a party. An advisory opinion may be requested by the individual or, in the case of a individual under consideration for appointment as a city official or employee, by the appointing officer or authority with the consent of the prospective appointee. City officials and employees shall be afforded an opportunity to appear before the board and present facts at issue in the interpretation and administration of the code of ethics established by provisions in this section before an advisory opinion is issued. 
(e)  Optional powers. The ethics board may issue subpoenas, administer oaths and investigate any violation of the section on its own motion or upon complaint by any person. The board may also develop and make recommendations to the city council with respect to amendments to this division. 
(f)  Records closed. Records of the board's opinions, requests for opinions and investigations of alleged code violations may, at the board's discretion, be closed in whole or in part to public inspection. 
(g)  Advisory opinions. The city ethics board or any appointing officer or authority acting with the consent of a prospective appointee may request the city attorney or county corporation counsel to issue an advisory opinion regarding the propriety of any matter to which a city official, employee or prospective appointee is or may become a party. Such action will be taken pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.59(5). 
(h)  Sanctions. Violation of the code of ethics created by this section should raise the question of whether the official or employee violating the code should voluntarily resign or other action should be taken in the best interests of the city and its citizens. Violation of the code may constitute a cause for removal from office, termination of employment, suspension, censure, reprimand or other appropriate disciplinary action. As an alternative or in addition to sanctions imposed herein, any individual violating the code shall be subject to a nonreimbursable forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 as determined by the city ethics board. 
(Code 1993, § 1.08) 
Secs. 2-232-2-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-256-2-273. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-274. - Commission established. 
    The former board of water and sewer commissioners and the board of public works have been combined and consolidated into a new commission known as the public works and utilities commission. The management, operation and duties of the commission shall be as provided in this division. 
(Code 1993, § 1.20(1)) 
State Law reference- Board of public works, Wis. Stats. § 62.14. 
Sec. 2-275. - Authority. 
    The management, control and supervision of all public works and of the waterworks and sewer system of the city and of any and all property pertaining thereto shall be vested in the public works and utilities commission. 
(Code 1993, § 1.20(2)) 
Sec. 2-276. - Composition; compensation; officers. 
    The commission shall consist of the mayor, four alderpersons and two citizen members, who shall receive no compensation for services rendered, except for actual expense incurred in the performance of their duties, subject to approval by the commissioners. The members shall annually choose one of their members as president and one as secretary. The city treasurer shall be ex officio treasurer of the commission. 
(Code 1993, § 1.20(2), (3)) 
Sec. 2-277. - Appointment; terms. 
    The mayor shall at the organizational meeting of the council each year appoint one citizen and four alderperson members of the commission. The appointments shall be subject to the confirmation of the council by a majority vote of all the members. The term of the citizen members shall be two years and shall commence on May 1 following their appointment. The alderperson members shall serve a one-year term. The initial term of the citizen members shall be one two-year term and one one-year term. The mayor may appoint temporary members to serve until the first reorganizational meeting, subject to council confirmation. 
(Code 1993, § 1.20(3)) 
Sec. 2-278. - Powers and duties. 
    The commissioners shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  All powers and duties involving public works as are enumerated in the state statutes and the further duties as the council may by resolution or ordinance prescribe. 
(2)  To protect the waterworks and sewer system and appliances from unnecessary damages and loss and to keep the waterworks and sewer system and all its parts in good running order and repair. 
(3)  To make all contracts for and procure at the expense of the city all fuel, supplies and material necessary to operate and maintain the water and sewer systems and employ all labor necessary in the operation, management and extension of the works. 
(4)  To call upon any other department or officer of the city for the assistance as may be necessary and for the best interests of the city in the economic management of the works. 
(5)  To make all the rules and regulations as to the use of water and the taking of water from the system and the other rules and regulations relating to the works as they shall deem necessary. 
(6)  To make all repairs of every kind or nature and direct all extensions of the works, provided the expenditures required are reasonable and necessary, are in the approved budget or in case of emergency. 
(7)  To approve and audit all bills incurred by them or by their authority and, if approved, shall be paid by orders upon the city treasurer issued and signed by the mayor, city clerk and city treasurer. 
(8)  To enforce all ordinances of the city relating to the water and sewer systems. 
(9)  To semi-annually make a full and complete report to the council of the condition of the water and sewer system and by their proper office cause the bills for water service to be made out and delivered to the city treasurer for collection. 
(10)  To cause correct returns and records to be made of all taps, connections, locations of mains, gates and all the records as may be useful or proper to be made in connection with the system, all of which shall be entered in proper books for that purpose; cause a correct record of relative value of fuel to be made and entered in permanent books; and cause to be kept just, true and correct books of account in the manner as to at all times show the true condition and state of the water and sewer system; and the books and records shall at all times be open to inspection by the city council or any citizen, and they shall deliver the books to their successors in office. 
(11)  To, when requested by the council, show the kind and amount of material used, the cost thereof and the expense attending any work done, and the same shall be fully itemized. 
(12)  To collect or provide for collection of the sewer service charges. 
(13)  To review issues that may arise from time to time involving the lake and airport and recommend a course of action to the city council. 
(14)  To develop and implement a long range plan of no less than three years in regards to the construction and/or repair of sidewalks within the city. Said plan shall be reviewed on an annual basis to establish target areas and reassess needs as the city's needs and priorities evolve with regard to pedestrian traffic. Each year, as part of the succeeding year's budget preparation, the commission shall establish a target area according to need within which sidewalk shall be installed where none exists adjacent to the city street. Sidewalks which are unsafe, defective or insufficient in said target areas shall also be repaired or replaced. The cost for newly constructed sidewalks and/or repair shall be allocated pursuant to sections 38-33 and 38-122 of this Code. The public shall be notified of the designated target area at least 12 months in advance of planned construction to allow property owners to plan for the same. 
(Code 1993, § 1.20(3); Ord. No. 2010-05-03D, § 1, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 2-279. - Public works performed by city. 
    Any class of public works or any part thereof may be done directly by the city without submitting the same for bids, upon three-fourths vote of all the members of the city council. When so ordered, the work shall be under the direction of the board of utility and public works. 
(Code 1993, § 1.20(4)) 
Secs. 2-280-2-306. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-307. - Members; terms. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall consist of eight members, two members of the council and six citizen members appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of the council. The council members' terms shall be for one year and they shall be appointed by the mayor at the annual organizational meeting of the council held on the third Tuesday of April. Citizen members shall be appointed for terms of three years at the annual organizational meeting of the council held on the third Tuesday of April. Their terms shall begin immediately upon appointment. 
(Code 1993, § 1.21(1)) 
Sec. 2-308. - Vacancies; compensation. 
    If a vacancy occurs in any of the positions, the mayor may appoint a successor at any time to fill the unexpired term in that position, upon approval by the city council. Two members shall be appointed in each year for terms of three years. No compensation shall be paid for serving on the parks and recreations commission. 
(Code 1993, § 1.21(1)) 
Sec. 2-309. - Meetings; quorum. 
    Meetings shall be held at least once each month. The commission shall elect a chairman and a secretary and notice of election shall be filed with the city clerk. Five members shall constitute a quorum and all actions shall require an affirmative approval of a majority of all the members. 
(Code 1993, § 1.21(2)) 
Sec. 2-310. - Powers and duties. 
    The park and recreation commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Parks. With respect to parks, the powers and duties provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 27.08, 27.09 and 27.10. The acceptance of gifts of money or property or the acquisition of property or privileges for park purposes, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 27.08, can be accomplished only upon the recommendation of the commission and approval by the council by resolution, but the dedication of land or money in lieu thereof to the city for park, recreation or other public purposes in connection with the subdivision of land shall be deemed to have been approved by the council in and by its act of accepting the final plat in connection with which the dedication is made. The commission shall have charge of supervision over all city employees now employed or to be employed in the future for the purposes of repair, maintenance, upkeep and development of city park property. 
(2)  Recreation. The commission shall have the general supervision of municipal recreation in the city and shall operate and maintain all community recreation centers, playgrounds and other recreational areas and shall have the power to make rules and regulations for the government and control of all places of recreation, subject to the approval of a majority of all of the members of the council. The commission shall have the power to recommend a person to be appointed director of parks and recreation for the city. The commission shall promote recreation in its broadest aspects and toward this end shall cooperate with existing recreational programs under the auspices of the city school district. 
(Code 1993, § 1.21(3a), (3b)) 
Sec. 2-311. - Budget. 
    The commission shall submit to the city council an estimate of the expenditures required for the subsequent calendar year in order to carry out a program for the maintenance, expansion, development and acquisitions of parks and recreational activities. The procedures used to perform this function shall be the same as those used by all other city departments. 
(Code 1993, § 1.21(3c)) 
Sec. 2-312. - Finances. 
    The commission shall pay all incomes from recreational activities to the city treasurer. All expenditures pursuant to the budget previously approved by the city council shall be made only upon prior approval of the committee of the whole. The city clerk shall thereupon draw his order upon the treasurer and the same shall be paid as other municipal orders are paid. 
(Code 1993, § 1.21(3d)) 
Sec. 2-313. - Park rules and regulations. 
    The parks and recreation commission is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations for the proper use, care and operation of the property under its control, provided the rules and regulations shall not conflict with the laws of this state or any rules or regulations enacted by the council. 
(Code 1993, § 1.21(3e)) 
Secs. 2-314-2-344. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY PLAN COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Plan commission, Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 

Sec. 2-345. - Membership; officers. 
    The city plan commission (that may also be referred to as the "plan commission" or the "planning commission") shall consist of seven members as follows: the mayor, who shall be its presiding officer, two alderpersons, and four citizens. Citizen members shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications. The alderperson member shall be elected by a two-thirds vote of the council upon creation of the commission and during each April thereafter. The citizen members shall be appointed by the mayor. Citizen members shall take the official oath required by Wis. Stats. § 19.01 that shall be filed with the city clerk. As soon as practicable after May 1 of each year, the commission shall organize itself and elect a vice-chairman, secretary and other officers deemed necessary. 
(Code 1993, § 1.23(1)-(3), (6)) 
Sec. 2-346. - Vacancies; compensation. 
    All vacancies on the plan commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as appointment for the full term. No compensation shall be paid for service on the plan commission. 
(Code 1993, § 1.23(4)) 
Sec. 2-347. - Quorum; record of proceedings. 
    Four members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions shall require the affirmative approval of a majority of all of the members of the city plan commission. The commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1993, § 1.23(7), (8)) 
Sec. 2-348. - Staff and budget. 
    The plan commission shall have the authority to employ experts and staff as may be necessary and proper within the limits of the budget established by the council or placed at its disposal through gift and subject to any ordinance or resolution enacted by the council. As far as possible, the commission shall utilize the services of existing city officials and employees. 
(Code 1993, § 1.23(9), (10)) 
Sec. 2-349. - Powers and duties. 
    The plan commission shall have the powers and duties prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 62.23 and the other powers and duties as shall be vested in it from time to time by the council. 
(Code 1993, § 1.23(11)) 
Sec. 2-350. - Industrial development duties. 
    The plan commission shall have the power to collect, hold, manage, control and use all funds appropriated and provided for industrial development to collect, hold, manage, control and use all proceeds, earnings, and monies available for the sale, lease, rental, conveyance or other disposition of any property held or acquired; to construct, acquire by gift or purchase, reconstruct, improve or extend any industrial building within the city limits; and to acquire by gift or purchase lands or rights in lands in connection therewith in the name of the city; to develop an industrial park and to do or cause to be done all matters and things in connection therewith; to employ the personnel, agents, engineers, and consultants as the commission shall deem necessary; and to cause to be sold, leased, rented, conveyed, transferred, assigned, or donated any property acquired by the commission; and to exercise the other power and authority necessary to accomplish the purpose of this division. Provided, however, that any and all contracts entered into by the commission shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 1.23(12)) 
Sec. 2-351. - Industrial development fund. 
    The industrial development fund previously created by ordinance is hereby re-established and shall be used for the purposes of financing and exercising the power of industrial development described above. Such fund shall consist of the sums of money as may be hereafter appropriated and provided for by the city council, and of all rentals, interest, income, dividends, earnings and monies available from the sale, lease, conveyance or other disposition of any property acquired pursuant to the power exercised by the commission under the terms of this division, and the other sums as may be provided for by ordinance or statute. 
(Code 1993, § 1.23(13)) 
Sec. 2-352. - Audit. 
    The commission shall cause all accounts, records and books concerning the management, operation and disbursements of the industrial development fund and of properties acquired thereby to be audited in the manner provided for by statute for the audit of public funds. 
(Code 1993, § 1.23(13)) 
Secs. 2-353-2-377. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Board of police commissioners, police and fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 

Sec. 2-378. - Members; appointment. 
    The general duties of the commissioners of the police and fire department as prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 62.13 is hereby vested in a board consisting of five citizens. The mayor shall appoint five citizens to serve as members of the commission, upon approval of the city council. At the expiration of the term of each commissioner the mayor shall appoint one citizen to the commission for a term of five years, appointment to be made between the last Monday in April and the first Monday in May. Not more than three members of the commission shall belong to the same political party. 
(Code 1993, § 1.24(1)) 
Sec. 2-379. - Appointment of chief and subordinates. 
    The commission shall appoint the chief of police and the chief of the fire department, who shall hold their offices during good behavior, subject to suspension or removal by the commission for cause. The chiefs of the police and fire departments shall appoint their subordinates, subject to the approval of the board and in the manner and form as prescribed by law and the state statutes. 
(Code 1993, § 1.24(2)) 
Sec. 2-380. - Rules of procedure. 
    The police and fire commission shall from time to time make the rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to perform and execute the duties and powers vested in the board. 
(Code 1993, § 1.24(3)) 
Sec. 2-381. - Duties and authority. 
    The supervision, management, equipment and control of the police department and the fire department of the city, subject to the powers vested in the police and fire commission, shall be in the council, and they shall fix the salaries of the chiefs and members of the police and fire department as provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 1.24(4)) 
Secs. 2-382-2-405. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - AMBULANCE COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Ambulance service, Wis. Stats. § 62.133. 

Sec. 2-406. - Composition; duties. 
    The ambulance commission shall consist of seven members, not less than four of whom shall be residents of the city. The commission shall supervise operation of the Tomah Area Ambulance Service; provided, however, that the supervision, management, equipment and control of the Tomah Area Ambulance Service, subject to the power herein vested in the ambulance commission, shall be in the council. 
(Code 1993, § 1.26(1), (3); Ord. No. 2009-07-06-D, § 1, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-407. - Appointment; compensation. 
    Commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. The mayor shall designate the term of office of each commissioner so appointed. After original appointments, each member shall hold office three years, unless sooner removed for cause. No compensation shall be paid to any commission member. 
(Code 1993, § 1.26(2)) 
Sec. 2-408. - Service area. 
    The Tomah Area Ambulance Service shall provide ambulance service for those cities, townships and villages within the service area which, for purposes of this division, is defined as consisting of those cities, townships and villages which have agreed to participate in the program. All cities, townships and villages within the definition of service area, in addition to the requirements herein, shall be required to execute a written agreement with the city. 
(Code 1993, § 1.26(5), (8)) 
Sec. 2-409. - Service rates. 
    Charges for ambulance calls and services performed by the ambulance service shall be established by the commission and approved by the council. Charges shall be reviewed annually by the commission. All rate changes are subject to approval by the council after public hearing. Notice of public hearing shall be published as a class I publication as provided by statute. Current charges for services shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1993, § 1.26(4)) 
Sec. 2-410. - Rules and regulations. 
    The ambulance commission is hereby authorized to adopt rules governing its own proceedings and regulations for the proper use, care and operation of the property under its control, provided the rules and regulations do not conflict with the laws of the state or any ordinance or resolution enacted by the council. 
(Code 1993, § 1.26(6)) 
Sec. 2-411. - Cost sharing. 
    The expense of operating the Tomah Area Ambulance Service shall be shared by those municipalities that are within the Tomah area in accordance with the population of the municipalities, on the basis established by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 1.26(9)) 
DIVISION 7. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-412. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of property, improvements, and materials of special architectural character or special historical interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. A historic preservation commission is hereby established, the purpose of which will be to: 
(1)  Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of such historic structures, sites and districts which represent or reflect elements of the city's cultural, social economic, political, engineering and architectural history. 
(2)  Safeguard the city's historic and cultural heritage, as embodies and reflected in such historic structures, sites and districts. 
(3)  Stabilize and improve property values. 
(4)  Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past. 
(5)  Protect and enhance the city's attractions to residents, tourists and visitors, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry. 
(6)  Strengthen the economy of the city. 
(7)  Promote the use of historic structures, sites and districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-06-D, § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-413. - Historic preservation commission composition. 
    A Historic preservation commission is hereby created, consisting of seven members. Of the membership, one shall be an alderperson, appointed annually by the mayor, one shall be a member of the city planning commission, one shall be a member of the long range planning committee, all remaining members shall be residents of the city of Tomah. Said persons shall be competent and informed in the historical, architectural and cultural traditions of the community. They shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the common council of the city of Tomah by majority vote. Of the initial members so appointed, two shall serve a term of one year, two shall serve a term of two years, and three shall serve a term of three years. Thereafter, the term for each member shall be three years. A vacancy occurring in the membership for any cause shall be filled by a person appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the common council for the unexpired term. The members of said commission shall receive no compensation except for necessary expenses sustained in carrying out their duties, which expenses shall be paid by the city of Tomah as may be authorized by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-06-D, § 2, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-414. - Historic preservation commission power and duties. 
(a)  Designation or rescission of historic structures, historic sites, and historic districts. The historic preservation commission may recommend designation or rescission of historic structures, historic sites, or historic districts within the city of Tomah. Designation or rescission of historic structures, historic sites and historic districts must be approved by the planning commission and the common council. In addition, any designation or rescission of a historic structure, historic sites or historic districts located within the boundary of the city's downtown master plan must also be reviewed by the city's long range planning committee prior to common council adoption. 
(b)  Review and approve applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall review and approve applications for certificate of appropriateness under chapter 10, section 10-406 (alterations, or demolition of historic structures, historic sites, or historic districts) of the city of Tomah Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Other duties. In addition to those duties already specified in this section, the commission shall: 
(1)  Work for the continuing education of the citizens of Tomah about the historic heritage of this city and the historic structures, historic sites, and historic districts designated under the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Conduct local preservation planning efforts, often in conjunction with the planning department. The commission would conduct or supervise an on-going survey to identify and evaluate properties of historical, prehistorical or architectural interest, prepare reports of its findings and sponsor educational activities in the community. 
(3)  Cooperate with the historic preservation officer for the State of Wisconsin, and the state historic preservation review board, in attempting to include such properties hereunder designated as historic structures, historic sites, or historic districts in the National Register of Historic Places. 
(4)  As it deems advisable, the commission shall receive and solicit funds for the purpose of historic preservation in the city of Tomah. Such funds shall be placed in a special city account for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-06-D, § 3, 4-11-2017) 
Secs. 2-415-2-435. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-436-2-453. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAKE COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-454. - Creation; purpose. 
    The lake committee of the city is an advisory committee which assists the common council in the performance of its duties to the city. The committee shall serve as a venue to thoroughly investigate and debate issues involving Lake Tomah. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-06-C, § 1(2.09(1)), 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 2-455. - Membership. 
    The lake committee shall consist of seven members. At least six of the committee members shall be electors (citizens) of the lake protection and rehabilitation district, however, not more than one non-elector member may be selected from the Drainage Area Boundary Map dated 1/5/2011. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-06-C, § 1(2.09(2)), 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 2016-06-05-D, § 1, 6-14-2016) 
Sec. 2-456. - Term of members. 
    The term of citizen members shall be three years each, and the term of the aldermanic member shall be one year. Members shall be appointed by the mayor, upon approval by the city council, at the annual organizational meeting of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-06-C, § 1(2.09(3)), 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 2-457. - Meetings and quorum. 
    Meetings shall be held at the direction of the public works and utilities director, city administrator or common council. Four members shall constitute a quorum and all actions shall require an affirmative approval of a majority of all of the members. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-06-C, § 1(2.09(4)), 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 2-458. - Powers and duties. 
    The lake committee shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To serve as a liaison between the community and the common council on issues involving Lake Tomah. 
(2)  To discuss and review any and all proposed ordinances or resolutions involving Lake Tomah and make recommendations to the common council regarding the necessity and appropriateness of the same. 
(3)  To review and make recommendations to the mayor and common council regarding the annual work plans and long-range goals for Lake Tomah. 
(4)  To review any other miscellaneous business involving Lake Tomah that may come from time to time and recommend a course of action to the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-06-C, § 1(2.09(5)), 7-10-2007) 
Secs. 2-459-2-484. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-485. - Composition; residency; compensation. 
    The community development block grant committee shall consist of five citizen members and an alderperson. The citizen members and the aldermanic member shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the common council. No compensation shall be paid for serving on the community development block grant committee. 
Sec. 2-486. - Term of office. 
    The term of citizen and aldermanic members shall be one year each. They shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the common council at the annual organizational meeting of the council held the third Tuesday in April. 
Sec. 2-487. - Meetings; rules and regulations. 
    The members of the community development block grant committee shall elect the officers, hold the meetings and establish the rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper for carrying on its functions. Four members constitute a quorum. 
Sec. 2-488. - Powers and duties. 
    The committee shall review loan applications and make recommendations to the council as to whether or not low interest or deferred payment loans should be awarded to homeowners for home improvements or to business owners for the promotion of economic development in the city. 
Secs. 2-489-2-514. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - JOINT CITY/SCHOOL PLANNING COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-515. - Composition. 
    The joint city/school planning committee shall consist of two members of the common council, two members of the school board, city administrator, police chief, school superintendent and one school administrator. 
Sec. 2-516. - Appointment; terms. 
    The members, other than the four school representatives, shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the common council at the annual organizational meeting of the council held the third Tuesday in April. The term of office shall be one year. 
Sec. 2-517. - Purpose and duties. 
    The purpose of the committee is to review issues of mutual concern between the city and the city school district. Five members of the joint city/school planning committee shall constitute a quorum. 
Secs. 2-518-2-542. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-543. - Composition. 
    The emergency management committee shall consist of the mayor, city administrator, chief of police, fire chief, director of public works and utilities, ambulance director, safety director for the VA Medical Center, safety director for Tomah Memorial Hospital, county civil defense director and the city attorney. 
Sec. 2-544. - Appointment; term; quorum. 
    The members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the common council at the annual organizational meeting of the council held the third Tuesday in April. The terms of office shall be one year. Six members of the emergency management committee shall constitute a quorum. 
Sec. 2-545. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the committee is to work toward obtaining and maintaining emergency readiness in the city. 
Secs. 2-546-2-555. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LONG RANGE PLANNING COMMITTEE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-01-01-D, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 2009, enacted provisions intended for use as Div. 6, §§ 2-546-2-548. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as Div. 6, §§ 2-556-2-558. 

Sec. 2-556. - Creation; purpose. 
    The long range planning committee is an advisory committee which assists the common council in the performance of its duties to the city. The committee shall serve as a venue to thoroughly re-evaluate the existing corporate limits of the city with a view of the revitalization of presently occupied areas as well as undeveloped sections of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01-01-D, § 1, 1-13-2009) 
Sec. 2-557. - Composition; term; quorum; meetings. 
    The long range planning committee shall consist of the mayor, two members of the common council, and seven members with two of said members being members of the planning commission. The council member terms shall be for two years. Members shall be appointed by the mayor at the annual organizational meeting of the council subject to confirmation by the council. After original appointments, each of the remaining members shall hold office three years, unless sooner removed for cause. Six members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions shall require the affirmative approval of a majority of all members of the committee. The members shall elect the officers and hold the meetings as necessary and proper for carrying on its functions. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01-01-D, § 1, 1-13-2009) 
Sec. 2-558. - Powers and duties. 
The long range planning committee shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To serve as a liaison between the community and the common council on long-range issues involving the city. 
(2)  To discuss, review and make recommendations to the mayor, planning commission and/or common council regarding the city's comprehensive land use plan. 
(3)  To discuss, review and make recommendations to the mayor, planning commission and/or common council regarding any and all long-range planning issues or goals for the city including but not limited to land use, annexation, zoning, economic development, capital improvements, infrastructure, grant opportunities or any other issue as directed by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01-01-D, § 1, 1-13-2009) 
Secs. 2-559-2-568. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AUTHORITIES AND BUREAUS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-569-2-599. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-600. - Composition; residency; compensation. 
    The city's housing authority shall consist of five citizens and one nonvoting alderperson. Per a resolution dated November 26, 1976, the common council desires that the project coordinator of the community development block grant program act as its representative on the said housing authority committee. The aldermanic and citizen members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the common council. No compensation shall be paid for serving on the housing authority. 
Sec. 2-601. - Terms of office. 
    The term of citizen members shall be five years each. The council member's term shall be for one year. The members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the common council at the annual organizational meeting of the council held on the third Tuesday in April. 
Sec. 2-602. - Meetings; rules and regulations. 
    The members of the housing authority shall elect the officers, hold the meetings and establish the rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper for carrying on its functions. Three members constitute a quorum. 
Sec. 2-603. - Powers and duties. 
    To provide oversight and direction in the administration of the authority towards the goal of providing safe, sanitary affordable housing to low and moderate income households. 
Secs. 2-604-2-624. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU 

Sec. 2-625. - Composition; residency; compensation. 
    The city's convention and visitors bureau (CVB) shall consist of eight directors. Appointed directors shall include: one representing the common council; one representing the Greater Tomah Area Chamber of Commerce board of directors; one representing the Monroe County Agricultural Society; one being the city administrator; two representing a city motel/hotel; one representing a city retail establishment; and one representing a city restaurant or bar. The mayor shall appoint members subject to confirmation by the common council. No compensation shall be paid for serving on the Tomah Convention and Visitors Bureau. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09-06-D, § 1, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 2-626. - Terms of office. 
(a)  Administrative members. The term of office for the following shall be one year: Representative of the common council, city administrator and a representative of the Greater Tomah Area Chamber of Commerce board of directors. Any administrative member shall not be subject to a term limit and would be eligible for reappointment by the mayor on an annual basis. 
(b)  Citizen members. The term of office for the following members shall be three years: representative of the Monroe County Agricultural Society, representative of city retail establishment, two representatives of a city motel/hotel and a representative of a city restaurant or bar. Any and all citizen members shall be subject to a term limit of three consecutive years. Provided, however, citizen members shall be eligible for reappointment after being off the board for at least one full year. 
(c)  Appointment. The members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the common council at the annual organizational meeting of the council held the third Tuesday in April. In case of any interim vacancy on the board through death, resignation, removal or other cause, a successor shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09-06-D, § 2, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 2-627. - Meetings, rules and regulations. 
    Regular meetings shall be held every other month at a time approved by the convention and visitors bureau (CVB) board of directors. Five members of the CVB board of directors shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at all meetings of the CVB board. At the regular meeting following the organizational meeting of the council, the CVB board of directors shall elect a chairperson and vice-chair for a one-year term. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09-06-D, § 3, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 2-628. - Powers and duties. 
    The affairs of the convention and visitors bureau, along with the control and management of its business and property shall be directed by the executive director upon approval of the CVB board of directors. Duties include: 
(1)  The elected CVB chairperson shall be the legislative head of the CVB and shall preside at all meetings of the CVB board of directors. Subject to the approval of the CVB board of directors, the chairperson shall be responsible for the signing of all notices, minutes, reports and contracts affecting the operation of the CVB and its property. 
(2)  The vice-chairperson shall perform the duties of the chairperson in his absence. Subject to approval of the CVB board of directors, the vice-chairperson may succeed the chairperson. 
(3)  The executive director of the CVB shall perform such responsibilities as assigned by the CVB board. Subject to the approval of the CVB board of directors, the executive director shall prepare an operating budget, and be responsible for all operating expenditures in accordance with the approved budget. The executive director shall prepare all meeting notices, and be responsible for proper media notice in accordance with the Wisconsin Open Meetings Law. The executive director shall also make monthly and year end financial reports to the board of directors. 
(4)  The executive director and/or staff of the CVB shall be responsible for all minutes of the CVB meetings. 
(5)  Responsible for establishing procedure and formulating policy for the organization that is consistent with and subordinate to the bylaws of the Greater Tomah Area Chamber of Commerce. Procedure and policies shall be maintained, reviewed and revised by the CVB board of directors as deemed necessary. 
Secs. 2-629-2-659. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC RECORDS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Public records, Wis. Stats. § 19.21 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-660. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authority means any city entity having custody of a city record including an office, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order or a formally constituted subunit of the foregoing. 
    Custodian means that officer, department head, division head or employee of the city designated herein or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any city records or files, deposit or keep the records in his office or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of the public records and who is required by this division to respond to requests for access to the records. 
    Record means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved regardless of physical form or characteristics, that has been created or is being kept by an authority. The term "record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes) and computer printouts. The term "record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published library materials which are available for sale or which are available for inspection at a public library. 
(Code 1993, § 1.40) 
Sec. 2-661. - Duty to maintain. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, each officer and employee of the city shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his office or employee or his deputies or to the possession or control of which they may be lawfully entitled as the officers or employees. 
(Code 1993, § 1.41(1)) 
Sec. 2-662. - Surrender of records. 
    Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term of employment or whenever the office or position of employment becomes vacant, each the officer or employee shall deliver to his successor all records then in his custody and the successor shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file the receipt with the city clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, the records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the clerk on behalf of the successor to be delivered to the successor upon the latter's receipt. 
(Code 1993, § 1.41(2)) 
Sec. 2-663. - Legal custodian. 
(a)  Designation. Each elected official is the legal custodian of the records of his office, but the official may designate an employee of his staff to act as the legal custodian. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the city clerk or the clerk's designee shall act as legal custodian for the council and for any committees, commissions, boards or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution of the council; provided, however that the council may by resolution designate the legal custodian for these committees, commissions, boards or other authorities as it deems appropriate. Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his absence or the absence of his designee. 
(b)  Authority. The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry out the duties of an authority under Wis. Stats. §§ 19.21-19.39 and this section. The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an authority under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 1.42) 
Secs. 2-664-2-684. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSPECTION AND DUPLICATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Public records and property, Wis. Stats. § 19.21 et seq. 

Sec. 2-685. - Access to records. 
(a)  Access; adoption of state law. The rights of any person who requests inspection or copies of a record are governed by the provisions and guidelines of Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1) which is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  Provision of equipment and facilities. Each authority shall provide any person who is authorized to inspect or copy a record that appears in written form, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1)(b), or any person who is authorized to and requests permission to photograph a record, the form of which does not permit copying pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1)(f), with facilities comparable to those used by its employees to inspect, copy and abstract the record during established office hours. An authority is not required by this subsection to purchase or lease photocopying, duplicating, photographic or other equipment or to provide a separate room for the inspection, copying or abstracting of records. 
(c)  Response to requests for access. Each authority in acting upon a request for any record shall respond within the times and according to the procedures set out in Wis. Stats. § 19.35(4). 
(d)  Notice to public. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.34, each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods whereby the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records or obtain copies of records and the costs thereof. Each authority shall also prominently display at its offices for the guidance of the public a copy of Wis. Stats. §§ 19.31 to 19.39. This subsection does not apply to members of the city council. 
(e)  Limitations on right to access; adoption of state law. Wis. Stats. § 19.36 is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1993, §§ 1.43, 1.44) 
Sec. 2-686. - Separation of information. 
    If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may not be made public, the authority having custody of the record shall provide the information that may be made public and withhold the information that may not be made public from the record before release. Each authority shall consult with the city attorney before releasing any information under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 1.45) 
Sec. 2-687. - Fees. 
(a)  Reproduction and transcription. Each authority shall impose a fee upon the requestor of a copy of a record that may not exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost of reproduction and transcription of the record, unless a fee is otherwise specifically established or authorized to be established by the law. 
(b)  Photographic reproduction. Each authority shall impose a fee upon the requester of a copy of a record for the actual, necessary and direct cost of photographing and photographic processing if the authority provides a photograph of a record, the form of which does not permit copying. 
(c)  Records research. Except as otherwise provided by law or as authorized to be prescribed by law, an authority shall impose a fee upon a requester for locating a record, not exceeding the actual, necessary and direct cost of location, if the cost is $50.00 or more. 
(d)  Mailing and shipping costs. Each authority shall impose a fee upon a requester for the actual, necessary and direct cost of mailing or shipping of any copy or photograph of a record that is mailed or shipped to the requester. 
(e)  Partial or complete waiver of fees. An authority may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge where the authority determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest. 
(f)  Prepayment of fees. Each authority shall require prepayment by requester of any fee imposed under this section if the total amount exceeds $5.00. 
(Code 1993, § 1.48) 
Sec. 2-688. - Certain records of the assessor. 
    Whenever the assessor in the performance of his duties requests or obtains income and expense information, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af) or any successor statute, the income and expense information that is provided to the assessor shall be held by him on a confidential basis. Such information, unless otherwise ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, is not subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1); provided, however, that this section shall not apply to information revealed to and used by persons: 
(1)  Pursuant to order of court; 
(2)  In the discharge of duties imposed by law; and 
(3)  In the discharge of duties imposed by office including, but not limited to, use by the assessor in performance of official duties of the assessor's office and use by the board of review in performance of its official duties. 
(Code 1993, § 1.49) 
Secs. 2-689-2-719. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECORDS RETENTION 

Sec. 2-720. - Destruction of records generally. 
    Destruction of records shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article and state law. Unless notice is waived by the state historical society, at least 60 days' notice shall be given the state historical society prior to the destruction of any record as provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(a). 
(Code 1993, § 1.46(4)) 
Sec. 2-721. - Tape and other recordings. 
    Any tape or other audio or audio/visual recordings of a governmental meeting of the city may be destroyed, erased or reused no sooner than 90 days after the minutes of the meeting have been approved and published, if the purpose of the recording was to make minutes of the meeting. 
(Code 1993, § 1.46(5)) 
Sec. 2-722. - Non-utility records. 
    City officers may destroy the following non-utility financial records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 422, but not less than seven years after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular transaction, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then, after the shorter period: 
(1)  Water stubs and receipts of current billings. 
(2)  Customer ledgers. 
(3)  Vouchers and supporting documents pertaining to charges not included in plant accounts. 
(4)  Bank statements. 
(5)  Canceled checks. 
(6)  Receipt forms. 
(7)  Vouchers. 
(8)  Bonds and coupons after maturity. 
(9)  License and permit applications. 
(10)  Justice dockets. 
(11)  Resolutions and petitions. 
(12)  Correspondence. 
(13)  Oaths of office. 
(Code 1993, § 1.46(1)) 
Sec. 2-723. - Obsolete records. 
    City officers may destroy the following records of which they are legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than seven years after the record was effective, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after the shorter period: 
(1)  Old insurance policies. 
(2)  Election notices. 
(3)  Canceled registration cards. 
(4)  Contracts and papers relating thereto. 
(5)  Financial reports other than annual financial reports. 
(Code 1993, § 1.46(3)) 
Sec. 2-724. - Utility records. 
    City officers may destroy the following utility records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 422, subject to state public service commission regulations, but not less than seven years after the record was effective, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after the shorter period, except that water stubs, receipts of current billings and customers' ledgers may be destroyed after two years: 
(1)  Contracts. 
(2)  Excavation permits. 
(3)  Inspection records. 
(4)  Special assessment records. 
(5)  Licenses and permits. 
(Code 1993, § 1.46(2)) 
Secs. 2-725-2-746. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FINANCE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance, Wis. Stats. § 62.12; municipal finance, revenue, Wis. Stats. § 66.0601 et seq.; local government purchasing, Wis. Stats. § 66.0131; interest on late payments, Wis. Stats. § 66.0135. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-747. - Fiscal year. 
    The calendar year shall be the fiscal year of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 3.03) 
Sec. 2-748. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    Upon recommendation of the committee of the whole, the council may, at any time by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership, transfer any portion of an unencumbered balance of an appropriation to any other purpose or object. Notice of the transfer shall be given by publication within ten days thereafter in the official city newspaper as required by Wis. Stats. § 65.90(5)(a). 
(Code 1993, § 3.05) 
Sec. 2-749. - Expenditure of city funds. 
    No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as authorized in this article. At the close of each fiscal year, any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation, but appropriations may be made by the council to be paid out of the income of the current year in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within the year, and any appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned. 
(Code 1993, § 3.06(1)) 
Sec. 2-750. - Signing of orders. 
    All order checks drawn on the city treasury shall be signed by the city treasurer, city clerk and mayor or their respective designees. 
(Code 1993, § 3.06(2)) 
Secs. 2-751-2-768. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PAYMENT OF CLAIMS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Claims and actions, Wis. Stats. § 62.25. 

Sec. 2-769. - General procedure. 
(a)  Certification. Prior to submission of any account, demand or claim to the city council for approval of payment, the committee of the whole shall certify by indicating its approval on each claim that funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget, the item or service was authorized by the proper official or agency and has been received or rendered in accordance with the purchasing agreement, and the claim is accurate in amount and a proper charge against the treasury. 
(b)  Report to city council. At the next regular meeting of the city council, the committee of the whole shall present to the city council its report as to claims allowed. The city council may approve or reject the report in whole or in part and may approve the payment of additional accounts, demands and claims. However, no account, demand or claim shall be allowed by the city council until it has been reviewed by the committee of the whole. No regular monthly account, demand or claim against the city, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be paid unless it has been allowed by the city council by approval of the committee of the whole's report or other action of the council. The city clerk shall mark each account, demand or claim not approved with the appropriate legend. 
(Code 1993, § 3.02(1), (2)) 
Sec. 2-770. - Alternative procedure. 
    Should it be deemed necessary that payments be made from the city treasury other than designated in section 2-769, the council may authorize that those payments may be made weekly only after the city administrator audits and approves each claim as a proper charge against the treasury and endorses his approval on the claim after having determined: 
(1)  That funds are available pursuant to the budget approved by the governing body. 
(2)  That the item or service covered by the claim has been duly authorized by the proper official, department head, board or commission. 
(3)  That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered in conformity with the authorization. 
(4)  That the claim is just and valid pursuant to law. The city administrator may require the submission of the proof and evidence to support the foregoing as in that officer's discretion may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1993, § 3.02(4a)) 
Sec. 2-771. - Wages and salaries. 
    Regular wages or salaries of city officers and employees shall be paid by payroll, verified by the proper city official, department head, board or commission and filed with the city accounting department in time for payment on the regular payday. 
(Code 1993, § 3.02(3)) 
Sec. 2-772. - Monthly list of claims. 
    A monthly list of all claims that are paid pursuant to this article shall be provided to the committee of the whole for approval. Said list shall show the date paid, name of claimant, purpose and amount. The monthly resolution submitted to the city council for approval that authorizes payment of bills shall include the total of payments made during that month that were authorized by the city administrator under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 3.02(4b)) 
Sec. 2-773. - Annual audit. 
    The common council of the city shall authorize an annual detailed audit of its financial transactions and accounts by a public accountant licensed under state law and designated by the governing body. 
(Code 1993, § 3.02(4c)) 
Secs. 2-774-2-799. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUDGET PROCEDURE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Budgets, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.12(2), 65.90. 

Sec. 2-800. - Departmental estimates. 
    On or before October 1 of each year, each officer, department or board shall file with the city administrator an itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties of the officer or department during the preceding fiscal year, a detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision of the officer or department during the year and of the condition and management of the fund, and also detailed estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year. Such statement shall be presented in the form prescribed by the city administrator, shall be designated by the term "departmental estimates," and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main divisions of all departments. 
(Code 1993, § 3.04(1)) 
Sec. 2-801. - Consideration and recommendation. 
    The committee of the whole shall consider the departmental estimates in consultation with the city administrator and shall then determine the total amount to be recommended in the budget for the department or activity. 
(Code 1993, § 3.04(2)) 
Sec. 2-802. - Proposed budget. 
    If possible, on or before October 28 each year, the committee of the whole shall prepare and submit to the city council a proposed budget presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the city for the ensuing calendar year. In lieu of a committee of the whole proposed budget, an executive budget prepared by the city administrator shall be presented to the council. The council shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the prepared budget for distribution to citizens. 
(Code 1993, § 3.04(3a), (3b)) 
Sec. 2-803. - Contents of proposed budget. 
    The budget shall include the following information: 
(1)  Anticipated expenses. The expense of conducting each department and activity of the city for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increases and decreases recommended as compared with appropriations for the current year. 
(2)  Anticipated income. An itemization of all anticipated income of the city from sources other than general property taxes and bond issues, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and fiscal years. 
(3)  General property tax revenues. An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes that, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
(4)  Other information. Such other information as may be required by the council and by state law. 
(Code 1993, § 3.04(3c)) 
Sec. 2-804. - Hearing. 
    The committee of the whole shall submit to the council at the time the annual budget is submitted the draft of an appropriate resolution providing for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. Upon the submission of the proposed appropriation resolution to the council, it shall be deemed to have been regularly introduced therein. The council shall hold a public hearing on the budget and the proposed appropriation resolution as required by law. Following the public hearing, the proposed appropriation resolution may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the council as other resolutions. 
(Code 1993, § 3.04(4)) 
Secs. 2-805-2-831. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ETHICS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Ethics for public officials generally, Wis. Stats. § 19.41 et seq.; code of ethics for local government officials and employees, Wis. Stats. § 19.59. 

Sec. 2-832. - Declaration of policy. 
    Where government is based on consent of the governed, every citizen is entitled to have complete confidence in the integrity of government. Public officials and employees must help earn, preserve and honor that trust by their integrity and conduct. In recognition of these goals there is hereby established a code of ethics for all city officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of all city boards, commissions and committees. 
(Code 1993, § 1.08(1)) 
Sec. 2-833. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appointed official means any officer of the city appointed pursuant to the authority set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.09 who is compensated for official services to the city; any appointed member of a city board, commission or committee serving with compensation; city agency heads and their designated deputies. 
    Business means a corporation, partnership, proprietorship, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual or any legal entity engaged in profit-making activities. 
    Candidate for elective office means any individual who is required to file nomination papers and register with the city clerk as a candidate for elective office pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 8.10. 
    Declaration of economic interest means the statement prescribed by and filed with the city ethics board pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
    Economic interest means any of the economic interests defined in Wis. Stats. § 19.44. 
    Elected official means any official of the city serving in an elective office established pursuant to or under the authority of Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 
    Employee means any individual, other than an agency head and his designated deputy, who is employed by the city and receives a salary or wages for work performed on either a parttime or fulltime basis. The term shall apply to all individuals classified as temporary, probationary or permanent employees of the city. 
    Immediate family means the parent, stepparent, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsister, grandparent, parent-in-law, spouse, child, stepchild, son-in-law or daughter-in-law of an appointed or elected official. 
    Official, as used in this article, includes both elected and appointed officials, as defined herein. 
(Code 1993, § 1.08(2)) 
Sec. 2-834. - Official misconduct. 
(a)  State law prohibitions. Wis. Stats. §§ 946.10 to 946.17 prohibit certain forms of conduct on the part of all public officials and employees and provide for the imposition of criminal penalties upon conviction for engaging in prohibited forms of conduct. Each city official and employee will be provided with a copy of these statutes by the city clerk upon taking office or entering employment. 
(b)  Gifts and favors. No official or employee shall accept any gift or favor, whether an article of value, loan, service or promise, from any individual, business or group which has either a direct or indirect interest in a matter pending before the city council, a board, commission, committee, city agency or office. Nor shall any official or employee accept any gift or favor that may tend to influence the discharge of their responsibilities or duties. 
(c)  Representing private interests. No official or employee, whose salary is paid in whole or in part by the city, shall appear in behalf of private interests before any board, commission, committee or agency of the city or in any litigation to which the city is a party except when subpoenaed as a witness by a party involved in the litigation. A member of the council may appear before a board, commission, committee or agency in behalf of constituents, providing no compensation is paid or gratuity provided to that member contingent upon a specific outcome in a matter of interest to a constituent. 
(d)  Substantial or controlling contractual interest. Any official or employee having a substantial or controlling financial interest in any business entity seeking or securing a contract with the city, or in the sale of real estate, vehicles, equipment, supplies, materials or services to the city, shall make the interest known in writing to the ethics board. The ethics board shall provide this information to the council and the city agencies affected. A member of the council with an interest shall ask to be excused from voting on or otherwise participating in the matter while it is before the council or one of its committees. 
(e)  Private interest in legislative matter. A member of the council who has a financial or other private interest in any legislative matter introduced for consideration before the council shall disclose the interest to the presiding officer and members of the council at the time the matter is introduced and shall ask to be excused from voting on or otherwise participating in the matter while it is before the council or one of its committees. A member of a city board, commission or committee who has a financial or other private interest in any matter on which the body is expected to act shall disclose the interest to the body at the time the matter is introduced and shall ask to be excused from voting on or otherwise participating in the matter while it is before the body. 
(f)  Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or permit the use of city-owned buildings, facilities, vehicles, equipment, materials or other city property for personal convenience or profit, except when the services are available to the public generally and except where otherwise authorized by action of the council. 
(g)  Use of information. No official or employee shall make use of or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, information not made available to the public. 
(h)  Political activity. No employee shall, during the hours in which they are performing responsibilities and duties as a city employee, engage in any activity calculated to benefit a political party, partisan or nonpartisan organization, campaign committee or candidate seeking to influence the outcome of an election or referendum. This prohibition extends to the direct or indirect solicitation of campaign contributions, including in-kind contributions, and the use of city owned buildings, facilities, vehicles, equipment, materials or other city property to influence the outcome of an election or referendum. 
(i)  Outside employment. No employee shall engage in any outside employment that might result in a conflict or the appearance of a conflict between the private interests of the employee and the employee's duties and responsibilities as a city employee. 
(Code 1993, § 1.08(3), (4)) 
Sec. 2-835. - Employee protection; untrue statements and prohibited disclosure. 
(a)  No appointing authority, agent of an appointing authority or supervisor may initiate or administer or threaten to initiate or administer any retaliatory action against a city employee following an employee's disclosure of information related to the violation of any federal or state law, city ordinance, rule or regulation, the mismanagement or abuse of authority, a substantial waste of public funds or a danger to public health and safety. 
(b)  Nothing in this section restricts the right of the city as an employer to take appropriate disciplinary action against an employee who knowingly makes an untrue statement or discloses information, the disclosure of which is specifically prohibited by federal or state law, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1993, § 1.08(8)) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOL BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcohol beverages, Wis. Stats. ch. 125; local option, Wis. Stats. § 125.05. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cabaret means a place to which the general public is admitted and where entertainment, such as singing, vaudeville or dancing, is furnished to patrons by the management, with or without special charge, and where alcohol beverages are sold. 
    Conditional renewal means a renewal of a license subject to specified conditions as determined by the committee of the whole and approved by the common council. Such conditions shall be made with the intention of promoting and ensuring the compliance of the license holder to the provisions of this chapter and Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
    Offenses which substantially relate to the circumstances of the licensed activity shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Any nonfelony alcohol-related conviction or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
(2)  A history of nonfelony alcohol-related convictions as long as the most current conviction or arrest is within the last 24 months. 
(3)  Any nonfelony drug related convictions or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
(4)  Any nonfelony conviction or pending charges within the last 12 months which involve resisting arrest, battery to a police officer or obstructing justice in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
(5)  Two or more nonfelony convictions or pending charges in the last 24 months for disorderly behavior type offenses if they occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
(6)  One or more felony convictions in the last five years involving alcohol, drugs or other behavior if it occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
(7)  Any other arrest or conviction that is reasonably determined to be substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity. The reasons for such a determination shall be stated in writing with particularity by the governing body making said determination. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5), (7)-(9); Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 1, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-2. - Adoption of state law. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125 relating to intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages, inclusive of any provisions thereof relating to the penalty to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section by reference. A violation of any such provisions shall be a violation of this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the state statutes are incorporated herein and are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation in the area of intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(1)) 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation, Wis. Stats. § 125.10. 
Sec. 4-3. - Summary abatement procedure; disorderly houses; imminent health hazard. 
(a)  Duty to maintain order. A licensee under this section shall have the duty to maintain order and peace in and around the licensed premises and to maintain such premises in compliance with all applicable municipal and state codes dealing with building and health requirements. This duty shall include any premises specifically identified on the license or used in conjunction with the licensed premises. 
(b)  Police power to close licensed premises. The police department may order any disorderly house closed until 8:00 a.m. the following day when in the reasonable view of the department the licensee or person in charge has failed to maintain peace and order as per subsection (a) of this section or the department otherwise believes the public safety is served by such closing by reason of threat to the bodily security, property or peaceful repose of any member of the public. 
(c)  Building and health department authority to summarily abate public health and safety nuisances. In their capacity as agents to the department of health and social services or the department of industry, labor and human relations, the health inspector or building inspector may order the temporary suspension of a restaurant or beverage license issued under this chapter where imminent health or safety hazards exist on a licensed premises pending a hearing pursuant to state administrative code procedures. Such closing may act as grounds for suspension or revocation of liquor licenses issued under this chapter. 
Secs. 4-4-4-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-23. - Controlling provisions. 
    Applicants for and holders of alcohol beverage licenses within the city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and chapter 12, pertaining to businesses and business regulations, in addition to all other applicable city, state, and federal laws. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and general business licensing and regulation provisions, the specific shall prevail over the general, and the more stringent provision shall apply. 
Sec. 4-24. - License required. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall distribute, vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale, deal or traffic in or for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage or cause the same to be done without having procured a license or permit as provided in this chapter or without complying with all the provisions of this chapter and all statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and city applicable thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(2)) 
Sec. 4-25. - Classes of licenses. 
    There shall be the following classes of licenses which, when issued by the city clerk under the authority of the city council after payment of the fee specified in this article, shall permit the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 125.17, 125.25, 125.26, 125.28 and 125.51. 
(1)  Class A fermented malt beverage retailer's license. 
(2)  Class B fermented malt beverage retailer's license. 
(3)  Wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license. 
(4)  Temporary class B retailer's license. A single license may be issued to eligible organizations pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6). 
(5)  Special wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license. 
(6)  Class C wine license. A class C license authorizes the retail sale of wine by the glass or in opened original container for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(7)  Operator's license. 
(8)  Retail class A liquor license. 
(9)  Retail class B liquor license. 
(10)  Class A liquor license for sales limited to cider. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(3); Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 2, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-26. - Limitation on number of licenses. 
(a)  Class B retail liquor licenses shall be limited as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4). 
(b)  Class A retail liquor licenses shall be limited to a total number of 13 issued in the city. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(4); Ord. No. 2012-10-08-D, § 1, 10-9-2012) 
Sec. 4-27. - Application for licenses identified in section 4-25. 
(a)  Form of sworn application. All applications, except for operator's licenses, shall be made in writing on the form prescribed by the state department of revenue and shall be sworn to by the applicant as provided by Wis. Stats. § 887.01. 
(b)  Filing. The application shall be filed with the city clerk not less than 15 days before the next meeting of the committee of the whole. 
(c)  Contents of application. The premises shall be physically described on the application to include every room and storage space to be covered by the license, including all rooms not separated by a solid wall or joined by connecting entrances. 
(d)  Publication costs. Each application shall be accompanied by the cost of publication required by Wis. Stats. § 125.04(3)(g) and shall be published as therein prescribed. 
(e)  Council approval required. Unless otherwise designated, licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the city clerk only with approval of the common council. Opportunity shall be given by the committee of the whole and the common council to any person to be heard for or against the granting of any license. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(a); Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 3, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-28. - License fees. 
    The application for license hereunder shall be accompanied by a license fee in the amount established by the city council. Regardless of time of application, there shall be no proration of fees for wholesaler's fermented malt beverage licenses, special wholesaler's fermented malt beverage licenses, or temporary class B retailers' licenses. The fee for all other new licenses issued pursuant to this chapter, after July 1 of each year shall be prorated on the basis of the number of months or fractions thereof remaining in the licensing year. Fees for operator's licenses, which expire June 30 of even-numbered years, are pro-rated according to the schedule set by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 12.16) 
Sec. 4-29. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  Notice of hearing. Each applicant shall be notified of the date and time the committee of the whole shall consider the application. Notification shall be deemed given upon hand delivery to the applicant or the mailing to the applicant's last known address. 
(b)  Effect of failure to appear. Failure to appear in person for the initial application will result in a negative recommendation. 
(c)  Review; recommendation. The committee of the whole shall, after interviewing the applicant or reviewing any other written documentation from the applicant, make recommendation to the common council to either grant or deny the license. 
(d)  Statement of denial. If the recommendation is to deny the application, a written statement of the reasons will be forwarded to the common council along with said recommendation. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(a)1) 
Sec. 4-30. - Inspections; investigation. 
(a)  Inspection. The city clerk shall notify the chief of police, chief of the fire department and building inspector of the application. Each official shall inspect the application and the premises to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. 
(b)  Report. These officials shall furnish to the committee of the whole and common council information derived from such investigation and a statement as to whether the applicant and the premises meet the requirements of the department for whom the officer is certifying. 
(c)  Applications for renewal. For all renewal applications, the police department shall report any and all major or minor violations of the licensed establishment as defined in this chapter. No recommendation shall be made by any official as to whether the application should be approved or denied. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(a)2; Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 4, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-31. - Qualifications for licensure. 
    A license for a premises may be denied unless the applicant: 
(1)  Has been a resident of the state for at least 90 days prior to applying for such license; 
(2)  Is at least 21 years of age; 
(3)  Has successfully completed a responsible beverage server training course pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5)(a)5; 
(4)  Provides documentary proof of his right to possession of the premises sought be to licensed upon request by the city; 
(5)  Provides proof under Wis. Stats. § 77.61(11) that he is the holder of a seller's permit or will be issued a seller's permit from the appropriate state agency; 
(6)  Does not have an arrest or conviction record of offenses that substantially relate to the circumstances of the licensed activity to include: 
a.  Any nonfelony alcohol-related conviction or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
b.  A history of nonfelony alcohol-related convictions as long as the most current conviction or arrest is within the last 24 months. 
c.  Any nonfelony drug related convictions or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
d.  Any nonfelony conviction or pending charges within the last 36 months which involve resisting arrest, battery to a police officer or obstructing justice in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
e.  Two or more nonfelony convictions or pending charges in the last 24 months for disorderly behavior type offenses if they occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
f.  One or more felony convictions in the last ten years involving alcohol or drugs. 
g.  Any other arrest or conviction that is reasonably determined to be substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity. The reasons for such a determination shall be stated in writing with particularity by the governing body making said determination. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(a)3; Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 5, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-32. - Delinquent obligations to city. 
(1)  No license authorized or required under this chapter shall be issued or renewed, unless the applicant shall have first settled any delinquent tax obligations, assessments or other fees owed to the city, as well as be brought into compliance with building, plumbing, electrical, zoning, health or fire codes at the time the license is to be granted or renewed. The city council shall not refuse to renew without first giving the applicant notice and a hearing as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.12. 
(2)  A delinquency on any obligation due and owing to the city and/or failure to remain in compliance with building, plumbing, electrical, zoning, health or fire codes shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license under this chapter. The city council shall not revoke or suspend a license without first giving the applicant notice and a hearing as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.12. 
(Code 1993, § 12.02(11)(c); Ord. No. 2011-07-08-D, § 1, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 4-33. - Location restrictions. 
    No retail class A or B license shall be issued for a premises when: 
(1)  It is located less than 300 feet from any established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. Such distance shall be measured via the shortest route along the highway from the closest point of the boundary of such school, hospital or church to the closest entrance to such premises. 
(2)  It fails to conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the state department of health and social services applicable to restaurants set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.68(5). 
(3)  It is intended to be used to sell intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages by drive-thru window. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(a)3.f) 
Sec. 4-34. - Issuance to agents. 
(a)  Prohibited. No class A or B license shall be issued to any person acting as agent for or in the employ of another. 
(b)  Exception. This restriction shall not apply class B licenses issued to a hotel or to a restaurant not a part of or located in or upon the premises of any mercantile establishment or to a bone fide club, society or lodge, labor union or ex-servicemen's post which has been in existence for not less than six months prior to the date of application or to a corporation as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.04(6). 
(c)  Issuance to certain agents; qualifications. A class B license for a hotel, restaurant, club, society, lodge, labor union or ex-servicemen's post or corporation issued pursuant to this chapter may be taken in the name of an officer or manager who shall be personally responsible for compliance with all the terms and provisions of this chapter. Such officers or managers shall have resided in the state for at least 90 days prior to applying for such license. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(a)5) 
Sec. 4-35. - Incomplete or false applications. 
    All alcohol license and operator applications submitted which are incomplete or which contain false or misleading information shall be given a negative recommendation unless the committee finds strong mitigating circumstances. If an applicant receives a negative recommendation because of an incomplete or false application, or if the city council denies a license, the applicant must wait six months before resubmitting an application. The chief of police shall also have the discretionary authority to refer any false application to either circuit court or municipal court for prosecution of the applicant. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(c); Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 6, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-36. - Amendments to applications. 
    Whenever anything occurs to change any fact set out in the application of any license, such licensee shall file with the issuing authority a notice in writing of such change within ten days after the occurrence thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(f)) 
Sec. 4-37. - Term; renewal applications. 
    All intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverage licenses issued hereunder shall expire on June 30. All renewal applications for said licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk on or before April 20 of the year the license is sought to be renewed and shall be reviewed under the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(g); Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 7, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-38. - Display of licenses. 
    Licenses for intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages shall be enclosed in a suitable wood or metal frame having a clear glass face and a substantial wood or metal back so that the whole is at all times displayed in a conspicuous place in the room where such business is carried on, except as provided by Wis. Stats. § 125.04(10). 
(Code 1993, § 12.02(9)) 
Sec. 4-39. - Demerit point system created. 
(a)  There is hereby established a point system for the purpose of guiding the city council on possible warnings, suspensions, non-renewals, or revocations of alcohol beverage licenses as well as operators licenses. The number of demerit points shall be assigned according to the type of violation. The system is intended to identify habitually troublesome liquor licensees who repeatedly violate state statutes and/or City of Tomah ordinances and to take consistent action against such licensees. 
(b)  Maintenance of demerit point document. After approval by the city council, the city clerk shall retain the demerit point document which describes violations, corresponding ordinance/law, and the demerit points to be assessed. This document may be amended by the city council and shall serve only as a guideline when a warning, suspension, non-renewal, or revocation of a license is being considered. 
(c)  Method of determination. In determining the accumulated points, the date of the violation is used as the basis for assigning the demerit points per incident. The chief of police or his designee will maintain incident reports and will provide a demerit point recommendation to the Committee of the Whole upon the accumulation of 150 or more demerit points within a rolling 12-month period. 
(d)  Point reduction program. During any demerit point counting period, a licensee may regain up to 50 demerit points for that period by successfully completing courses or programs sanctioned for that purpose by the city. The number of demerit points returned for each successfully completed course or program shall be determined by the committee of the whole subject to approval by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 8, 12-8-2015) 
Secs. 4-40-4-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROVISIONAL OPERATOR'S LICENSES 

Sec. 4-65. - Temporary operator's licenses prohibited. 
    No temporary operator's license as specified in Wis. Stats. § 125.17(4) shall be issued by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(d)) 
Sec. 4-66. - Issuance by city clerk. 
(a)  Application-Issuance to city clerk. All applications shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the city clerk and shall be sworn to by the applicant as provided by WI Stats. § 887.01. 
(b)  Qualifications and requirements for provisional and regular operator's licenses. The following requirements shall be met in order to qualify for a provisional or regular operator's license: 
(1)  The applicant has not previously been denied a license by the common council within the preceding six months. 
(2)  If required, the applicant has enrolled in a responsible beverage server training course pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.17(6) that is to be completed during the term of the provisional operator's license. Regular operator license applications will not be processed until proof of completion of the responsible beverage server training course is provided. 
(3)  The applicant has paid a fee as indicated on the schedule of fees adopted from time to time by resolution of the common council and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(4)  The application filed by the applicant does not include any incomplete, misleading or falsified information pertaining to either the identification of the applicant or to any event occurring within five years prior to the date of application. 
(5)  The application filed by the applicant does not disclose any of the following: 
a.  Any nonfelony alcohol-related conviction or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
b.  A history of nonfelony alcohol-related convictions as long as the most current conviction or arrest is within the last 24 months. 
c.  Any nonfelony drug related convictions or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
d.  Any nonfelony conviction or pending charges within the last 36 months which involve resisting arrest, battery to a police officer or obstructing justice in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
e.  Two or more nonfelony convictions or pending charges in the last 24 months for disorderly behavior type offenses if they occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
f.  One or more felony convictions in the last ten years involving alcohol or drugs. 
g.  Any other arrest or conviction that is reasonably determined to be substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity. The reasons for such a determination shall be stated in writing with particularity by the governing body making said determination. 
(6)  The applicant has no outstanding fines, forfeitures, penalties, assessments or user fees owed to the city. 
(7)  Provisional license. The city clerk may issue provisional operator's licenses in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 125.17(5). The applicant must receive approval of the city police department prior to the issuance of a provisional operator's license. A provisional license may not be issued to any person(s) who has had his/her operator's license revoked or suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(c)  The provision set forth in section 4-36 shall also apply to operator's licenses. 
(d)  Term; renewal application. Operator licenses will expire on June 30 of even numbered years and shall also be reviewed prior to renewal under the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(c)1; Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 9, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-67. - Referral to the committee of the whole; hearing; recommendation. 
    If an applicant for a provisional or operator's license fails to meet all of the qualifications and requirements set forth in section 4-66, the applicant may submit a written request for an appeal to the committee of the whole for consideration at its next meeting. Provided however, if the committee of the whole and common council denies the license upon such appeal, the entire application fee will become nonrefundable. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(c)2; Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 10, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-68. - Transfer; expiration. 
    A provisional operator's license is not transferable from person to person. A provisional operator's license shall automatically expire 60 days after it is issued or when the operator's license is issued. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(c)3, 4) 
Sec. 4-69. - Revocation. 
    The city clerk may revoke a provisional license if the clerk discovers the applicant has made false statement on the application. The city clerk shall revoke a provisional license if the applicant fails to successfully complete the responsible alcohol beverage server training course. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(5)(c)5, 6) 
Secs. 4-70-4-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OUTDOOR FACILITIES LICENSE 

Sec. 4-97. - Approval required. 
    Any retail class B license issued shall limit and restrict the consumption of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 125 to the building premises so defined on the liquor license application unless, prior to the application of a liquor license or renewal thereof, approval has been obtained from the plan commission for an outdoor facility. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(6)(a)) 
Sec. 4-98. - Application; site plan. 
    The application to the plan commission shall be accompanied by the application fee established by the city council, together with a site and landscape plan of the entire parcel showing the outdoor facility, designating its location with respect to the main premises and other buildings on the site, designating entrances and exits of both the main structure and outdoor facility, and the location of the outdoor facility with respect to buildings on adjoining sites. The application shall also include such other information as the plan commission may require to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(6)(b)) 
Sec. 4-99. - Requirements and guidelines for outdoor facilities. 
(a)  Requirements: 
(1)  Entrance and exits. The normal entry and exit should be from inside the building. However, an entrance and exit must be available from the outdoor facility. The fire department and building inspector shall review the entrance and exit systems to ensure that the same are code compliant. In addition, the entrance and exit from the site shall have an alarm system meeting the requirements of the building inspector and chief of police to ensure that the staff inside the parent building will be immediately notified if the entrance or exit has been utilized. 
(2)  Use of right-of-way; setback. No outdoor area shall be located on a dedicated public right-of-way or within 20 feet thereof. Exceptions may be requested for those lots not able to accommodate the 20-foot minimum setback requirement. 
(3)  Video monitoring. An operating video camera monitoring system shall be installed in the outdoor area. 
(4)  Fencing and lighting. The outdoor area shall be enclosed with a fence. The requirements for location, height and style shall meet the minimum requirements as directed by the building inspector and chief of police after due consideration is made to the site location and any other pertinent factors specific to the site. 
(b)  Guidelines: The plan commission shall consider the following guidelines when reviewing an application for an outdoor facility: 
(1)  Location. In the event the location of the outdoor area is within 300 feet of property zoned residential, conditions shall be instituted to ensure that such area does not significantly compromise the uses, values and enjoyment of such residential property within the neighborhood of the proposed site. 
(2)  Overall appearance and size. The overall appearance must meet the downtown standards requirements if applicable or otherwise required by the plan commission. The outdoor area must be patrolled for trash and cleaned on a daily basis. 
(3)  Tables, chairs and trash receptacles. A seating plan shall be submitted and reviewed by the plan commission. The building inspector and/or fire chief shall provide a calculated occupant load for the area. The occupant load shall be clearly posted. Trash receptacles will be required. 
(4)  Liquor availability. The availability of liquor shall be consistent with liquor license of applicant. The liquor license must be amended to include the outdoor area as part of the premises. 
(5)  Surface and materials. The outdoor area should be on a hard surface; however, exceptions may be granted upon approval by the Plan Commission and after due consideration is made to the site location and any other pertinent factors specific to the site. Any and all building materials for structures thereon shall meet the requirements of the plan commission. 
(6)  Hours of operation. An outdoor facility shall only be operated during the hours as designated per Wisconsin State Statute for Class B alcohol beverage licenses. 
(7)  Noise restraint. Efficient means shall be employed to prevent the ordinary sound of music, dancing, singing or entertainment within the outdoor facility from being heard on adjoining premises or on the public street, and no unusually loud music, singing or entertainment or any boisterousness or noisy conduct on the part of the patrons shall be permitted. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(6)(c); Ord. No. 2014-02-03-D, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 2018-08-07-D, § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 4-100. - Public hearing; notice. 
    The plan commission shall conduct a public hearing and make a recommendation to the city council. Notice shall be given by ordinary mail of the proposed establishment of an outdoor facility to the owners of property immediately adjacent to the area to be considered for the new use extending 300 feet therefrom and to the owners of properties extending 300 feet from the street frontage of the opposite property and also by a class I publication in the official newspaper. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(6)(d)) 
Sec. 4-101. - Recommendation to council. 
    After hearing, the plan commission shall make a recommendation to the city council. The recommendation shall recommend either approval without special conditions, approval with special conditions (taking into consideration the above guidelines), or denial. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(6)(d)1-3) 
Sec. 4-102. - Determination by council. 
    Upon recommendation from the plan commission, the city council shall consider the application and any special conditions recommended by the plan commission. If final approval is granted by the city council, a special use permit shall be issued with any restrictions stated thereon. Any violation of the stated restrictions shall subject the special use permit to automatic revocation without further notice or public hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(6)(e)) 
Secs. 4-103-4-132. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CABARET LICENSES 

Sec. 4-133. - Required. 
    No person shall keep, maintain, conduct or operate any cabaret as defined below without first obtaining a cabaret license. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(7)(a)) 
Sec. 4-134. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a cabaret license shall present to the city clerk his application in writing giving the location of the premises to be licensed by legal description, name of the owner of the premises, name of the lessee, if any, name of the person proposing to operate the cabaret, name of the manager to be in charge of the cabaret, description of other businesses to be conducted upon the licensed premises and a statement of the length of time the owners and managers of the proposed cabaret have resided in the city, together with their employment or occupation for the past two years. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(7)(c)) 
Sec. 4-135. - Procedure; discretion of council. 
    The application for a cabaret license shall be processed in accordance with the procedure set forth in article II of this chapter. In reviewing the application for licensure, the council shall have discretion to refuse the granting of any license if such license shall be against the public interests, because of the unsuitability of the location, undesirability or unreliability of the applicant or his manager or because of the failure of such applicant or his manager to observe the provisions of this division in the prior conduct of a cabaret, dance hall, tavern or other similar place. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(7)(g)) 
Sec. 4-136. - Issuance of license; transferability. 
    A license shall be granted to each applicant who shall be approved by a majority vote of the council and shall be issued by the city clerk and contain with particularity a description of the premises licensed and the name and address of the licensee. The licenses shall be numbered consecutively beginning with the number one in each year and such license shall be posted conspicuously in the premises licensed at all times when they shall be in use. No cabaret license shall be transferable as to location or ownership. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(7)(e)) 
Sec. 4-137. - Cabaret regulations. 
    All licensed cabarets shall comply with the following regulations, failure of which may result in revocation of the cabaret license: 
(1)  Noise restraint. Efficient means shall be employed to prevent the ordinary sound of music, dancing, singing or entertainment within the cabaret from being heard on adjoining premises or on the public street, and no unusually loud music, singing or entertainment or any boisterousness or noisy conduct on the part of the patrons shall be permitted. 
(2)  Lighting. Cabarets shall be well lighted at all times when any patrons are within and at all times when the same is open to the public. 
(3)  Operating hours. The opening and closing of cabarets shall be governed by existing opening and closing of class B combination and class B fermented malt beverage licensed premises. 
(4)  Restricted entry. No minor under the age of 18 years shall be permitted in any cabaret, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. No prostitute, procurer or vagrant shall be permitted upon the premises of any cabaret. 
(5)  Intoxicated persons. No intoxicated person shall be permitted to remain in any cabaret and no person bordering on intoxication shall be served with any beverage containing alcohol or be permitted to dance in any cabaret. 
(6)  Obscene behavior. No entertainment or dancing shall be permitted which shall be vulgar, suggestive, licentious or offensive to public morals and decency. 
(7)  Exits. There shall be in every cabaret premises not less than two exit doors leading to the outside and opening outwardly. 
(8)  Sale of products restricted. The sale, service or consumption of commodities for which licenses are otherwise required shall not be permitted in any cabaret, unless the proper license therefore are obtained for such premises in the name of the owner or manager of such cabaret. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(7)(h)) 
Sec. 4-138. - Violations and enforcement. 
    Refusal by any person in a cabaret to comply with the reasonable efforts of the proprietor to comply with the provisions of this division shall be deemed a violation and subject to penalty hereunder, as shall refusal of any person to comply with directions of the police department, sheriff or deputy sheriff, constable or any dance inspector in efforts to enforce the provisions of this division in any cabaret. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(7)(h)) 
Secs. 4-139-4-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-160. - Conditions of licensure. 
    All licenses granted pursuant to this chapter are subject to continued compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other regulations imposed by the city including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Consent to inspection and search. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to the entry of police or other authorized representatives of the city at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search; consents to the removal from such premises of all things and articles there had in violation of city ordinances or state laws; and consents to the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be bought for such offenses. 
(2)  Sale to intoxicated person prohibited. No licensee or his agent or employee shall sell, vend or give away any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages to any person intoxicated or bordering intoxication. 
(3)  Health rules. Each licensed premises shall be maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and proper place for the purpose for which used. 
(4)  Required presence on premises. There shall be, upon premises operated under a retail class A or class B liquor license or a class A or class B fermented malt beverage license, at all times a person who shall be responsible for the actions of all persons serving as waiters or in any other manner any fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors to customers. The person shall be either the licensee, a member of licensee's immediate family of legal drinking age, or a person who has a valid operator's license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(5)  Acting as bartender. No person other than the licensee shall draw from the original container intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages or in any other manner act as bartender, unless the person is a member of the licensee's immediate family of legal drinking age, has an operator's license pursuant to this chapter, or is at least 18 years of age and under the immediate supervision of the licensee, permittee, agent or a person holding an operator's license, which supervisory person is on the premises at the time of service. 
(6)  Orderly premises. Each licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises. 
(7)  Dancing. Dancing is prohibited on all licensed premises, except where a cabaret license has been issued. 
(8)  Drive-thru sales prohibited. No premises for which a license has been issued hereunder shall be permitted to sell intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages from drive-thru windows at any time. 
(9)  Disorderly conduct prohibited. No licensee, either personally or through his agent or employee, shall permit any patron to participate in any act, stunt or dance in violation of the provisions of this division. 
(10)  Off-premises sales and consumption prohibited. With the exception of licensed outdoor facilities, all purchases of alcohol or fermented malt beverages by the glass or in open containers shall be consumed on the licensed premises where served and shall not be removed to thoroughfares, streets, or sidewalks in the business district of the city as defined in the building and land use regulations of this Code. No person shall consume or possess in open containers any alcohol or fermented malt beverages on any thoroughfare, street or sidewalk in the business district. 
(11)  Sale of intoxicating liquor in original package or container. Pursuant to Wisconsin § 125.51(3)(b) retail "Class B" licensees are hereby authorized to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package or container, in multiples not to exceed four liters, at any one time, and to be consumed off the premises where sold. The paragraph does not apply to a winery that has been issued a "Class B" license. 
(12)  Discontinuing or abandoning the use of a licensed premises for a period of 90 days. Any licensee holding a license to sell alcohol beverages who discontinues, abandons or fails to pay the appropriate license fees, such business or premises shall forfeit any right or preference he may have to the holding of or renewal of such license. Discontinuation, abandonment, failure to open for business within 90 days of the granting of such license, or failure to pay appropriate license fees shall be sufficient grounds for non-renewal or revocation of an alcohol beverage license unless otherwise authorized by the common council or as provided by state law. The closing of the licensed premises for at least 90 days shall be prima facie evidence of abandonment 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(8)(a)1-8; Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 11, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-161. - Hours of operation. 
    No premises for which a license has been issued hereunder shall be permitted to remain open for the sale of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages, either by the glass or by the package, at the following times: 
(1)  Wholesaler license. Sales are permitted between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on Saturday when closing hour shall be 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  Retail class A license. No sale of intoxicating liquor between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and no sale of fermented malt beverages between midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  Retail class B license. The closing hours during which no patron or guest shall be permitted to enter or remain on the licensed premises, except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, shall be as follows: 
a.  On Saturday and Sunday, between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
b.  On weekdays, between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
c.  On January 1 of each year, no closing. 
(4)  Hotels and restaurants, the principal business of which is the furnishing of food or lodging to patrons, shall be permitted to remain open for the conduct of their regular business, but shall not be permitted to sell intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages during the hours prohibited in subsection (3) of this section, pertaining to retail class B licenses. 
(5)  Recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, bowling alleys, indoor horseshoe pitching facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and golf clubhouses, shall be permitted to remain open for the conduct of their regular business, but shall not be permitted to sell intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages during the hours prohibited in subsection (3) of this section, pertaining to retail class B licenses. 
(6)  Drugstores and grocery stores. Drugstores and grocery stores shall be permitted to remain open, but shall not be permitted to sell any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages during the hours prohibited in subsection (2) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(8)(a)9; Ord. No. 2011-12-09-D, § 1, 12-15-2011) 
Secs. 4-162-4-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINORS 

Sec. 4-191. - Sales prohibited. 
    No person shall sell, dispense, give or furnish any fermented malt beverage to anyone underage when not accompanied by parent, guardian or spouse of legal drinking age. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(8)(d)1) 
Sec. 4-192. - Presence prohibited. 
    No licensee shall permit an underage person not accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse who has not attained the legal drinking age to enter or remain on any premises for which a license for retail sale of alcohol beverages has been issued, except as permitted under Wis. Stats. § 125.07(3). 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(8)(d)2) 
Sec. 4-193. - Defenses. 
    In determining whether a licensee has violated this division, all relevant circumstances surrounding the presence of the underage person or the procuring, selling, dispensing or giving away of alcohol beverages may be considered. In addition, proof of all of the following facts by seller of alcohol beverages to an underage person is a defense to any prosecution for a violation of this division: 
(1)  The purchaser falsely represented that he had attained legal drinking age. 
(2)  The appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent person would believe that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age. 
(3)  The sale was made in good faith and in reliance on the representation and appearance of the purchaser in the belief that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age. 
(4)  The underage person supported representation of age with documentation that he had attained the legal drinking age. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(8)(d)3) 
Sec. 4-194. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 12, adopted Dec. 8, 2015, repealed former § 4-194 in its entirety which pertained to vicarious liability of owner and defenses and derived from the Code of 1993, § 12.03(8)(e). 
Secs. 4-195-4-211. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 4-212. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the city by attempting to minimize, prevent and control the increase of criminal and other offensive activity, the disruption of peace and order in the community, the depreciation of real property value and the harm to the quality of life and economic welfare of the community which tend to be generated from bars and taverns in which live, total nude, non-obscene, erotic dancing occurs. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(8)(b)1(a)) 
Sec. 4-213. - Prohibited conduct. 
    It is unlawful for any person to perform or engage in, or for any licensee or manager or agent of the licensee to permit any person, employee, entertainer or patron to perform or engage in any live act, demonstration or exhibition on the premises of a licensed establishment which: 
(1)  Shows his genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering; 
(2)  Shows any portion of the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(3)  Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(8)(b)1(b)) 
Sec. 4-214. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article do not apply to the following licensed establishments: theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion of, employees engaging in nude erotic dancing. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(8)(b)1(c)) 
Secs. 4-215-4-236. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NON-RENEWAL, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION 

Sec. 4-237. - Grounds for non-renewal, suspension and revocation. 
    The license of any person issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to non-renewal, suspension or revocation for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A history of nonfelony alcohol-related convictions as long as the most current conviction or arrest is within the last 24 months. 
(2)  Any nonfelony drug related convictions or pending charges within the last 12 months. 
(3)  Any nonfelony conviction or pending charges within the last 36 months which involve resisting arrest, battery to a police officer or obstructing justice in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
(4)  Two or more felony convictions or pending charges in the last 24 months for disorderly behavior type offenses if they occurred in direct connection to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment. 
(5)  One or more felony convictions in the last ten years involving alcohol or drugs. 
(6)  Any other arrest or conviction that is reasonably determined to be substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity. The reasons for such a determination shall be stated in writing with particularity by the governing body making said determination. 
(7)  Failing to possess the qualifications required to obtain a license under this chapter or state law. 
(8)  Knowingly allowing another person, who is on the premises for which the license under this chapter is issued, to possess, with the intent to manufacture, distribute or deliver, or to manufacture, distribute or deliver a controlled substance or controlled substance analog as defined in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(4) and (4m). 
(9)  Accumulation of a sufficient amount of demerit points under the Alcohol Demerit Point Schedule. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(9)(b); Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 13, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-238. - Conditional renewal. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall limit the ability of the conditional renewal of a license. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(9)(c); Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 14, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-239. - Procedure. 
    The nonrenewal, suspension, revocation or conditional renewal of a license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure established by Wis. Stats. § 125.12. For procedural purposes, a conditional renewal shall be treated as a nonrenewal. 
(Code 1993, § 12.03(9)(d); Ord. No. 2015-12-08-D, § 15, 12-8-2015) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANCES AND DANCE HALLS 

Sec. 6-19. - License required. 
    No person or organization shall keep, maintain, conduct or operate any public dance hall or place for holding public dances without first securing a license therefor. This license shall expire December 31 each year. 
(Code 1993, § 12.09(1)) 
Sec. 6-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public dance means a dance that is or may be attended or patronized by the public generally, either with or without tickets or charge of admission. 
    Public dance hall means any room, place or space in which a public dance or public ball may be held. 
(Code 1993, § 12.09(2)) 
Sec. 6-21. - Application for license. 
    A license shall be required for any public dance. Application for permit shall be made to the city clerk, on the form provided by the clerk, and shall be submitted to the clerk together with the permit fee established by the city council. Licenses shall be issued at least five days in advance of each dance or on an annual basis for a term not to exceed one year. 
(Code 1993, § 12.09(4)) 
Sec. 6-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-06-06-D, § 1, adopted June 14, 2011, repealed § 6-22 which pertained to dance inspector and derived from the Code of 1993, § 12.09(3). 
Sec. 6-23. - Restrictions on licenses. 
    No license for a public dance hall shall be issued until it shall be found that such hall complies with and conforms to all ordinances and health and fire regulations of the city, that it is properly ventilated and supplied with sufficient toilet conveniences and is a safe and proper place for the purpose for which it is intended to be used. 
(Code 1993, § 12.09(5)) 
Sec. 6-24. - Investigation. 
    The city clerk shall refer all applications for dance hall licenses to the chief of police who shall investigate or cause to be investigated each application to determine whether the dance hall sought to be licensed complies with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto and in making such investigation the chief of police shall, when desired, have the assistance of the building inspector and the fire chief. The chief of police shall furnish to the council in writing the information derived from such investigation accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused. No license shall be renewed, except after a reinspection of the premises. 
(Code 1993, § 12.09(6)) 
Sec. 6-25. - Issuance of license. 
    The council shall consider each application and, upon approval thereof, the city clerk shall issue a license authorizing the holder to keep, maintain, conduct and operate a public dance hall or place for holding public dances at the place to be specified in the license. Such license shall be posted at all times by the licensee in a conspicuous place in the dance hall or place for holding public dances specified in the license. 
(Code 1993, § 12.09(6)) 
Sec. 6-26. - Operating rules and regulations. 
    The following rules and regulations shall govern the conduct, operation and management of all public dance halls for which a license has been issued: 
(1)  Public dances shall be discontinued and public dance halls closed for the night no later than 1:00 a.m. 
(2)  The participation in a public dance of persons under the influence of liquor or drugs shall not be permitted. 
(3)  All dances held after dark shall be kept well and sufficiently lighted at all times. 
(4)  All public halls shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthy and sanitary condition and all stairways and other passages and all rooms connected with the dance hall shall be kept open and well lighted. 
(5)  The owners or agents of private dance halls shall see that all rules and regulations are followed at their dance halls. 
(Code 1993, § 12.09(7)) 
Sec. 6-27. - Revocation of license. 
    Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the city council as follows: 
(1)  The council shall cause to be served on the licensee a notice specifying how the licensee has failed to comply with this chapter. 
(2)  The notice shall require the licensee to appear before the city council or a committee thereof at a specified day and hour not less than ten days after personal service of the notice on the licensee, to show cause at such time and place why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(3)  At the time and place set for appearance of the licensee before the council, the licensee shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel and introduce such evidence as he may desire and the city shall confront the licensee with any charges the city may have against him. 
(4)  After the hearing the council may, at its discretion, revoke or suspend the license. 
(Code 1993, § 12.09(a)) 
Secs. 6-28-6-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 6-58. - License required. 
    No person shall possess any amusement device that is operated for amusement or gain in any public place within the city without first having obtained a license therefor. The term "amusement device" as herein used shall include all coin-operated or currency-operated machines. The provisions set forth in chapter 12, article II, shall apply to such licenses. 
(Code 1993, § 12.10(1)) 
Secs. 6-59-6-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAMING TABLES AND BOWLING ALLEYS 

Sec. 6-77. - License required. 
    No person shall erect, place or keep or permit to be erected, placed or kept upon his premises any bowling alley, nine-pin or ten-pin alley, billiard table, pool table or other table wherein balls are played or any objects are rolled, slid or thrown, used or kept for hire and to be used for any compensation or to be used with or without compensation in any building where liquor is sold without having first obtained a license therefor. Every billiard or other table or bowling alley or nine-pin or ten-pin alley so kept or placed or permitted to be kept or placed upon any premises without a license therefor shall constitute a separate offense under the provisions of this section. The provisions set forth in chapter 12, article II, shall apply to such licenses. 
(Code 1993, § 12.11(1)) 
Sec. 6-78. - Gambling prohibited. 
    No person who has a license under this article shall permit any gambling for money or other valuable thing on any table or alley kept by him. 
(Code 1993, § 12.11(3)) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS AND FOWL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means mammals, reptiles, and birds. 
    Cat means any feline, regardless of age or sex, including domestic, wild or hybrids. 
    Cruel means causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering, or unjustifiable injury or death, including but not limited to failing to provide adequate food and water; failing to detect the need for or withholding veterinary care; creating or allowing unhealthful living conditions, infliction of suffering, injury, or death to an animal by striking, beating, dropping, kicking, dragging, choking, or by the use of an object or weapon; causing pain, injury or death by means of caustic, flammable, boiling, or heated substances; causing suffering, injury or death by suffocation or drowning, failure to provide health-related grooming, failure to provide shade from sun or shelter from extreme temperatures. 
    Dog means any canine, regardless of age or sex. 
    Owner means any person owning, harboring, or keeping a dog or cat. The occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or to which a dog or cat customarily returns daily for a period of ten days is presumed to be harboring or keeping the dog or cat within the meaning of this chapter. 
    Running at large means an animal that is on any of the public ways of the city or property, public or private, other than the premises of its owner, without the permission of the property owner, unless the animal is in the immediate control of the owner, his agent, or a member of his family over 12 years of age either by leash, chain or cord of not more than six feet in length. However, if the animal is tied or staked upon any open or unfenced lot or land within the city, the animal shall be tied or staked in a manner so as to prevent the animal from getting on, across, or within six feet of any walking path, walking trail, sidewalk, street, alley, park or other public property. 
    Veterinarian means a person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
    Vicious animal means any animal that, when unprovoked, bites, injures kills or attacks a human being or domestic animal on either public or private property. An animal shall specifically not be declared vicious if: 
(1)  Death, injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time thereof, was committing a trespass of the land or criminal trespass of the dwelling upon premises occupied by the owner of the animal; 
(2)  Death, injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time thereof, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime or violating or attempting to violate an ordinance which protects persons or property; 
(3)  Death, injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal that, at the time thereof, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal; 
(4)  The animal was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault; or 
(5)  The animal was acting in the capacity of a law enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes while under the control and direction of a law enforcement officer or agent. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(1); Ord. No. 2011-01-11-05D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
Secs. 8-2-8-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 8-23. - Vaccination-Required. 
    The owner of a dog or cat or ferret shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian within 30 days after the animal reaches five months of age. If the owner obtains the dog or cat or ferret, or brings the animal into the city after the animal has reached six months of age, the owner shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies within 30 days after the animal is brought into the city unless the animal has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies vaccination. The owner of a dog or cat or ferret shall have the animal revaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian before the date the immunization expires as stated on the certificate of vaccination or, if no date is specified, within three years after the previous vaccination. The certificate of vaccination shall meet the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2). 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-05D, § 2, 1-11-2011) 
Sec. 8-24. - Same-Certificates. 
(a)  Issuance. The veterinarian who vaccinates a dog, cat, or ferret against rabies shall complete and issue to the owner a certificate of rabies vaccination bearing a serial number and in the form approved by the city, stating the owner's name and address, the name, sex, spayed or unspayed, neutered or unneutered, breed and color of the dog or cat or ferret, the date of the vaccination, the type of rabies vaccination administered and the manufacturer's serial number, and the date the immunization expires as specified for that type of vaccine by the U.S. Center for Disease Control. No license shall be issued to a dog or cat without proof of a rabies vaccination. 
(b)  Certificate copies. The veterinarian shall keep a copy of each certificate of rabies vaccination in a file maintained for such purpose until the date that the immunization expires or until the dog or cat or ferret, is revaccinated, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-05D, § 3, 1-11-2011) 
Sec. 8-25. - Same-Tags. 
(a)  Form of tag. After issuing the certificate of rabies vaccination, the veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies vaccination tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the certificate, the year the vaccination was given, and the name, address and telephone number of the veterinarian. 
(b)  Duplicate tags. The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination tag with a new serial number to an owner in place of the original tag upon presentation of the certificate of rabies vaccination. The veterinarian shall then indicate the new tag number on the certificate and keep a record of such duplicate tag in the file. 
(c)  Substitute tags. The owner of a dog or cat may, at the owner's discretion, utilize a substitute rabies vaccination tag. The substitute tag shall be of a durable material and contain the same information as the original rabies vaccination tag. 
(d)  Attachment of tag to collar. If the rabies tag is issued for a dog or cat, the owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or a substitute tag to a collar, and a collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat at all times, except when the animal is: 
(1)  Competing in an animal show or competition; 
(2)  Securely confined indoors; or 
(3)  Under the control of its owner during training or competition. 
Secs. 8-26-8-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-54. - Trapping. 
(a)  Prohibited. In the interest of public health and safety, it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to set, place or tend any trap for the purpose of trapping, killing, catching, or wounding any animal, except by use of live box type traps only. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "live box type traps" means traps that capture and hold an animal in an alive and unharmed condition. 
(b)  Exceptions. Any person requiring deviations from this section must receive written approval from the city. Approved traps set, placed or tended on city-owned land shall comply with Wis. Stats. ch. 29, as such chapter relates to trapping. 
(c)  Nonapplicability to city officials and employees. Nothing in this section shall prohibit or hinder the city or its employees or agents from performing their official duties. 
Sec. 8-55. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to permit such animal to be at large. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "at large" means that such animal is off the premises of its owner or keeper and upon any public street or alley, school ground, public park or any other public or private property without the permission of the owner of the property; provided, however, an animal shall not be deemed to be at large if it is: 
(1)  Attached to a leash not more than ten feet in length, or a retractable leash which is of sufficient strength to restrain the animal; the leash is held by a person at least 12 years of age and physically able to control the animal; and the leash prevents the animal from annoying or worrying pedestrians or trespassing on private property or public property where animals are forbidden; or 
(2)  Properly restrained within a motor vehicle. 
Sec. 8-56. - Neglected, abandoned, and injured animals. 
(a)  Abandonment prohibited. No person may abandon any animal. For the purposes of this section, abandonment is defined as the presence of an animal in an environment where the animal is separated from basic needs such as food, water, shelter or necessary medical attention, for a period of longer than 24 hours. This includes depositing, leaving, dropping off or otherwise disposing of any live domestic animal on any public or private property. 
(b)  Proper medical care required. No person who owns, harbors or keeps any animal shall fail to provide proper medical attention to such animal when and if such animal becomes sick or injured. If the owner of such animal cannot be located, the city or any animal control agency with which the city has an agreement or contract shall have the authority to take custody of such animal for the purpose of providing medical treatment, and the owner thereof shall reimburse the person or organization for the costs of such treatment. 
(c)  Removal; notice to owner. Any law enforcement officer may remove, shelter and care for an animal found to be cruelly exposed to the weather, starved or denied adequate water, neglected, abandoned or otherwise treated in a cruel manner, and may deliver such animal to an approved facility to be sheltered, cared for and given medical attention, if necessary. In all cases, the owner, if known, shall be immediately notified and may be cited. 
(d)  Disposition of animals. If the owner or custodian is unknown and cannot, with reasonable effort, be ascertained or does not, within seven days after notice, redeem the animal by paying the expenses incurred, it may be treated as a stray and dealt with as such. 
(e)  Killing of animal by law enforcement authority. Whenever an animal is hopelessly injured or diseased so as to be beyond the probability of recovery, it shall be lawful for such officer to kill the animal and the owner thereof shall not recover damages for the killing of such animal unless he shall prove that such killing was unwarranted. The officer will attempt to contact a veterinarian prior to killing any such animal to ascertain if said animal could recover if it receives appropriate medical attention. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-05D, § 4, 1-11-2011) 
Sec. 8-57. - Animal care. 
    No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any animal may fail to provide the animal with proper shelter as prescribed in this section. With regard to animals maintained or confined within the corporate limits of the city, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Indoor standards. Minimum indoor shelter standards shall include the following: 
a.  Ambient temperatures. The ambient temperature shall be compatible with the health of the species concerned. 
b.  Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated by natural or mechanical means to provide for the health of the animals at all times. 
(2)  Outdoor standards. Minimum outdoor shelter standards shall include the following: 
a.  Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion of an animal, sufficient shade, accessible during all daylight hours, by natural or artificial means, shall be provided to protect the animal from direct sunlight. 
b.  Shelter from inclement weather. 
1.  Animals generally. Natural or artificial shelter, appropriate to the local climatic conditions for the species concerned, shall be provided, as necessary, for the health of the animal. 
2.  Dogs. If a dog is tied or confined unattended outdoors under weather conditions which adversely affect the health of the dog, a shelter of suitable size to accommodate the dog shall be provided. 
(3)  Space standards. Minimum space requirements for both indoor and outdoor enclosures for animals other than dogs shall include: 
a.  Structural strength. The housing facilities shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury and to contain the animals. 
b.  Space requirements. Enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space may be indicated by evidence of debility, stress or abnormal behavior patterns. 
c.  Dog tethering restrictions. 
1.  Extreme weather. No dog shall be tethered outside in the case of extreme weather, weather advisory, or when a dangerous storm is approaching. No dog shall be tethered outside when temperatures reach above 85° [Fahrenheit] and below 35° Fahrenheit. 
2.  Unsafe and unsanitary conditions. No dog will be tethered in unsafe or unsanitary conditions, which includes allowing the animal sufficient area to defecate or urinate in an area separate from the areas where it must eat, drink, and lie down. 
3.  Monitoring of animal. A tethered dog should be in direct control of and obedient to the owner or keeper, or in close visual range and no person under the age of 12 should be left in charge of the animal. 
4.  Tether weight. It is prohibitive to use a tether weighing more than 15 percent of the dog's weight. 
5.  Nighttime tethering restrictions. No dog shall be tethered outside between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
6.  On-off daytime tether ratio 4:1. No dog will be tethered for more than four consecutive hours without being provided a minimum of one hour off-tether for exercise and socialization. 
7.  Attachment restrictions. No person shall tether, fasten, chain, tie, or restrain a dog to any dog house, tree, fence, wall, or other stationary object under circumstance that may endanger its health, safety, or well-being. No dog shall be attached to a motor vehicle. 
8.  Tether construction. The tether must be of light-weight cable or chain, be of adequate strength to hold the size of the dog, and each end must have a swivel to prevent entanglement. 
9.  Tether length. The length of the tether must be at least four times the length of the dog as measured from the tip of its nose to the base if its tail, or 12 feet in length, whichever is longer. 
10.  Entanglement. The tether should be positioned so as to not become entangled with other objects that may cause strangulation or the dog's inability to reach food, water and shelter. 
11.  Access to food, water, shade, and shelter. The tether length will allow the dog unencumbered and convenient access to edible food, potable water, shade, dry ground, and shelter. 
12.  Collars. Collars cannot be completely made of metal and must be a buckle-type nylon/leather material; prong, pinch, or choke collars are prohibited; collars must fit properly; leather collars must be a minimum of one inch in width for larger dogs and the strength and width appropriate for smaller dogs. 
13.  Age. No puppy/dog under the age of five months can be tethered. 
14.  Neutering and spaying. This section prohibits the tethering of a dog that has not been spayed or neutered. 
15.  Trespassing on private or public land. The tethered dog shall be placed so that it cannot trespass on neighboring properties or encroach upon public thoroughfares. 
16.  Adjacent to other dogs. No dog shall be tethered that comes closer than three feet from another dog, and only one animal can be placed on each line. 
17.  Sick or injured. No dog should be tethered who is sick and/or injured. 
18.  Vicious or dangerous dogs. May not be tethered outside under any circumstances. 
19.  Training or treadmill devices. No dog should be tethered outside to a training or treadmill device. 
20.  Height of attachment. No tether shall be attached to any building or device higher than seven feet in height. 
21.  Obstructions and obstacles to tether. The inside of the tether circumference shall be clear of any obstacles and be positioned to as not become entangled with other objects that may cause strangulation or inability to reach food or shelter. 
(4)  Sanitation standards. Minimum standards of sanitation shall include weekly cleaning to remove excreta, other waste materials, dirt and trash so as to minimize health hazards. 
(5)  Specific housing requirements for dogs. The minimum requirements for a doghouse shall be as follows: 
a.  The floor shall rest on an enclosed base, four inches in height. 
b.  The height of the doghouse shall be at least four inches above the height of the occupant dog. 
c.  The length and width of the doghouse shall be of such dimensions that the occupant dog can lie flat on its side on the floor. 
d.  The doghouse shall have a tight floor which is covered with soft, clean bedding safe for a pet. 
e.  The roof and sides of the doghouse shall be constructed so as to be waterproof and windproof. 
f.  A baffle shall be placed over the door in inclement weather. A baffle shall consist of some material or structure that will protect the occupant dog from direct exposure to the elements of weather. 
g.  The doghouse and run shall be located at least 15 feet from the owner's lot line. 
h.  Shade from the direct rays of the sun in the months of June-September, inclusive, shall be provided in the area of the doghouse. 
i.  The area around the doghouse shall be reasonably dry, without standing water or mud, and shall be kept reasonably clean. 
j.  The minimum outdoor dog run enclosure size shall be four feet by six feet, and shall be of a height and strength sufficient to contain the dog. 
k.  The minimum allowable tie out length is 12 feet. The end of the tie out shall be a minimum of six feet from any sidewalk. 
l.  An animal carried in the bed of a truck must be crated or restrained upon a nonmetal mat so that it cannot fall or jump from the truck or be strangled. 
m.  No animal may be left or confined in an unattended motor vehicle under conditions that endanger the health or well-being of an animal due to heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, or lack of food or water, or other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death to the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-05D, § 5, 1-11-2011) 
Sec. 8-58. - Vehicle accidents. 
    The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to, or death of, a domestic animal which appears to be a pet shall immediately notify the owner of the animal, if known, and the city police department. 
Sec. 8-59. - Liability of owner for damages caused by animals. 
    The owner or person responsible for supervision and confinement of an animal shall be responsible for any damages caused by the animal. Liability for damages shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for violation of this chapter or state or federal law. This section shall not apply to police dogs acting in the line of duty. 
Sec. 8-60. - Animals prohibited from food-handling establishments. 
    No person shall take or permit to remain any dog, cat or other live animal on or upon any premises where food is sold, offered for sale or processed for consumption by the general public. This section shall not apply to guide dogs or other medical service dogs or animals when in service. 
(Code 1993, § 11.04(2)) 
Sec. 8-61. - Housing of farm and exotic animals prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. No farm or exotic animal shall be housed, quartered, stabled, pastured, kept, or in any manner maintained within the city limits except temporarily during special events or as otherwise specifically approved by the city council. 
(b)  Applicability. The animals prohibited by this section include, but are not limited to, horses, ponies, mules, cows, sheep, goats, llamas, pigs (including potbellied pigs), chickens and roosters, geese, ducks, peacocks, ostriches, and any other farm or exotic animals. The animals prohibited by this section also include any animal, other than domestic dogs and cats, that in wild state are carnivorous or that, because of their nature or physical makeup, are capable of inflicting physical harm on human beings or property, including, but not limited to, animals that belong to the cat family, snakes (either poisonous or that otherwise present a risk of physical harm to human beings as a result of their nature or physical makeup, including constrictors), bears, wolves, wolverines, badgers, lions, tigers and any hybrids of the same. 
(c)  Exception. This section shall not apply to animals that are housed, quartered, stabled, pastured, kept, or in any manner maintained within the city limits as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived by the city council; provided, however, that the exception granted herein shall terminate immediately upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  Transfer of ownership of the real property, by sale or otherwise, of the property upon which the animal is housed; 
(2)  Transfer of ownership of the animal that is subject to this exception, whether by sale or otherwise; 
(3)  Death of the animals existing on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived and subject to this exception; and 
(4)  Acquisition by the owner of an animal subject to this exception of one or more additional prohibited animals. 
The application of this exception to a specific property due to preexisting use shall not be construed so as to authorize the acquisition of additional prohibited animals but shall permit continued use only until the property or animal is sold or the animal dies. Violation of this section shall result in immediate termination of the exception. 
(Code 1993, § 11.04(3)(a)) 
Sec. 8-62. - Riding of horses restricted. 
    No horse shall be ridden on Superior Ave. between Washington St. and Elizabeth St. except in parades or by specific permission of the chief of police. 
(Code 1993, § 11.04(3)(b)) 
Sec. 8-63. - Pigeons prohibited. 
    The city deems it necessary to regulate the keeping of pigeons within the city to promote the peace, comfort and welfare of all city residents. For purposes of this section, the term "pigeon" means a member of the family Columbidae, including any and all varieties and breeds. No person shall keep, maintain, raise or harbor pigeons within the city. 
(Code 1993, § 9.19) 
Sec. 8-64. - Leading animal from motor vehicle. 
    No person shall lead any animal upon a highway from a motor vehicle or from a trailer or semitrailer drawn by a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-04D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
State Law reference- Wis. Stats. § 951.04. 
Sec. 8-65. - Use of poisonous and controlled substances. 
    No person may expose any domestic animal owned by another to any known poisonous substance, any controlled substance included in schedule I, II, III, IV or V of [Wis. Stats.] ch. 961, or any controlled substance analog of a controlled substance included in schedule I or II of [Wis. Stats.] ch. 961, whether mixed with meat or other food or not, so that the substance is liable to be eaten by the animal and for the purpose of harming the animal. This section shall not apply to poison used on one's own premises and designed for the purpose of rodent or pest extermination nor to the use of a controlled substance in bona fide experiments carried on for scientific research or in accepted veterinary practices. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-04D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
State Law reference- Wis. Stats. § 951.06. 
Sec. 8-66. - Instigating fights between animals. 
(1)  No person may intentionally instigate, promote, aid or abet as a principal, agent or employee, or participate in the earnings from, or intentionally maintain or allow any place to be used for a cockfight, dog fight, bullfight or other fight between the same or different kinds of animals or between an animal and a person. This section does not prohibit events or exhibitions commonly featured at rodeos or bloodless bullfights. 
(2)  No person may own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that the animal be engaged in an exhibition of fighting. 
(3)  If a person has been convicted under subsections (1) or (2) of this section, the person may not own, possess, keep or train any animal for a period of five years after the conviction. In computing the five-year period, time which the person spent in actual confinement serving a criminal sentence shall be excluded. The person may move the sentencing court to have this requirement waived. The court may waive the requirement except that the waiver may not authorize the person to own, possess, keep or train animals of the species involved in the offense under subsections (1) or (2) of this section. 
(4)  No person may intentionally be a spectator at a cockfight, dog fight, bullfight or other fight between the same or different kinds of animals or between an animal and a person. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-04D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
State Law reference- Wis. Stat. §§ 951.08(1), (2), (2m), (3). 
Sec. 8-67. - Shooting at caged or staked animals. 
(a)  No person may shoot, kill, or wound with a firearm, or with any deadly weapon, any animal that is tied, staked out, caged or otherwise intentionally confined in an artificial enclosure, regardless of size. Whoever is concerned in the commission of a violation of this section is a principal and may be charged with and convicted of the violation although he or she did not directly commit it and although the person who directly committed it has not been convicted of the violation. 
A person is concerned in the commission of a violation of this section under par. (a) if the person does any of the following: 
(1)  Instigates, promotes, aids, or abets the violation as a principal, agent, employee, participant, or spectator. 
(2)  Participates in any earnings from the commission of the violation. 
(3)  Intentionally maintains or allows any place to be used for the commission of the violation. 
(b)  This section does not apply to any of the following animals: 
(1)  A captive wild bird that is shot, killed, or wounded on a bird hunting preserve licensed under Wis. Stats. § 169.19. 
(2)  Farm-raised deer, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 95.001(1)(ag). 
(3)  Animals that are treated in accordance with normally acceptable husbandry practices. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-04D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
State Law reference- Wis. Stats. §§ 951.09(1), (2)(a), (2)(b), (2)(b)1, (2)(b)2, (2)(b)3, (3), (3)(b), (3)(c), (3)(d). 
Sec. 8-68. - Harassment of police and fire animals. 
(1)  No person may do any of the following to any animal that is used by a law enforcement agency or fire department to perform agency or department functions or duties: 
a.  Frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse or harass the animal. 
b.  Strike, shove, kick or otherwise subject the animal to physical contact. 
c.  Strike the animal by using a dangerous weapon. 
(2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to any of the following: 
a.  Any act that is performed by or with the authorization of the animal's handler or rider. 
b.  Any act that is necessary for the training of an animal to perform functions or duties for a law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-04D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
State Law reference- Wis. Stats. §§ 951.095(1), (1)(a), (1)(b), (1)(c), (2), (2)(b). 
Sec. 8-69. - Harassment of service dogs. 
(a)  Any person may provide notice to another person in any manner that the latter person's behavior is interfering with the use of a service dog and may request that the latter person stop engaging in that behavior. No person, after receiving a notice and request under par. (a) regarding a service dog, may do any of the following: 
(1)  Recklessly interfere with the use of the service dog by obstructing or intimidating it or otherwise jeopardizing its safety or the safety of its user. 
(2)  Intentionally interfere with the use of the service dog by obstructing or intimidating it or otherwise jeopardizing its safety or the safety of its user. 
(3)  No person may recklessly allow his or her dog to interfere with the use of a service dog by obstructing or intimidating it or otherwise jeopardizing its safety or the safety of its user. 
(4)  No person may intentionally allow his or her dog to interfere with the use of a service dog by obstructing or intimidating it or otherwise jeopardizing its safety or the safety of its user. 
(5)  No person may recklessly injure a service dog or recklessly allow his or her dog to injure a service dog. 
(6)  No person may intentionally injure a service dog or intentionally allow his or her dog to injure a service dog. 
(7)  No person may recklessly cause the death of a service dog. 
(8)  No person may intentionally cause the death of a service dog. 
(9)  No person may take possession of or exert control over a service dog without the consent of its owner or user and with the intent to deprive another of the use of the service dog. 
(b)  Reference to statutes. References to specific statutory sections wherever used in [this article] shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes 2007-2008 as from time to time amended, modified, repealed or otherwise altered by the state legislature. 
(c)  Severability. If any section or part of [this article] is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of [this article] shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-04D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
State Law reference- Wis. Stats. 951.097(1)(a), (1)(b), (1)(b)1, (1)(b)2, (2), (2)(a), (2)(b), (3), (3)(a), (3)(b), (4), (4)(a), (4)(b), (5). 
Sec. 8-70. - Unlawful public sales of animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade, barter, lease, rent, give away or display for a commercial purpose a live animal, including dogs and cats, as well as birds and reptiles, along the roadside, public right-of-way, commercial parking lots, private property, or at an outdoor special sale, swap meet, flea market, garage or yard sale, parking lot sale or similar event within the city. 
This section does not apply to: 
(1)  An event, such as the county fair, animal exhibitions or shows, 4-H activities, and other activities or events that are regulated by other state departments or county agencies; 
(2)  A tax-exempt nonprofit organization founded for the purpose of providing humane sanctuary or shelter for abandoned or unwanted animals; 
(3)  Retail sales on the premises of a licensed pet store. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01-11-04D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
Secs. 8-71-8-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VICIOUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 8-85. - Confinement. 
    Every owner or caretaker of a vicious animal as defined in section 8-1, while the animal is off the owner's or caretaker's property, shall securely confine the animal indoors or keep the animal in a secured, enclosed, and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons and to prevent the animal from escaping. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(6)) 
Sec. 8-86. - Restraint. 
    Every owner or caretaker of a vicious animal as defined herein, while the animal is off the owner's or caretaker's property, shall muzzle the animal and restrain the animal by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding four feet in length and under the control of a responsible adult. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent the animal from biting or injuring any person or animal. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(6)) 
Sec. 8-87. - Insurance required. 
    Every owner or caretaker of a vicious animal as defined herein must provide evidence to the city that he has in full force and effect a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, providing liability insurance in the amount of not less than $100,000.00 for bodily injury and accidental death protection for injury to any one person and $100,000.00 for property damage protection for any one accident or incident. Each liability insurance policy shall contain a provision obligating the insurer to give the city written notice of cancellation not less than ten days prior to the date of any cancellation. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(6)) 
Secs. 8-88-8-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 8-118. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, or keep any dog or cat that: 
(1)  Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley, or highway in the city; 
(2)  Assaults or attacks any person in the city; 
(3)  Runs at large within the limits of the city; 
(4)  Habitually barks, cries, or howls to any annoyance of any person; 
(5)  Attacks, kills, or wounds any domestic animals; 
(6)  Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been bitten by an animal known to have been infected with rabies; 
(7)  Goes upon public or private lands or premises without the permission of the owner of such premises and damages any property in any manner whatsoever; 
(8)  Defecates or urinates on another person's property; 
(9)  The use of spring-poles and spring-pole training is expressly prohibited in the city. This includes any device, whether manufactured or homemade, used as a training tool with any breed of dog. 
(10)  Has dangerous propensities or has evidenced a disposition to attack human beings or domestic animals, except police dogs under the supervision and control of a police officer pursuant to authorization by the chief of police. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(2); Ord. No. 2011-01-11-05D, § 6, 1-11-2011) 
Sec. 8-119. - Limitation on number of cats and dogs. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The keeping of more than two dogs, or more than six cats or two dogs and four cats older than five months within the city for more than 30 days of time detracts from, and in many instances, is detrimental to, healthful and comfortable life in such areas. The keeping of a large number of animals, therefore, is declared a public nuisance. 
(b)  Number restriction. No owner or household shall own, harbor, or keep in its possession more than six animals over the age of five months, not to include more than two dogs, on any city lot, land, parcel, or dwelling unit if in a multiple building. This restriction shall not apply to bona fide animal hospitals in which the dogs and cats are confined, or litters of pups or kittens that may be kept for a period of time, not to exceed five months from birth. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(3); Ord. No. 2011-01-11-05D, § 7, 1-11-2011) 
Sec. 8-120. - Dog or cat bites. 
    Every owner or person harboring or keeping a dog or cat who knows that such dog or cat has bitten any person shall immediately report such fact verbally and in writing to the police department, and shall keep such dog or cat quarantined for not less than 14 days or for such period of time as the city police department shall direct. The owner or keeper of any such dog or cat shall surrender the dog or cat to the city police department upon demand for examination. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(4)) 
Sec. 8-121. - Vaccinations required. 
    No dog or cat or ferret shall be kept within the city unless the person owning, harboring, or keeping the dog or cat or ferret furnishes proof upon demand that the dog or cat or ferret has received its rabies vaccination as required by law or is less than five months of age. Upon the failure to provide such proof upon demand, the city police department may impound said dog or cat or ferret and shall release the same to its owner only after the required vaccinations have been arranged for by the owner at the owner's expense. The requirements of this section are in addition to those provisions of this chapter regarding rabies vaccination. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(5); Ord. No. 2011-01-11-05D, § 8, 1-11-2011) 
Sec. 8-122. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to own, harbor, or keep any dog or cat more than five months of age without a license. If the dog or cat is more than five months of age on January 1 of any year or reaches five months of age within the license year, or within 30 days from the date such dog becomes five months of age, the owner or caretaker shall obtain a city/county license. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(8)) 
Sec. 8-123. - General licensing procedure. 
(a)  Issuance by city. The owner or caretaker of a dog or cat that is required by the provisions of this article to be licensed shall make application to the city treasurer, on the form provided by the city/county, shall present proof of the vaccination required hereunder, and shall pay the license fee established by the common council by resolution. 
(b)  Issuance by authorized veterinarians. As an alternative, the license required pursuant to this section may be obtained from any local veterinarian who has been authorized by the city to issue licenses, pursuant to the program approved by the city council and developed by the city, through the city treasurer and the county. 
(c)  Term; fee proration; refunds. Dog and cat licenses shall be renewable annually, and shall expire on December 31 of each year. There shall be no proration of fees for licenses issued for less than one year. There shall be no refund of fees by reason of sale, transfer, death, or other transfer of the licensed animal. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(8); Res. of 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 8-124. - Collar; removal prohibited. 
    The owner of every dog and cat shall place and keep on the dog or cat an issued license tag bearing license number and current year of issuance. No person, except the owner or his authorized agent, shall remove a dog or cat collar containing the name of the owner and license number of the dog or cat. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(9)) 
Secs. 8-125-8-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 8-149. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to any animal, which may be impounded upon occurrence of any one of the following conditions: 
(1)  Any animal in violation of this chapter. In addition to any penalty provided for violation of this chapter, the city police department may impound any animal that habitually is in violation of subsections 8-118(1)-(10). Any animal that violates subsections 8-118(1)-(10) and has been apprehended by a citizen shall be turned over to the city police department for proper disposition. 
(2)  Animals running at large. Any animal running at large in violation of this article shall be impounded. When it is not possible or feasible to catch an animal running at large, and the owner of the animal is known, the owner may be prosecuted. 
(3)  Dangerous animals. Any animal that, in the opinion of the chief of police, or his/her designee, poses an immediate threat to persons, animals, or property, shall be impounded or, if necessary for protection of the public health and welfare, in the sole discretion of the chief of police, or his/her designee killed. 
(4)  Rabid animals. Any animal that has or may have been exposed to rabies shall be quarantined as per state statute. Release of any animal so quarantined shall not occur until, in addition to other requirements contained herein, a licensed veterinarian certifies that the animal is free of rabies and no danger to the community. Wis. State § 95.21(4)(a) states as follows: Quarantine or sacrifice of dog or cat. Except as provided in par. (d), an officer shall order a dog or cat quarantined if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person, is infected with rabies or has been in contact with a rabid animal. If quarantine cannot be imposed because the dog or cat cannot be captured, the officer may kill the animal. The officer may kill a dog or cat only as a last resort or if the owner agrees. The officer shall attempt to kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. 
(5)  Other animals. The chief of police, or his/her designee may, in his discretion, impound any animal found within the boundaries of the city that he believes poses a threat to the health and general welfare of the community or to any person, animal, public property, or private property. 
(Code 1993, § 12.04(7); Ord. No. 2011-01-11-05D, § 9, 1-11-2011) 
Secs. 8-150-8-152. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-01-11-05D, § 10, adopted Jan. 11, 2011, repealed §§ 8-150, 8-151, and 8-152, which pertained to notice to owner, redemption, and unclaimed animals, respectively and derived from the Code of 1993, § 12.04(7). For a complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Enforcement of building codes, Wis. Stats. § 62.17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons and property by plan review and inspection process so that the minimum standards for design, construction, structural strength, quality of material, adequate egress facilities, sanitary facilities, natural light and fire safety are adhered to. 
(Code 1993, § 14.02) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basement means a space of full story height below the first floor that is not designed or used primarily for yearround living accommodations. Space partly below grade which is designed and finished as habitable space is not basement space. 
    Building inspector means the building inspector of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Dwelling means any building that is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided temporary housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling. The term "dwelling" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling, forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. The term "dwelling unit" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by other recognized, legal pest elimination methods approved by the county health department. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking and consuming of food. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
    Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
    Occupant means any person living, sleeping, cooking, eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator means any person who has charge or care of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are offered for rent. 
    Ordinary minimum winter conditions means inside room temperature of 67 degrees Fahrenheit minimum. 
    Owner means any person who alone, jointly or severally: 
(1)  Has a legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; provided, whenever the dwelling or dwelling unit is subject to conditional sales contract lease with option to purchase or any other form of written contract under the terms of which any person is entitled to a conveyance of legal title upon payment of a specified sum, "owner" shall mean the person who shall have the contractual right, rather than the person holding the legal title; or 
(2)  Has charge or care of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, agent of the owner, as personal representative, administrator, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any person representing the owner shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as if he were the owner. Any person acting as the agent of the owner shall not be construed to be the owner within the terms of this chapter, but shall be bound to notify the owner, by means of a registered letter addressed to the owner at his last known address, of any order or notice to be issued by the building inspector relating to property of the owner. 
    Plumbing means all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washers, catchbasins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines. 
    Premises , when used herein, shall be construed as though followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating. The term "rooming unit" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. The term "roominghouse" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material; and paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter designed to be transportable, which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07) 
Sec. 10-3. - Authority of building inspector. 
    The building inspector may at all reasonable hours and with proper notifications or permission enter upon any public or private premises for inspection purposes and may require the production of a permit for any building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fence, swimming pool and antenna work. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any premises to the building inspector or his agent, with proper notification or permission, while in the performance of his duties as per Wis. Stats. § 66.05. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(7)(2)) 
Sec. 10-4. - Registration by contractors required. 
    All building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fencing, swimming pool and antenna contractors doing work within the city shall be registered with the city and shall file proof of liability insurance acceptable to the city. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(1)) 
Sec. 10-5. - Unsafe buildings. 
    Whenever the building inspector finds any building or part thereof within the city to be in his judgment so old, dilapidated or so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, he shall order the owner to raze or remove at the owner's option, the order and proceedings shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0413. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(8)) 
Sec. 10-6. - Building numbers. 
(a)  Generally. All buildings in the city shall be assigned a building number by the public works department. The assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the building. The assigned number shall be displayed in contrasting colors. The number shall be four inches or larger. 
(b)  Commercial buildings. Any commercial building with a public entrance fronting an alley shall display the building number at that location. The number shall be four inches or larger. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(9)) 
Sec. 10-7. - Procedure adopted. 
    Variances, appeals and determinations shall follow the procedures set out in Wis. Stats. ch. 8, Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 16, § Comm 20.19, § Comm 20.20, § Comm 20.21, § Comm 61.21, § Comm 61.22, and § Comm 82.20. 
(Code 1993, § 14.06) 
Secs. 10-8-10-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 10-33. - No permit if property in arrears. 
    No permit shall be issued for work on any property that has unpaid assessments and any other arrears due the city, unless other arrangements have been made for payment. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(11)) 
Sec. 10-34. - Individual and annual permits. 
(a)  Individual permits. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, permits are required for any building, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, plumbing, fencing, swimming pool, antenna and electrical work done within the city. Owner-occupants of one-family dwelling units shall be issued a permit to do work in their own dwelling unit without registering and showing proof of liability insurance. 
(b)  Annual permits. Annual permits shall be issued to any commercial establishment making application for same to do electrical, mechanical and plumbing installations and alterations upon property owned by that establishment, without taking out individual permits. One person shall be responsible to notify the building inspector to inspect each installation when it is completed. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(1)(b), (2)(b)) 
Sec. 10-35. - Inspections. 
(a)  Residential construction. Inspection shall be made at construction stages as required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 20 by a state-certified Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC) construction inspector employed by the city. 
(b)  Commercial building construction. Inspections shall be made at construction stages as required by Wis. Admin. Code § Comm 61.41 by a state-certified commercial building inspector employed by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(1)(e), (2)(e)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Approval of building plans required. 
    All building plans shall be approved by the building inspector and, when required, by the state. Two copies of approved plans shall be filed with the city. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(1)(d), (2)(c)) 
Sec. 10-37. - Term; fees. 
    Building permits shall expire 24 months after the date of issue, providing the work has commenced within six months of the date of issue. Fees as established by resolution of the city council shall be collected at the time the permit is issued. No permit fee will be charged when the work is done for the city. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(2), (3)) 
Sec. 10-38. - Revocation. 
    If the building inspector shall at any time find a violation of any ordinances, laws, orders, plans and specifications, and the holder of the permit refuses to conform after a written warning or instruction has been issued to him, the building inspector shall revoke the building, electrical, mechanical or plumbing permit by written notice posted at the site of the work. When the permit is revoked, no person shall do any further work thereunder until the permit is reissued, except that the work the building inspector may order to be done as a condition precedent to the reissuance of the permit or as the building inspector may require for the preservation of human life and safety or property. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(4)) 
Sec. 10-39. - Reports of violations. 
    Any person may report to the building inspector any work being done without proper permits. The building inspector shall investigate the report and take appropriate action if needed. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(5)) 
Sec. 10-40. - Records. 
    The building inspector shall keep a record of all permits, fees and inspections and make an annual report thereon to the city administrator. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(6)) 
Secs. 10-41-10-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 10-69. - Certificate required. 
    No new dwelling unit for which a building permit has been issued shall be occupied until a final inspection is conducted and an occupancy permit has been issued. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(f)) 
Sec. 10-70. - Final inspection. 
    A final inspection of all new buildings, additions and alterations shall be made by the department. If no violations of this chapter or any other law or ordinance be found, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued stating the purpose for which the building is to be used. No building or portion thereof shall be occupied until the certificate is issued, nor shall any building be occupied in any manner that conflicts with the conditions set forth in the certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(2)(g)) 
Sec. 10-71. - Unlawful use of building. 
    Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the department shall order the use or occupancy discontinued and the building or portion thereof vacated, by notice served on any person using or causing the use or occupancy to be continued, and the person shall vacate the building or portion thereof within ten days after receipt of the notice or shall proceed diligently to make the building or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(2)(g)(2)) 
Sec. 10-72. - Damaged and vacated buildings. 
    Any building, structure or premises, or any portion thereof, hereafter vacated or damaged by any cause whatsoever so as to jeopardize public safety or health, shall not be used or occupied under any existing certificate of occupancy or without the same, until an application has been filed and a new certificate of occupancy issued. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(2)(g)(2)) 
Sec. 10-73. - Change of use. 
    No person shall change the use of any building, structure, premises, or any part thereof, without first obtaining from the department an approval of the change and a certificate of occupancy therefor. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(2)(g)(3)) 
Sec. 10-74. - Exceptions. 
    The building inspector may permit the occupancy of any building or structure prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy in cases of hardship, as in his judgment warrant occupancy and the premises are determined to be safe and sanitary. The building inspector shall determine the time within which the building can be completed, but not greater than 60 days. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(2)(g)(4)) 
Secs. 10-75-10-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-92. - Grade elevation. 
    The foundation height for all new construction in the city shall be a minimum of 18 inches above the street grade. Any variance to the above requirement due to land topography shall be approved by the public works department and the building inspector. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(10)) 
Sec. 10-93. - Drain tile for basements and crawl spaces. 
    A drain tile system is required to be installed for all basements and usable crawl spaces. Drain tile systems shall be installed as per requirements in Comm 21 and Comm 82. A drain tile with a sock shall be used whenever sand is encountered. 
(Code 1993, § 14.03(13)) 
Sec. 10-94. - Extensive alteration or repair. 
    When an existing building is damaged by fire or other cause, or if alterations and repairs are made to an extent of 50 percent or more of the physical value of the building before the damage or alteration, the entire building or structure shall be made to comply with the requirements of this Code for new buildings. If the cost of the alterations or repairs is less than 50 percent of the physical value of the building, the inspection department shall determine to what degree the portions so altered or repaired shall be made to conform to the requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(1)(f)) 
Sec. 10-95. - Adoption of building regulations. 
(a)  One- and two-family dwelling units. The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, Chs. SPS 320-325 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, and all amendments thereto, is adopted and incorporated by reference and shall apply to all one- and two-family dwelling units and accessory buildings, including existing units. 
(b)  Commercial buildings. Chs. SPS 360-366 of the Wisconsin Commercial Building Code (Wis. Admin. Code § 361.01 et seq.), specifically including Wis. Admin. Code § 361.60(4) regarding certification of inspectors; are adopted and incorporated by reference and shall apply to all commercial buildings. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(1)(a), (2)(a); Ord. No. 2013-03-01-D, § 1, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 10-96. - Permitting and inspections. 
    The issuance of permits and building inspections shall be as set forth in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04) 
Secs. 10-97-10-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS 

Sec. 10-121. - Adoption of electrical regulations. 
    The city adopts Wis. Admin. Code chs. Comm 24, UDC Electrical; Comm 16, State Electrical Code and Commercial Electrical Inspections and Certification of Electricians and Inspectors. The city shall make application to inspect commercial electrical installations. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(3)(a)) 
Sec. 10-122. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. Permits are required for the installation of all new conductors and equipment that affect the ampacity, conductor size or load. A permit is not required for the replacement of switches, receptacles, light fixtures on existing boxes, circuit breakers and the repair of listed appliances. 
(b)  Temporary permits. A permit for temporary electrical work shall have a specified period of time for which the wiring is to remain in service. 
(c)  Emergency installations. Emergency work may be done before a permit is obtained. The person or contracting business will procure a permit, if required, as soon as possible or the next regular business day. 
(d)  Exceptions. In existing single-family dwelling units and accessory structures to the dwelling unit, a permit is not required for the installation of a new or extension of one branch circuit up to 50 amps, providing another permit has not been issued for that single-family unit or accessory structure. The owner or individual installing the electrical conductors and equipment shall take full liability for the installation. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(3)(b)-(e), (h)) 
Sec. 10-123. - Inspections. 
    Inspections shall be made by the state-certified electrical inspector in Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC) electric and commercial electric categories and shall be employed by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(3)(f)) 
Sec. 10-124. - Grounding. 
    The grounding of all electrical services within the city shall be to the municipal water system, provided the building has a metal water system. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(3)(g)) 
Sec. 10-125. - Load calculations. 
    Load calculations shall be submitted by the electrical contractor when the electrical inspector has reason to believe that the service or feeder is underrated. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(3)(i)) 
Secs. 10-126-10-148. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBING INSTALLATIONS 

Sec. 10-149. - Adoption of plumbing regulations. 
    The city has adopted Wis. Admin. Code chs. Comm 81-87, Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(4)(a)) 
Sec. 10-150. - Permits. 
    Permits are required for the installation of new plumbing pipes, fixtures and appliances. A permit is not required for the repair of leakages, stoppages and the replacement of fixtures on existing plumbing. The replacement of an existing water heater will not require a plumbing permit when the energy source is not changed. The installation shall be done by a state licensed plumber. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(4)(b), (4)(d)) 
Sec. 10-151. - Approval of plans required. 
    The plumber shall submit plans to the state for approval when Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 82 requires submittal. A copy of state-approved plans shall be filed with the city. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(4)(c)) 
Sec. 10-152. - Inspections. 
    Inspections shall be made at required stages of construction according to Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 20 for one-family and two-family dwellings by a state-certified plumbing inspector employed by the city. Inspection of commercial plumbing shall be done under the requirements set forth by Wis. Stats. § 145.05. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(4)(e)) 
Secs. 10-153-10-172. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS 

Sec. 10-173. - Adoption of mechanical regulations. 
    The city adopts Wis. Admin. Code chs. Comm 23, Uniform Dwelling Code, Comm 64 Commercial Building Code and Comm 45 Mechanical Refrigeration. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(5)(a)) 
Sec. 10-174. - Permits. 
    Permits are required for the installation of new equipment. Repair of listed equipment does not require a permit. The replacement of heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment will require a permit from the mechanical contractor only. All solid fuel heating appliances or fireplaces and waste oil heating appliances installed in existing buildings, which includes mobile homes, within the limits of the city shall require a permit and inspection. Any state-licensed HVAC contractor shall be issued a mechanical permit with approved plans when required. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(5)(b)) 
Sec. 10-175. - Approval of plans required. 
    State approved plans or letters are required when Comm 61.30 Commercial Building Code requires submittal. Two copies of state-approved plans shall be filed with the city. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(5)(c)) 
Sec. 10-176. - Inspections. 
    Inspections shall be made at installation stages as required for one-family and two-family dwellings per Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 20. Commercial installations shall be inspected per Wis. Admin. Code § Comm 61.41 by a state-certified commercial building inspector. Inspectors are to be employed by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 14.04(5)(e)) 
Secs. 10-177-10-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINIMUM HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-206-10-233. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-234. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is recognized that there may now be, or, may in the future be, residential and nonresidential buildings, structures, yards or vacant areas and combinations thereof which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unhygienic, overcrowded, inadequately maintained or lacking in basic equipment or facilities, light, ventilation or heating so as to constitute a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the people. The establishment and enforcement of minimum housing and property maintenance standards is necessary to preserve and promote the private and public interest. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(1)) 
Sec. 10-235. - Inspection; complaints. 
    The building inspector shall make inspections to determine the condition of rental dwelling units, rooming units, nursing units, hotel units, and premises located within the city to safeguard the health and welfare of the occupants of dwellings and the general public. All complaints shall be received in writing, so that location, names of tenant and owner and permission to inspect may be obtained. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(3)(a)(1)) 
Sec. 10-236. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Inspector. For the purpose of making the inspections, the building inspector may enter, examine and survey, at proper times after due notice, all rental dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or the person in charge shall give the building inspector access to the dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at proper time after due notice, for the inspection, examination and survey. 
(b)  Owner or operator. Every occupant of a dwelling unit, rooming unit, nursing unit or hotel unit shall give the owner or operator thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of the rental dwelling unit, rooming unit, nursing unit, hotel unit, or its premises at all reasonable times for maintenance or making repairs or alterations as necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful notice or order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(3)(a)(2)) 
Sec. 10-237. - Notice; service. 
    If the building inspector determines that there has been a violation or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of the violation or alleged violation to the person responsible therefor. The notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
(3)  Include a statement of the reason why it is being issued; 
(4)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(5)  Be served upon the owner and/or operator; provided the notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner and/or operator if a copy thereof is delivered to him personally, or sent by registered mail to his last known address, or posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice or if he is served by any other method authorized or required under state laws. 
The notice may contain an outline of remedial action that, if taken, shall effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(4)(a)) 
Sec. 10-238. - Petition for hearing. 
    Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of this article, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the council; provided a written petition requesting the hearing and setting forth a statement of the grounds therefor shall be filed in the office of the building inspector within ten days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of the petition, the building inspector shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(4)(b)) 
Sec. 10-239. - Hearing; determination. 
(a)  Opportunity to be heard. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the notice should not be complied with. 
(b)  Determination. After the hearing, the city council shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its finding as to whether the provisions of this and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto have been complied with. 
(c)  Order. If the council sustains or modifies the notice, it shall be deemed an order. Any notice served pursuant to this article shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the building inspector within ten days after the notice is served. 
(d)  Revocation of permit. After a hearing in the case of any notice has been sustained by the council, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any permit that has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the building inspector within ten days after the notice is served. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(4)(b), (c)) 
Sec. 10-240. - Record; service of order. 
    The proceedings at the hearing, including the findings and decision of the council, shall be reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the council. The record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. A copy of the written decision of the council shall then be served in the manner prescribed herein on the person who filed the petition for hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(4)(d)) 
Sec. 10-241. - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the council or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city, may seek relief therefrom by having the decision reviewed by the circuit court certiorari; if the petition for the writ is presented to the court within 30 days after the date on which the council's decision was served on the person who filed the petition for hearing, and if the person aggrieved notifies the council within ten days after the council's decision was served on him of his intention to present the petition to the court. The verified petition shall put forth that the decision is illegal in whole or in part, or does not comply with the provision of section 10-239, specifying the grounds thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(4)(d)) 
Sec. 10-242. - Emergency orders. 
    If the building inspector finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order stating the existence of an emergency and requiring that the action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, the order shall be effective immediately, but upon petition to the building inspector, a hearing shall be afforded as soon as possible, in the manner provided herein. After the hearing, depending upon the findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with, the council shall continue the order in effect, modify it, or revoke it. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07) 
Secs. 10-243-10-262. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS 

Sec. 10-263. - Compliance required; standards. 
    No person shall occupy as owner or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for living, sleeping, cooking or eating meals therein which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition, properly connected to a water and sanitary sewer system approved by the plumbing division of the building inspector's office. 
(2)  Toilet facility. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy to a person which is equipped with a flush water closet, a lavatory basin, bathtub or shower, and the necessary accessories therefor in good working condition, properly connected to hot and cold water lines and a sanitary sewer system approved by the health officer or building inspector. 
(3)  Exits. Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe, open space at ground level. 
(4)  Smoke detectors. Every dwelling unit, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 101.645 and 101.145, shall have smoke detectors on each floor level, including basements. 
(5)  Guardrails; handrails. Every dwelling unit shall have properly maintained guardrails and handrails according to the requirements set forth in Wis. Admin. Code chs. Comm 21 and Comm 62. 
(6)  Electrical installations. Existing conditions will be allowed until determined to be unsafe or until replacement or renovation takes place. Any electrical work must comply with Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 16. 
(7)  Hot water. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner, properly maintained and capable of heating water to the a temperature to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower, and laundry facility or other similar units, at a temperature of not more than 125 degrees Fahrenheit, when needed. 
(8)  Screens. From May 1 to October 1, in every dwelling unit for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every window used or intended to be used for ventilation shall be supplied with screens installed. 
(9)  Lighting and ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened or such other device as will adequately light and ventilate the room. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms, except no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and toilet rooms equipped with an adequate ventilation system that is kept in operation. 
(10)  Heating. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities that are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 67 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(11)  Basements; cellars. No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless the floor and walls are of waterproof and dampproof construction. Every basement shall receive natural or artificial light and shall be ventilated according to Federal Housing Administration or equal minimum requirements. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a basement that might provide an entry for rodents shall be screened with a wire mesh of not less than 16 gauge or other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(12)  Total floor area. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not less than 150 square feet for the first occupant, 100 square feet for the second occupant, and 75 square feet for each additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all the habitable rooms. 
(13)  Sleeping room floor area. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied by more than one occupant shall contain an additional 40 square feet of floor space for each occupant over the age of 12 years and at least 30 square feet for each occupant under the age of 12 years. 
(14)  Access to sanitary facilities. Every occupant of every dwelling shall have unrestricted access to a kitchen sink, toilet, bath and lavatory basin. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(5)-(7)) 
Sec. 10-264. - Owner responsibility for maintenance. 
    No person shall occupy as owner or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit or portion thereof for living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Foundation; exterior walls; roofs. Every foundation, exterior wall, and roof shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, rodentproof and insectproof and shall be kept in a reasonably good state of repair. 
(2)  Interior walls; floors; ceilings. Every interior partition, wall, floor and ceiling shall be kept in a reasonably good state of repair, and maintained to permit continuation of clean, sanitary conditions. 
(3)  Windows; exterior doors; basement hatchways. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight and rodentproof, kept in reasonably good working condition and a reasonably good state of repair. All exterior windows and doors shall have locks so entry is restricted. No security bars shall be installed over windows of rooms used for sleeping. 
(4)  Stairways; porches. Every inside and outside stairway, porch and appurtenance thereto shall be constructed to be reasonably safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and kept in sound condition and in a reasonably good state of repair. 
(5)  Plumbing fixtures. Every supplied plumbing fixture and water pipe and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition. 
(6)  Toilet room floors. Every toilet room floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water, permitting the floor to be kept in a clean, sanitary condition. 
(7)  Safe and functioning facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function properly and shall be maintained in reasonably good working condition. 
(8)  Sanitary condition prior to occupancy. No owner shall occupy or rent to any other person for occupancy or allow any other person to occupy any vacant dwelling unit unless it is reasonably clean, sanitary and complies with all provisions of this chapter and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(8)) 
Sec. 10-265. - Occupant and owner responsibility for maintenance. 
(a)  Maintenance of shared and public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(b)  Sanitary condition of dwellings. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises that he occupies and controls. 
(c)  Trash disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers. 
(d)  Pest control and eradication. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall exterminate any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(e)  Sanitary plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(9)) 
Secs. 10-266-10-293. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONDEMNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS 

Sec. 10-294. - Grounds for condemnation. 
    Any dwelling or dwelling unit that the building inspector shall find to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation: 
(1)  One which is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin infested, creating a hazard to the health or welfare of the occupants or the public; 
(2)  One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities adequate to protect the health or welfare of the occupants or the public; or 
(3)  One that because of its general condition is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or welfare of the occupants or the public. Any dwelling unit may be condemned as unfit for human habitation by the building inspector if the owner or occupant failed to comply with any order based on the provisions of this chapter or rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto; provided, the dwelling unit is, in the opinion of the building inspector, unfit for human habitation. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(10)) 
Sec. 10-295. - Notice to owner. 
    If the building inspector has condemned a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation, he shall give notice to the owner of the condemnation and of his intent to placard the dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation. The notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
(3)  Include a statement of the reason why it is being issued; 
(4)  Include a description of the repairs and improvements required to bring the condemned dwelling unit into compliance with the provisions of this section and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto; 
(5)  Include an explanation of the owner's right to seek modification or withdrawal of the notice by petitioner to the building inspector; and 
(6)  Be served upon the owner; provided, however, that the notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner if a copy thereof is delivered to him personally or if not found, by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode, in the presence of someone of the family of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof, or by sending a copy thereof by certified mail with return receipt requested to his last known address, or, if the certified letter with the copy is returned with a receipt showing it has not been delivered to him, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(10)(a), (b)) 
Sec. 10-296. - Appeal. 
    Any owner affected by any notice relating to the condemnation of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter under the procedure set forth herein. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(10)(c)) 
Sec. 10-297. - Placarding. 
    After the condemnation notice has resulted in an order for condemnation, the building inspector shall placard the affected dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation. The building inspector shall post, in a conspicuous place upon the affected dwelling unit, a placard bearing the following words: "Condemned as Unfit for Human Habitation." No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling unit that has been condemned as unfit for human habitation. No dwelling unit that has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall be occupied until written approval is secured from, and the placard is removed by, the building inspector. The building inspector shall remove the placard whenever the defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(10)(d), (f), (g)) 
Sec. 10-298. - Vacating building. 
    Any dwelling unit that has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation by the building inspector shall be vacated within a reasonable time as required by the officer. No owner or operator shall let to any person for human habitation and no person shall occupy any dwelling unit that has been condemned and placarded by the building inspector after the date on which the officer has required the affected rental dwelling unit to be vacated. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(10)(e)) 
Sec. 10-299. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit the city in defining and declaring nuisances or the building inspector in removing or abating nuisances by summary or other appropriate proceedings. The provisions of this article shall not abrogate the responsibility of any person to comply with any provisions of the state building code and the building and zoning codes of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 14.07(11), (12)) 
Secs. 10-300-10-316. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOVING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 10-317. - Permit required. 
    No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector and notifying the chief of police of the date and time of the proposed move. 
(Code 1993, § 14.08(1)) 
Sec. 10-318. - Application for permit. 
    Applications for permits to move buildings shall be made in writing on a form provided by the building inspector and filed no later than seven days before the next meeting of the planning commission. Each application shall be reviewed by the planning commission. The commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the issuance of the permit based upon whether or not the applicant has met the standards of issuance outlined in section 10-319. If the commission conditionally approves the application, the building inspector may issue the permit upon the applicant meeting all of the pre-permit conditions required by the commission. 
(Code 1993, § 14.08(2)) 
Sec. 10-319. - Standards for issuance. 
    No permit shall be issued under this section until the applicant meets the following standards: 
(1)  The building must not be too large, in the state of deterioration or disrepair or otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons or property in the city. 
(2)  The applicant's equipment for removal must be safe so as not to endanger persons and property by its use. 
(3)  The applicant must agree in writing to indemnify the city for any damage caused to its facilities by the move and pay to the city and any public utilities the cost of moving and replacing their facilities if required. 
(4)  The applicant shall provide proof of insurance to the satisfaction of the city attorney. 
(5)  The applicant must provide in writing the route of transfer and obtain the approval of the route by the chief of police. 
(6)  If the new location is in the city, the building may not be structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which it is moved. Additionally, the applicant shall provide a site map showing the new location of the building after the proposed move, including lot boundaries, setback distances and any other information reasonably required by the planning commission or the building inspector. Zoning or other ordinances must not be violated by the building in its new location. 
(Code 1993, § 14.08(3)) 
Sec. 10-320. - Bond required. 
    Prior to the building inspector issuing a permit involving the moving of a building to a location within the city, the applicant shall provide to the city a bond in an amount determined by the planning commission. The amount of the bond shall be sufficient to cover the cost of completing the conditions outlined in the permit should the applicant fail to substantially comply with the same. 
(Code 1993, § 14.08(4)) 
Sec. 10-321. - Term of permit. 
    A permit issued under this section shall expire six months from the date of issuance or as otherwise determined by the planning commission. 
(Code 1993, § 14.08(5)(a)) 
Sec. 10-322. - Conditions of permit. 
    The building inspector and planning commission shall determine what, if any, conditions shall be part of the permit that are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the building code and other sections of this Code. The conditions must be met prior to the expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1993, § 14.08(5)(b)) 
Sec. 10-323. - Failure to meet permit conditions. 
    Upon learning of the failure of the applicant to meet the permit conditions, the building inspector shall notify the planning commission so that the noncompliance may be reviewed and the forfeiture of the bond considered based upon whether or not the applicant substantially complied with the conditions of the permit. The applicant shall be notified of when the planning commission will consider the forfeiture of the bond. Notice shall be deemed given upon mailing a copy of the committee agenda to the last known address of the applicant. If the committee finds that the applicant failed to substantially comply with the conditions of the permit, the city may complete the remaining conditions and pay for the cost thereof from the forfeited bond. 
(Code 1993, § 14.08(5)(c)) 
ARTICLE VIII. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-401. - Jurisdiction. 
    This article shall apply to all lands located wholly or in part within the boundaries of the City of Tomah. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-402. - Definitions. 
    In this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Alteration means any change, addition, modification, demolition or removal to an improvement or grading of a Historical Site. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means an official form issued by the zoning administrator, building inspector or designee stating that the proposed work on a designated landmark or on a building in a historic district is in accord with the requirements of this article and that (1) the proposed work may be completed as specified in the certificate; and (2) that the building inspector may issue any permits needed to do the work specified in the certificate. 
    Commission means the historic preservation commission created under this section. 
    Improvement means any building, structure, place, work of art or other object constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. 
    Improvement parcel is the unit of property which includes a physical betterment constituting an improvement and the land embracing the site thereof, and is treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying real estate taxes. Provided, however, that the term "improvement parcel" shall also include any unimproved area of land which is treated as a single entity for such tax purposes. 
    Historic district (HD) is an area designated by the common council on recommendation of the commission, composed of two or more improvement parcels that together comprise a district of special character or special historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city of Tomah, the state or nation, and which has been designated as a historic district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Historic structure means any improvement which has a special character or special historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city of Tomah, the state or nation and which has been designated as a historic structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Historic site means any parcel of land whose historic significance is due to a substantial value in tracing the history of aboriginal people, or upon which a historic event has occurred, and which has been designated as a historic site under this section, or an improvement parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the historic structure is situated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 2, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-403. - General administrative provisions. 
(a)  Conflicting regulations. Where the regulations imposed by this ordinance are either more or less restrictive than regulations in other ordinances or laws, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail, unless an exception to this provision is specifically noted. 
(b)  Measuring 200 feet around properties. Certain provisions of this chapter reference properties that are within 200 feet of a subject property. Under this chapter, measurements around properties shall be taken from the lot lines of the subject property 200 feet in all directions. Any lots that fall within this measurement shall be considered within 200 feet of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 3, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-404. - Historic structures, historic sites, and historic districts designation criteria. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, a historic structure, historic site, or historic district designation may be placed on any site, natural or improved, including any building, improvement or structure located thereon, or any area of particular historic, architectural or cultural significance to the city of Tomah which: 
(1)  Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state or community; or 
(2)  Are identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local history; or 
(3)  Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen, inherently valuable for a study of a period, style, method of construction, or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or architect. 
(b)  The commission may adopt specific operating guidelines for historic structure or historic site designation providing such are in conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Historic district preservation plan. For preservation purposes, the historic preservation commission shall select geographically defined areas within the city of Tomah to be designated as historic districts and shall, with the assistance of the city planning commission and long range planning committee, prepare a historic preservation plan in ordinance form for each area prior to designation of the historic district. Each historic preservation plan prepared for or by the historic preservation commission shall include a cultural and architectural analysis supporting the historic significance of the area, the specific guidelines for development and a statement of preservation objectives. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-405. - Procedures for designating or rescinding historic structures, historic sites, or historic districts. 
(a)  Public hearing required. The historic preservation commission may, after notice and public hearing, recommend establishing historic structures, historic sites and historic districts, or rescind such designation or recommendation, after application of the criteria in section 10-404. At least ten days prior to such hearing, the commission shall notify the owners of record, as listed in the office of the city assessor who are owners of the subject property plus those owners of property in whole or in part situated within 200 feet of the boundaries of the property affected. These owners shall have the right to confer with the commission prior to final action by the commission on the designation. Notice of such hearing shall also be published as a Class 2 Notice, under the Wisconsin Statutes. The historic preservation commission shall also notify the following: Department of public works, parks and recreation commission, fire and police departments, health/building inspection department, long range planning committee and planning commission. Each such department shall respond to the commission within 30 days of notification with its comments on the proposed designation or rescission. The commission shall then conduct such public hearing and, in addition to the notified persons, may hear expert witnesses and shall have the power to subpoena such witnesses and records as it deems necessary. The commission may conduct an independent investigation into the proposed designation or rescission. 
(b)  Historic preservation commission recommendation. Following the public hearing, the historic preservation commission shall vote to recommend, reject, or withhold action on the designation or rescinding application. This recommendation shall be forwarded to the city planning commission, long range planning commission (as applicable), and the city council. 
(c)  Planning commission recommendation. The planning commission shall review the designation or rescinding application of historic structure, historic site, or historic district and make a recommendation to the city council. The planning commission shall make its recommendation within 30 days of receiving notification under section 10-405(a). 
(d)  Long range planning committee recommendation. Any designation or rescinding application of a historic structure, historic sites or historic districts located within the boundary of the city's downtown master plan must also be reviewed by the city's long range planning committee prior to common council adoption. The long range planning committee shall make its recommendation within 30 days of receiving notification under 10-405(a). 
(e)  City council approval. The city council, upon receipt of the recommendations from the historic preservation commission, planning commission, and long range planning committee (as applicable) shall take action on the designation or rescinding application of a historic structure, historic site, or historic district. The council at its discretion may hold an additional public hearing prior to taking action. 
(f)  Post approval notifications and recording. After the designation, or rescission has been made, notification shall be sent to the property owner or owners and to any persons who requested notification. Notification shall also be given to the city clerk, building inspector department, and the city assessor. The commission shall cause the designation or rescission to be recorded, at city expense, in the Monroe County Register of Deeds office. 
(g)  Records. Appropriate records, including photographs and plans, shall be kept as a part of the city's official zoning file. Once designated by common council, such historic structures, sites, and districts shall be subject to all provisions of this ordinance. 
(h)  Recognition of historic structures and historic sites. At such time as a historic structure or historic site has been properly designated, a suitable plaque may be prepared and erected on such property, declaring that such property is a historic structure or historic site. Information to be included on such a sign must be reviewed by the historic preservation commission; the standard size and specific style of plaque will be determined by the historic preservation commission so that signage throughout the city will match. Such plaques shall be placed as to be easily visible to passing pedestrians. In the case of a historic structure, the plaque shall state the accepted name of the structure, the date of its construction, and other information deemed proper by the commission. In the case of a historic site which is not the site of a historic structure, such plaque shall state the common name of the site, and such other information deemed appropriate by the commission. 
(i)  Voluntary restrictive covenants. The owner of any historic structure or historic site may, at any time following such designation of his property, enter into a restrictive covenant on the subject property after negotiation with the commission. The commission may assist the owner in preparing such covenant in the interest of preserving the historic property. The owner shall record such covenant in the Monroe County Register of Deeds office, and shall notify the city assessor of such covenant and the conditions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 5, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-406. - Alterations or demolition of historic structures, historic sites, or historic districts. 
(a)  Certificate of appropriateness required. No permit to develop, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, alter, demolish, or remove historic structures, historic sites or property in a historic district shall be issued until the historic preservation commission has reviewed the application or petition and has recommended approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application or petition. 
(1)  Permit required. Except as provided in section 10-410, no owner or person in charge of a historic site, historic structure, or structure within a designated historic district shall construct, alter, reconstruct or permit all or any improvements on any part of the exterior of such property or properties, including demolition of all or part of an improvement, without the review and approval of plans for such alterations by the historic preservation commission. In addition, any permit for a property located within the boundary of the city's downtown master plan must also be approved by the city's long range planning committee. The certificate of appropriateness shall be filed with the building inspector or zoning administrator. Until such certificate has been granted by the commission and long range planning committee (as appropriate), the building inspector shall not issue a permit for any such work. 
(2)  Basis for approval. Any changes or alterations of a historic structure, a historic site, or a property in a historic district will be permitted as long as they do not destroy, seriously impair, or significantly alter its character in terms of its historical or architectural interest, or particular character and quality of the historic district, and conform to all other applicable city ordinances. 
(b)  Regulation of construction, reconstruction and exterior alteration. 
(1)  Upon filing of any application with the historic preservation commission, the historic preservation commission shall determine: 
a.  Whether, in the case of a designated historic structure or historic site, the proposed work would detrimentally change, destroy or adversely affect any exterior architectural feature of the improvement upon which said work is to be done; and 
b.  Whether, in the case of the construction of a new improvement upon a historic site, the exterior of such improvement would adversely affect or not harmonize with the external appearance of other neighboring improvements on such site; and 
c.  Whether, in the case of any property located in a historic district the proposed construction, reconstruction or exterior alteration does not conform to the objectives and design criteria of the historic preservation plan for said district as duly adopted by the common council. 
d.  If the commission determines subparagraphs a.-c. above in the negative, it shall issue the certificate of appropriateness. Upon the issuance of such certificate, the building permit shall then be issued by the building inspector. The commission shall make this decision within 30 days of the filing of the application. 
(2)  Appeal. Should the commission, or long range planning commission (as applicable), refuse to issue a certificate of appropriateness due to failure of the proposal to conform to the above guidelines, the applicant may appeal such decision to the common council, which may grant said certificate by a ? vote only, and then only upon a clear showing of economic hardship by the applicant to the common council. In addition, if the commission fails to issue a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall, at the request of the applicant, cooperate and work with the applicant in an attempt to obtain a certificate of appropriateness within the guidelines of this article. 
(c)  Criteria for the review of alterations to historic structures or properties in historic districts. 
(1)  Criteria for the review of alterations in historic structures or properties in historic districts: 
a.  Height. All additions shall be no higher than the existing building. 
b.  Second exit platforms. Second exit platforms shall not be applied to the front or sides of a building, unless they are not visible from the street. 
c.  Solar apparatus. Passive and active solar apparatus will be allowed only if such devices do not detract from the architectural integrity of the building and are as unobtrusive as possible. Solar apparatus will not be permitted if such devices hides from street view significant architectural features of the building or neighboring buildings, if their installation requires the loss of significant architectural features, or if they are of such a large scale that they become a major feature of the design. 
d.  Repairs. Repairs in materials that exactly duplicate the original in composition, texture, and appearance are encouraged. Repairs in new materials that duplicate the original in texture and appearance are also permitted. 
Repairs in materials that do not duplicate the original in appearance will be permitted on an individual basis if the repairs are compatible with the character and materials of the existing building and if repairs that duplicate the original in appearance are prohibitively expensive. 
e.  Restoration. Projects that will return the appearance of the building to an earlier appearance are encouraged and will be permitted if such projects are documented by photographs, architectural or archaeological research, or other suitable evidence. 
f.  Re-siding with aluminum or vinyl. Re-siding with aluminum or vinyl that replaces clapboards or non-original siding on buildings originally sided with clapboards is not recommended, but may be permitted if the new siding imitates the width of the original siding within one inch, and provided that all architectural details (such as window trim, wood cornices, and ornament) either remain uncovered or are duplicated exactly in appearance. 
Aluminum, vinyl and other materials will be considered on an individual basis. 
Siding that imitates wood graining will not be permitted. 
If more than one layer of siding exists on the building, all layers except the first must be removed before new siding is applied. If insulation is applied under the new siding, all trim must be built up so that it projects from the siding as in the original. 
g.  Storms, screens and storm doors. The repair and retention of original storms, screens and storm doors, or the replacement of same with new units that duplicate the original in materials and appearance is encouraged. Replacements with non-original materials, such as combination metal components may also be permitted. If metal components are used, owners are encouraged to use metal components which have been factory-enameled. 
Painting of raw aluminum storms after a year of weathering of the finish is encouraged. Storm doors that imitate a specific style shall be permitted only if the style matches the style of the building. 
h.  Additions and alterations to street facades. The appearance of all street facades of a building shall not be altered unless the design is sensitive to the historic character of the building. Specifically, the design shall be compatible with the existing building in scale, color, texture, and the proportion of solids to voids. Materials and architectural details used in such alterations and additions shall either match those on the existing building or shall be materials and details used for the original construction of other buildings in the historic district of similar materials, age, and architectural style. 
i.  Additions and alterations not visible from the street. Additions and alterations that are not visible from streets contiguous to the lot lines will be permitted if their design is compatible with the scale of the existing building and, in addition, materials used shall be compatible with the existing in texture, color and architectural details. Alterations shall harmonize with the architectural design of the building, rather than contrast with it. 
j.  Side additions. Side additions shall be set back from the front wall of the building. 
k.  Alterations to the roof. Roof alterations, resulting in an increased building volume, to provide additional windows, headroom, or area are not permitted unless by the commission. In addition, the roof shape of the front of the building shall remain the same, unless the owner wishes to restore an earlier, documentable appearance. 
Roof alterations on the back and sides of the building shall be compatible with the design of the building. 
If the existing roofing material is the same as the original, changes in the appearance of roofing materials (not including color), will not be permitted except when the repair of the existing roof is unfeasible and the cost of replacing it in kind is prohibitive. The new roof shall match the original in appearance (not including color), as closely as is economically possible. 
If the existing roofing material is not original to the building, the new roofing materials shall harmonize in color with the building. Thick wood shakes, rolled roofing and hexagonal shingles will not be allowed. Restoration to a documentable earlier appearance is encouraged. 
(2)  Criteria for the review of new construction in historic districts: 
a.  Primary buildings. 
1.  Heights. The maximum height for new buildings shall conform to the requirements of the city's zoning Code for each property and shall be compatible with adjacent buildings within the same block face. 
2.  Roof. Roof shapes will be considered on an individual basis. The shape shall be compatible with adjacent buildings within the same block face. 
3.  Materials. Materials for the exterior walls of new buildings shall be the same or similar to the materials prevalent in Tomah. The following materials will be permitted: brick, narrow gauge horizontal clapboards under four inches in exposed width, stone, stucco, smooth shingles or any combination of the above. The following materials will not be permitted: concrete block, asbestos, wide clapboards over four inches in exposed width, diagonal boards, vertical boards, rough sawn wood, rough split shingles, shakes. Other materials, such as aluminum or vinyl, will be considered on an individual basis. 
4.  Visual size. The gross area of the front facade (all walls facing the street) shall not be greater than 125 percent of the average gross area of the front facades of all adjacent buildings within the same block face. If this is not possible, changes in the building plane/architectural detail should be designed in the front facade of the building to repeat the rhythm and proportions of adjacent buildings within the same block face. 
5.  Solar panels. Solar panels may be permitted on new buildings, including the front facades. Solar apparatus will not be permitted if such devices hide from street view significant architectural features of neighboring buildings, or if they are of such a large scale that they become a major feature of the design. 
6.  Parking lots. In historic district(s) any proposed new parking will need to be reviewed by the historic preservation commission. Each proposal will be considered on an individual basis. 
b.  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be compatible with the design of the existing buildings on the zoning lot and shall be as unobtrusive as possible. Exterior wall materials permitted are the same as for construction of new primary buildings, but the materials should be the same as the exterior materials of existing buildings on the same zoning lot wherever possible. 
(d)  Regulation of demolition. No permit to demolish or move all or part of a Historic Structure, or improvement in a Historic District, shall be granted by the Building Inspector except as follows: 
(1)  Review and recommendation by commission. At such time as such person applies for a permit to demolish or move such property, an application shall be filed with the historic preservation commission. Upon receipt of such application, the historic preservation commission has the right to wait two months from receipt of the application to grant written permission to the application. During the two-month period, the Commission and the applicant shall work together in good faith for the purpose of finding a method in which to save the property from demolition. At the end of the two-month period, if no agreeable way to save the subject property has been found, and no funding from any source to preserve the property is pending, the building inspector may issue the demolition permit for the subject property without the approval of the commission. If the mutually agreeable method for saving the subject property is not successful or the funding for the preservation of the property is not available within a two-month period following the first two-month period, the building inspector may issue the demolition permit without approval of the commission. 
(2)  Review by state historical society. If an order is issued to raze a historic building or the city intends to raze a municipally owned historic building, the city shall notify the state historical society of the order, application or intent. No historic building may be razed for 30 days after the notice is given. During the 30 day period, the state historical society shall have access to the historic building to create or preserve a historic record. 
(3)  Standards. In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness for any demolition, the commission shall consider and may give decisive weight to any or all of the following: 
a.  Whether the building or structure is of such architectural or historic significance that its demolition would be detrimental to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the people of the city of Tomah and the state; 
b.  Whether the building or structure, although not itself a designated historic structure, contributes to the distinctive architectural or historic character of the historic district as a whole and therefore should be preserved for the benefit of the people of the city of Tomah and the state; 
c.  Whether demolition of the subject property would be contrary to the purpose and intent of this chapter as set forth in chapter 2, section 2-412 and to the objectives of the historic preservation plan for the applicable district as duly adopted by the common council; 
d.  Whether the building or structure is of such old and unusual or uncommon design, texture and/or material that it could not be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficulty and/or expense; 
e.  Whether retention of the building or structure would promote the general welfare of the people of the city of Tomah and the state by encouraging study of American history, architecture and design or by developing an understanding of American culture and heritage; 
f.  Whether the building or structure is in such a deteriorated condition that it is not structurally or economically feasible to preserve or restore it, provided that any hardship or difficulty claimed by the owner which is self-created or which is the result of any failure to maintain the property in good repair cannot qualify as a basis for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness; 
g.  Whether any new structure proposed to be constructed or a proposed change in use is compatible with the buildings and environment of the district in which the subject property is located. 
(4)  Appeal. An appeal from the decision of the commission, or long range planning commission (as applicable), to grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness, whether this determination is made upon receipt of the application for the demolition permit or at the end of the two-month period in a case where action on the application is delayed, may be taken to the common council by the applicant for the demolition permit. Such appeal shall be initiated by filing a petition to appeal, specifying the grounds, with the city clerk within ten days of the date the final decision of the commission is made. The city clerk shall file the petition to appeal with the common council. After a public hearing, the city council may by favorable vote of two-thirds of its members, reverse or modify the decision of the commission if, after balancing the interest of the owner in using it for his or her own purposes, the city council finds that, owing to special conditions pertaining to the specific piece of property, demolition will preclude any and all reasonable use of the property and/or will cause serious hardship for the owner, provided that any self-created hardship shall not be a basis for reversal or modification of the commission's, or long range planning commission's (as applicable), decision. Self-created hardship shall be determined by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 6, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-407. - Sale/rescission of historic structures and historic sites. 
    Any party who is listed as the owner of record of a historic structure, or historic site, who can demonstrate to the commission that by virtue of such designation he or she is unable to find a buyer willing to preserve such a historic structure or historic site, even though he or she has made reasonable attempts in good faith to find and attract such a buyer, may petition the commission for a rescission of its designation under section 10-405. Following the filing of such petition with the commission: 
(1)  The owner and the commission shall work together in good faith to locate a buyer for the subject property who is willing to abide by its designation. 
(2)  If, at the end of a period not exceeding six months from the date of such petition, no such buyer can be found, and if the owner still desires to obtain such rescission, the commission shall rescind its designation of the subject property under the procedures of section 10-405; provided however if the owner has received any financial or tax benefits from designation as a historic structure or historic site, the waiting period may not exceed 12 months. 
(3)  In the event of such rescission, the commission shall notify the city clerk, the building inspector, and the city assessor of same, and shall cause the same to be recorded, at its own expense, in the office of the Monroe County Register of Deeds. 
(4)  Following any such rescission, the commission may not re-designate the subject property a historic structure or historic site for a period of not less than five years following the date of rescission. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 7, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-408. - Conformance with regulations. 
    Every person in charge of any historic structure, historic site or improvement in a historic district shall maintain same or cause or permit it to be maintained in a condition consistent with the provisions of this article. 
    The city council may appoint the building inspection department or any other individual or group of individuals to enforce this article. The duties of the inspection officer shall include periodic inspection at intervals provided by the city council of designated historic structures, historic sites and historic districts. These inspections may include physical entry upon the property and improvement, with permission of the owner, to insure that interior alterations or maintenance will not jeopardize the exterior appearance or structural stability of the improvement. If an owner refuses permission for the enforcement officer to enter for purposes of inspection, the inspection officer may obtain a warrant of entry pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.112, and take any other reasonable measures to further enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 8, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-409. - Maintenance of historic structures, historic sites or properties in historic districts. 
(a)  Every person in charge of an improvement on a historic structure, historic site, or property in a historic district shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement and all interior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portions of such improvement to fall into a state of disrepair. This provision shall be in addition to all other provisions of law requiring such improvement to be kept in good repair. 
(b)  Insofar as they are applicable to a historic structure, historic site, or property in a historic district, designated under this section, any provision of the Plumbing Code, the Minimum Housing and Property Maintenance Code, Building Code, Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Code, and outdoor signs and outdoor advertising structures regulations of the general ordinances may be varied or waived, on application, by the appropriate board having such jurisdiction over such chapter or, in the absence of such board, by the building inspection department, provided such variance or waiver does not endanger public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 9, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-410. - Conditions dangerous to life, health or property. 
    Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the making of necessary construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any historic structure, any improvement on a historic site or in a historic district pursuant to order of any governmental agency or pursuant to any court judgment, for the purpose of remedying emergency conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health or property. In such cases, no approval from the commission shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 10, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-411. - Penalties for violations. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $200.00 for each separate violation. Each and every day during which a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. In addition, in any instance where work commences as regulated in this chapter without the owner or agent having secured a certificate of appropriateness and where applicable, planning commission approval, the building inspector shall promptly issue a stop work order which shall take immediate effect and remain in effect until such certificate and other applicable approaches shall have been secured. Issuance of a certificate in such instances shall require payment of a $100.00 fee. If, in the process, provisions of the Building Code shall also have been violated, the penalties for such violation called for in that Building Code shall be applied. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 11, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 10-412. - Separability. 
    If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-07-D, § 12, 4-11-2017) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    No holder of any business licenses issued by the city shall willfully refuse services offered under the license or refuse to employ or to discharge any person otherwise qualified because of sex, race, color, creed, sexual orientation, handicap, religion, national origin, sex or marital status of the person maintaining a household, lawful source of income, age or ancestry or discriminate against any member of the military services, whether dressed in uniform or not, by adding charges or requiring deposits not required by the general public or by willfully refusing services offered under the licenses. 
(Code 1993, § 12.02) 
Sec. 12-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the desire of the common council of the city to create a procedure which ensures the gathering of information to assist city officials and businesses, trades and professions established or maintained in buildings located within the city. 
(Code 1993, § 12.16) 
Sec. 12-3. - Business signs. 
    All exterior business advertising must comply with the city's zoning law, chapter 52. 
Secs. 12-4-12-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSING GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-27. - License required. 
    No person shall establish or maintain any business, trade or profession in a building located within the city without first obtaining an applicable license or being registered with the city clerk. 
(Code 1993, § 12.16(2)) 
Sec. 12-28. - Application/registration. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, application for a particular license or registration of a business shall be made in writing to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city, and the applicant/business owner shall state the location, type of activity to be conducted and the facts as may be required or applicable to the granting of the license. A copy of the application/registration shall be forwarded to the appropriate city officials. 
(Code 1993, § 12.16(3)) 
Sec. 12-29. - Delinquent obligations to city. 
    No license authorized or required under this chapter shall be issued or renewed, unless the applicant shall have first settled any delinquent tax obligations, assessments or other fees owed to the city at the time the license is to be granted or renewed. 
(Code 1993, § 12.02; Ord. No. 2011-07-08-D, § 1, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 12-30. - License/registration fees. 
    The license/registration fees as indicated on the schedule of fees adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council and on file with the city clerk shall accompany the application. No application shall be accepted or acted upon until the fee is paid, no fee shall be prorated, and no fee shall be refunded except: 
(1)  All existing businesses, trades or professions within the city as of March 1, 1999, shall be exempt from the business registration fee until the time as ownership is transferred, location is changed or the activities conducted change substantially. 
(2)  License fees for alcohol beverage licenses shall be as set forth in chapter 4. 
(Code 1993, § 12.16(4)) 
Sec. 12-31. - Form of license. 
    All licenses issued hereunder shall show the dates of issue and expiration and the activity licensed and shall be signed by the city clerk. 
(Code 1993, § 12.02(7)) 
Sec. 12-32. - Numbering; record of licenses issued. 
    All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the specific premises for which they are granted, date of issuance, fee paid, and the name of the licensee. The city clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued. 
(Code 1993, § 12.02(5)) 
Sec. 12-33. - Display of license. 
    All licenses hereunder shall be displayed upon the premises or vehicle for which issued or, if carried on the person, shall be displayed to any officer of the city upon request. No person shall post the license or be licensed to post it upon premises other than those mentioned in the 
(Code 1993, § 12.02(9)) 
Sec. 12-34. - Inspection of business premises. 
    City officials may enter upon the premises where the business, trade or profession is maintained at all reasonable times for the purpose of health, safety and fire inspection or investigation, which, under the provisions of this Code, the official may deem necessary to be made. 
(Code 1993, § 12.16(5)) 
Sec. 12-35. - Term of license/registration. 
(a)  Except for those businesses specifically enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, once issued, the business registration shall remain in effect until the time as the business ceases to operate, ownership is transferred, location is changed or the activities conducted change substantially. It is the responsibility of the license holder to notify the city clerk in the event one of the above occurs. 
(b)  All licenses issued hereunder for amusement devices, billiard tables, bowling alleys, dance halls, mobile home dealers, and mobile home parks, shall expire on June 30 in the year of issuance, unless issued for a shorter or longer term, when they shall expire at midnight of the last effective day of the license. 
(Code 1993, §§ 12.02(6), 12.16(6)) 
Secs. 12-36-12-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FARMERS' MARKET[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, §§ 1-4, adopted May 11, 2010, deleted the former Art. III, §§ 12-61-12-64, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to farmers' market and derived from Code 1993, § 12.14(1)-(3); Ord. No. 2007-09-09-C, § 1(12.14(1)-(3)), 9-10-2007. 

Sec. 12-61. - Sales of certain goods restricted. 
    There is hereby established a farmers' market within the city. Except for sales within enclosed structures and business establishments within the city, all persons offering for sale articles for human consumption, such as fruits, vegetables, edible grains, nuts and berries, apiary products, baked goods, maple sugars, syrups, meat products (bison, beef, sausages, etc.) and eggs or nonedible articles, such as cut or potted flowers, arts, crafts, or furniture may offer same for sale only within the designated farmers' market. No such sales as described above shall be made in any other place within the city without first obtaining a transient merchant license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, § 1, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2017-03-04-D, § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 12-62. - Registration required. 
    No seller shall engage in sales at the farmer's market within the city without being registered for that purpose as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, § 2, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 12-63. - Registration form. 
    Applicants for registration shall complete and return to the clerk a registration form furnished by the clerk at least 15 days prior to issuance of the registration that shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's complete name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary address, if any; 
(2)  Applicant's age, height, weight, color or hair and eyes; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the applicant represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold; 
(4)  Temporary address and telephone from where business will be conducted, if any; 
(5)  Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the merchandise, and any services offered; 
(6)  Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the applicant in the conduct of his business; 
(7)  Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving this city; 
(8)  Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's participation in a farmer's market within the last five years, and the nature of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, § 2, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 12-64. - Supporting documents. 
    With the registration form, applicants shall present to the clerk for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, § 2, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 12-65. - Fees. 
    At the time the registration is returned, a fee in the amount determined by the city council shall be paid to the clerk to cover the cost of the processing of the registration and copying related information. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, § 3, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 12-66. - Registration; term. 
    Upon compliance with all of the foregoing conditions, including payment of the fee and designation of the registered agent, the clerk shall register the applicant as a farmer's market seller and date the entry. The registration shall be valid for a period of a calendar year from the date of entry subject to subsequent refusal as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, § 3, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 12-67. - Display of certificates and re-sale signs. 
    If the business is being conducted from a vehicle or stationary structure, or table, the certificate of registration or facsimile thereof shall be displayed prominently thereon. The placard issued by the clerk's office shall be displayed. Any registrant with products being sold as organic must display their certified organic certificate next to the registration certificate. If goods being sold have been purchased elsewhere and are being resold, the registrant is required to have signs indicating which products are not their own. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, § 3, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2017-03-04-D, § 2, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 12-68. - Location. 
    The area of the farmers' market shall be along the Northern side of East Holton Street and Superior Avenue at Gillett Park, restricted to the area between Superior Avenue and Kilbourn Avenue. Overflow of sellers may extend onto the Kilbourn Avenue section between East Holton and Council Streets. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, § 4, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2017-03-04-D, § 3, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 12-69. - Hours of operation. 
    The farmers' market shall be open for operation every Wednesday from 11:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and every Saturday from 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m with the provision that setup be included in these hours from May 1 through October 31 of each year. The farmers' market may remain open on Wednesday evenings during Music in the Park until 8:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, § 4, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2017-03-04-D, § 4, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 2018-04-03-D, § 1, 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 12-70. - Compliance required. 
    All vendors and participants of the farmers' market shall comply with the local, state and federal rules and regulations regarding the respective articles being offered for sale. Failure to comply with the rules and regulations or violations of ordinances related to the farmer's market will be grounds for revocation of the applicants registration. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-01D, § 4, 5-11-2010) 
Secs. 12-71-12-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTELS AND MOTELS 

Sec. 12-87. - Applicability. 
    In addition to the general business licensing provisions of this chapter, hotels and motels within the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 12-88. - License; fee. 
    Every person furnishing rooms, lodging or camping sites shall file with the treasurer an application for a license for each place of business. Every application for a license shall be made upon a form prescribed by the treasurer. At the time of making an application, the applicant shall pay a license fee as established by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07) 
Sec. 12-89. - Due date; no transfer or assignment. 
    The license is valid only as to the applicant and is not assignable or transferable. All new applications are due within five days of first furnishing rooms, lodging or camping sites. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07) 
Sec. 12-90. - Gross receipts tax; bond. 
    All persons furnishing rooms, lodging, or camping sites shall be subject to taxation and may be required to post bond as set forth in chapter 42. 
Secs. 12-91-12-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

Sec. 12-109. - Applicability of state codes. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 98, and Wis. Admin. Code ch. ATCP 92 are adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the regulations of the city pertaining to weights and measures. All performance required thereunder shall be required in the city and all acts thereunder prohibited in the city. In addition, should either the statute or administrative code chapter be amended, revised, modified or replaced, the amendments, revisions, modifications and replacement provisions shall be enforced under hereto. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(1)) 
State Law reference- Authority for adoption by reference, Wis. Stats. § 98.04(1). 
Sec. 12-110. - Appointment of inspectors. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 98.04(2), enforcement of this article shall be performed in the city by the state department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection in accord with a contract entered into for that purpose in the city. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(2)) 
Sec. 12-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial weighing or measuring devices means devices used or employed in establishing the size, quantity, extend, area or measurement of quantities, things, produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or payment for services rendered on the basis of weight and measure. 
    Weights and measurers program means the program that includes administration and enforcement of this article, Wis. Stats. ch. 98, applicable state administrative code provisions, and any related actions. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(3)) 
Sec. 12-112. - License required. 
(a)  License requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall operate or maintain any commercial weighing or measuring devices or any other weights and measures or systems and accessories related thereto which are used commercially within the city for determining the weight or measure of count unless each device is licensed by an annual weights and measures license pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Exemptions. Sales which are otherwise exempted by law from operation of this article and the statute and administrative code provisions incorporated by reference, including those taking place at farmers' markets and under direct sellers, transient merchants and solicitors regulations, are exempted from the licensing requirements under this article. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(4)) 
Sec. 12-113. - Application for license. 
    An application for a weights and measures license shall be made in writing on a form provided for the purpose by the city clerk and shall be signed by the owner of the commercial business, or by its authorized agent. The applications shall state the type and number of weighing and measuring devices to be licensed, location of the devices, the applicant's full name and address, and whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the names and addresses of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the application shall state the name and address of all officers and agents of the applicant, including the registered agent thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(5)) 
Sec. 12-114. - Issuance; fees. 
    Upon compliance with this section, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant upon payment of an annual license fee on the schedule of fees adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. Each separate store or business location shall require a separate license. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(6)) 
Sec. 12-115. - Change of ownership. 
    If the ownership of a commercial business licensed under this section is transferred during a license year, the owner of the business as of July 1 of the license year shall be liable and responsible for the payment of the fees assessed under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(10)(e)) 
Sec. 12-116. - Term. 
    A license issued under this section shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(7)) 
Sec. 12-117. - Enforcement. 
    In the event that the city clerk is informed of violations of this article or statutes and administrative code provisions incorporated herein by reference, the city clerk shall refer the alleged violation to the state department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection for enforcement. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(8)) 
Sec. 12-118. - Method of giving notice. 
    Schedules, notices and invoices shall be considered delivered to a licensee when mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the licensee's address as shown on the application form. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(10)(d)) 
Sec. 12-119. - Fee assessment. 
(a)  Annual assessment. Each licensee shall be responsible for all the charges levied against the city by the state for enforcement activities pertaining to that particular licensee's regulated weighing and measuring activities under this article. On an annual basis, the common council shall assess the costs of enforcement against those licensees whose activities required the enforcement activity during the preceding year. 
(b)  Calculation. The total costs of enforcement for the preceding year shall be divided by the total number of devices tested by the inspectors that year. The amount to be assessed to each licensee shall be determined by multiplying the resulting number by number of devices tested at the licensee's site. For purposes of this section, each year shall run from July 1 to June 30. 
(c)  Assessment schedule; notice. Annually, the city clerk shall prepare a schedule of assessments and mail to each licensee an invoice for the assessed fee. Each licensee shall pay the fee as assessed or file a written request for the city to review the assessed fee within 30 days after the date the invoice is mailed. The written request for review shall include specific reasons why the licensee is disputing the assessed fee along with any supporting documentation. The city council shall make a determination whether the assessment should be modified at its next scheduled council meeting following the filing of a written request for review. 
(d)  Delinquency; collection fee; interest. If the assessed fee is not paid within 30 days of the date of mailing of the invoice, an additional administrative collection charge of ten percent of the fee shall be added to the amount due, plus interest shall accrue thereon at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof until paid. 
(e)  Attachment to real property. If the licensee is the owner of the real estate premises where the licensed weights and measures devices are located, any delinquent assessment shall be extended upon the current or the next tax roll as a charge against the real estate premises for current services, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. No licenses shall be issued or renewed under this section if the licensee is delinquent in the payment of a fee assessed under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 12.17(10)(a)-(c)) 
Chapter 14 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, Wis. Stats. § 755.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 14-19. - Established. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 755, a municipal court is created to be designated municipal court for the city. 
(Code 1993, § 1.12(1)) 
Sec. 14-20. - Jurisdiction. 
    The municipal judge shall have jurisdiction as provided in Wis. Stats. § 755.045, and exclusive jurisdiction over violations of this Code or other city ordinances. 
(Code 1993, § 1.12(5)) 
Sec. 14-21. - Procedure. 
    Sessions of the municipal court shall be determined by order of the municipal judge. Court shall be held in the city hall. The city council reserves the right to establish or change court hours. Court procedure shall otherwise be as provided by state law. 
(Code 1993, § 1.12(6)) 
Sec. 14-22. - Collection and disposition of funds. 
    The municipal judge shall direct the collection and disposition of all forfeitures, taxable costs and penalty assessments, if applicable, in any action or proceeding before him. 
(Code 1993, § 1.12(6)) 
Sec. 14-23. - Municipal court fees. 
    The municipal judge is hereby authorized to issue orders upon the city treasurer for payment of fees associated with the municipal court. 
(Code 1993, § 1.12(7)) 
Sec. 14-24. - Contempt of court. 
    The municipal judge shall have power to punish for contempt by forfeiture, or by imprisonment for failure to pay the forfeiture, and as long as not paid in the following cases: 
(1)  All persons present in court, including parties, attorneys, clerks or police officers, for any misbehavior or disobedience of any process or lawful order of the court, addressing the court in a disrespectful, profane or contemptuous manner or interfering with the proceedings in any action. 
(2)  All persons subpoenaed as witnesses for failure to obey the subpoena, failing to attend or failing to answer lawful questions. 
(3)  All jurors for improperly conversing with any party to an action, or with any person in relation to the merits of the action, or receiving communications from any party or from any other person in relation to the merits of an action without immediately disclosing the same to the court. 
(4)  Any person committing misconduct in the present of the municipal judge. When any misconduct shall be committed in the immediate view and presence of the court, it may be punished summarily by forfeiture, or by imprisonment for failure to pay the forfeiture, and for so long as not paid. An order shall be made by the judge stating the facts that constituted the offense and assessing the punishment. 
(Code 1993, § 1.12(8)) 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State of emergency, mutual assistance, Wis. Stats. § 66.0314. 

Sec. 16-1. - Joint action emergency government. 
    A joint action ordinance of the county board providing for a county-municipal joint action emergency government plan of organization adopted by the county board on September 6, 1972, has been ratified and accepted by the city. This ratification and acceptance of the Joint Action Ordinance shall constitute a mutual agreement between the city and the county as provided by section VIII of the Joint Action Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 6.01) 
Sec. 16-2. - County-municipal emergency coordinator. 
    The county-municipal emergency government coordinator, appointed and employed by the county board as provided in the referred-to ordinance, is hereby designated and appointed emergency government coordinator for the city, subject to the conditions and provisions set forth in the state statutes and the Monroe County Joint Action Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 6.02) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-19. - Prohibited; defined. 
    No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the city. For purposes of this chapter, a public nuisance, generally and without limitation of nuisances specifically enumerated in this chapter, is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public. 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property. 
(3)  Greatly offend the public morals or decency. 
(4)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way. 
(Code 1993, §§ 10.01, 10.02) 
Sec. 18-20. - Public health nuisances. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances: 
(1)  All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public. 
(2)  Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
(3)  Accumulations of decayed animals or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed. 
(4)  Accumulations of animal fecal matter of more than one week in accumulation on any personal property. 
(5)  All solid fecal matter deposited by an animal on any street, sidewalk, alley, rights-of-way, public place or public property, parking lots or property of another without consent of the owner. The owner/caretaker of any such animal shall have in his/her possession a scoop, bag or shovel for use in the immediate removal of said fecal matter. This fecal matter shall be placed in a flush toilet or a receptacle ordinarily used for garbage and covered by a lid, or in an otherwise lawful and sanitary manner. 
(6)  Disposal of animal fecal matter in any lake, waterway or storm sewer. 
(7)  All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply. 
(8)  Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not fly-tight. 
(9)  All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation. 
(10)  All animals running at large. 
(11)  The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the city limits or within one mile there from in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property. 
(12)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances. 
(13)  Any use of property, substance or other things within the city or within four miles thereof emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the city. 
(14)  All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use. 
(Code 1993, § 10.03; Ord. No. 2011-01-01-D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate offensive industry, Wis. Stats. § 66.0415. 
Sec. 18-21. - Public nuisances offending morals and decency. 
    The following acts, omissions, conditions and things and places are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of section 18-19: 
(1)  All disorderly houses, bawdy houses of ill fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling. 
(2)  All gambling devices and slot machines. 
(3)  All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by the ordinances of the city. 
(4)  Any place or premises within the city where city ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated. 
(5)  Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 10.04) 
Sec. 18-22. - Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting the public peace or safety coming within the provisions of section 18-19: 
(1)  All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. 
(2)  All buildings, erected, repaired or altered within the fire limits of the city in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within the district. 
(3)  All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing. 
(4)  All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crossing. 
(5)  All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than ten feet above the surface thereof or less than ten feet above the surface of a public street. 
(6)  All use or display of fireworks, except as provided by the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(7)  All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use. 
(8)  All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground. 
(9)  All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any kind. 
(10)  The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any considerable number of persons within the city. 
(11)  All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the city or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished. 
(12)  All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(13)  All abandoned refrigerators or ice boxes from which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside. 
(14)  Any unauthorized use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks. 
(15)  All leaving of wrecked or dismantled automobiles, machinery or tractors in streets of the city; the leaving of such articles or other machinery or equipment used by builders upon property zoned for residential purposes; the leaving of tools and equipment outside business properties for such periods of time and in such a manner that offends a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(16)  Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the city or laws of the state relating to the storage of flammable liquids. 
(Code 1993, § 10.05) 
Sec. 18-23. - Inspections. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever a complaint is made that a public nuisance exists within the city, the chief of police, building inspector, or code enforcement officer shall inspect or cause to be inspected the offending premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-11-D, § 1, 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 18-24. - Abatement. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, if the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall serve notice on the owner or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to post a copy of the notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct an owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such nuisance within 24 hours and shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the city may cause same to be abated, charging the costs thereof to the owners, occupants or person causing the nuisance to be recovered in a court action for debt or, in the alternative, the city may proceed with court action after the lapse of the 24 hours stated above. 
(Code 1993, § 10.10) 
Secs. 18-25-18-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES 

Sec. 18-52. - Public nuisance. 
    The following are hereby declared to be a public nuisance wherever they may be found within the city: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle, truck body, tractor, and recreational vehicle as enumerated and defined in section 18-53. 
(2)  Any junk stored contrary to provisions set forth in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 10.06(1); Ord. No. 2018-12-13-D, § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Sec. 18-53. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulation means an assemblage, gathering, compilation, stocking or aggregation of junk material or materials. For the purpose of determining whether a person has an accumulation, the amount, type, quantity and nature of all materials possessed by the person on all property owned or under the person's control is relevant. 
    Disassembled, inoperable, junked or wrecked motor vehicles, truck bodies, and recreational vehicles means: 
(1)  Motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors and trailers in such a state of physical or mechanical ruin as to be incapable of propulsion or being operated upon the public streets or highways. 
(2)  Recreational vehicles in such a state of physical or mechanical ruin as to be incapable of propulsion, intended performance and function. 
    Inoperable vehicle means a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle, regardless of whether it is licensed, that is not in operating condition. A motor vehicle is "in operating condition" if the motor vehicle can be started and actually operated on the highways of this state without requiring repairs, or borrowing of parts, batteries or materials from other vehicles. A vehicle stored in the open which has not actually moved for more than two months is rebuttably presumed to be inoperable if it cannot be started and operated on the highway at the same time as any other vehicle in the accumulation or owned by the same person, entity or family. 
    Junk means worn out or discarded material of little or no value, that have an adverse effect upon the neighbors or city property values, health, safety or general welfare including, but not limited to, the following material: 
(1)  Household appliances or parts thereof; 
(2)  Machinery and equipment or parts thereof; 
(3)  Vehicles or parts thereof; 
(4)  Tools or discarded building materials, including the following: 
a.  More than one cord of scrap wood which is not stacked in an orderly manner. 
b.  Pallets which have not been used or moved for more than six months. 
c.  Metal, glass, plastic or mineral materials which are not part of an item which is in current household or commercial use and in working condition. 
d.  Appliances, including (without limitation by enumeration) washing machines, clothes dryers, dishwashers, refrigerators, stoves, ovens, microwaves, trash compactors and freezers which are not in operating condition. 
e.  Food scraps, except when stored in compost piles maintained in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 402. 
f.  Sawdust, industrial waste, slag, waste concrete, debris, castings, grease or other commodities or materials which are generated in the course of a manufacturing or construction process, except when stored as inventory, or for disposal within 30 days, on the property on which these materials are found. 
g.  Unlicensed automobiles, motor vehicles, or recreational vehicles which are not in operating condition or are being used for storage of materials. 
h.  Medical waste or debris. 
i.  Unusable or highly deteriorated mattresses, box springs and furniture. 
j.  Garbage. 
k.  Any material which is likely to harbor mosquitoes or other pests or larvae. 
l.  A mobile home or camper or manufactured home which has not been used for residential purposes for more than 12 months and which is in a deteriorated condition and is no longer habitable. 
m.  Farm machinery which is no longer in use and is no longer usable. 
n.  Building and construction materials and supplies that have not been used or moved for more than six months. 
    Motor vehicles. Any self-propelled land vehicle which can be used for towing or transporting people or materials, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, buses, motorized campers, motorcycles, motor scooters, and tractors. 
    Operating condition. A motor vehicle is in operating condition if the motor vehicle can be started and actually operated on the highways of this state without requiring repairs, or borrowing of parts, batteries or materials from other vehicles. A vehicle stored in the open which has not actually moved for more than two months is rebuttably presumed to be inoperable if it cannot be started and operated on the highway at the same time as any other vehicle in the accumulation or owned by the same person, entity or family. 
    Recreational vehicles. A vehicle primarily used for leisure activities, including but not limited to all-terrain vehicles, boats, with or without trailers, camping trailers, jet skis, motor home, utility trailers, snowmobiles, and like motorized and non-motorized vehicles. 
    Unlicensed motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, or recreational vehicles. Motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, or recreational vehicles which do not bear lawful current license plates or Wisconsin DNR registration numbers. 
(Code 1993, § 10.06(2); Ord. No. 2018-12-13-D, § 2, 12-11-2018) 
Sec. 18-54. - Storage of vehicles restricted. 
(a)  No person shall accumulate, store or allow any disassembled, inoperable, junked or wrecked motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, or any unlicensed motor vehicle, truck body or tractor in the open upon any public or private property in the city. 
(b)  No person shall accumulate, store or allow any disassemble, inoperable, junked or wrecked recreational vehicle or any unlicensed recreational vehicle that requires licensing in the open upon any public or private property in the city. 
(Code 1993, § 10.06(3); Ord. No. 2018-12-13-D, § 2, 12-11-2018) 
Sec. 18-55. - Responsibility for violations. 
    It is the joint responsibility of the property owner and the owner of the junk or junk vehicles to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Code 1993, § 10.06(3)) 
Sec. 18-56. - Notice. 
    The building inspector, or any other code enforcement officer, shall provide written notice to any person in violation of this article. Said notice shall direct the person to abate or remove such nuisance within 15 days from the date of the notice and shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the city may cause the same to be abated, charging the costs thereof to the person in a court action for debt or in the alternative, the city may proceed with the issuance of a citation. For purposes of this article, notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing to the address of the person on file with the city treasurer's office, or upon personal delivery. 
(Code 1993, § 10.06(4); Ord. No. 2013-09-08-D, § 1, 9-10-2013) 
Sec. 18-57. - Citation. 
    The building inspector, or any other code enforcement officer, shall have the authority to issue a citation to any person failing to abate the nuisance as directed by the 15-day notice. 
(Code 1993, § 10.06(5); Ord. No. 2013-09-08-D, § 2, 9-10-2013) 
Sec. 18-58. - Abatement. 
    The abatement of junk or junk vehicles shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code. The cost of abating any junk or junk vehicles as defined in this section shall be borne by the responsible party. 
(Code 1993, § 10.06(6)) 
Secs. 18-59-18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DUTCH ELM DISEASE 

Sec. 18-91. - Public nuisance. 
    The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances where they may be found within the city: 
(1)  Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus Ceratocysis ulmi (Buisman) Mureau which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistraitus (Eichh.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.). 
(2)  Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective bark beetle destroying insecticide. 
(Code 1993, § 10.07(2)) 
Sec. 18-92. - Inspection. 
    The city forester shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises and places within the city to determine whether any public nuisance as defined in this article exists thereon and shall also inspect or cause to be inspected any elm tree reported or suspected to be infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus or any elm bark bearing material reported or suspected to be infested with the elm bark beetle. The city forester shall have the authority to enter upon private premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 10.07(4)) 
Sec. 18-93. - Abatement. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations specified in this article, if the city forester shall find with reasonable certainty on examination or inspection that any public nuisance as defined in this article exists within the city, he shall cause it to be sprayed, removed, burned or otherwise abated in such manner as to destroy or prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease fungus or the insect pests or vectors known to carry such disease. 
(b)  Provided, however, that before abating any nuisance on private premises or in a terrace strip between the lot line and the curb, the forester shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  If the forester shall determine that danger to other elm trees from such nuisance is not imminent because of elm dormancy, he shall make a written report of his findings to the park board and council who shall proceed as provided in Wis. Stats. § 27.08(4). 
(2)  If the forester determines that danger to other elm trees within the city is imminent, he shall notify the owner or abutting owner of the property on which such nuisance is found, in writing if he can be found, otherwise by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, that the nuisance must be abated as directed in the notice within a specified time, not less than ten days from the date of such notice, unless the forester shall find that immediate action is necessary to prevent spread of the infection. If the owner fails to comply with the notices within the time limit, the forester shall cause the abatement thereof. 
(c)  No compensation shall be awarded to the owner for destruction of any elm tree, elm wood or elm material or any part thereof pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1993, § 10.07(5)) 
Sec. 18-94. - Costs of abatement. 
    The cost of abating any public nuisance as defined in this section shall be borne by the property owner if the disease occurs upon his property, but shall be borne by the city if upon any boulevard, park or premises on or controlled by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 10.07(6)) 
Sec. 18-95. - Recordkeeping; cost assessment. 
    The city forester shall keep strict account of the costs of work done under this article and shall report monthly to the city clerk all work done for which assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the land, lots, parts of lots or parcels of land and the amounts chargeable to each lot or parcel so reported and such amounts shall be levied and assessed against such parcels or lots in the same manner as other special taxes. 
(Code 1993, § 10.07(6)) 
Sec. 18-96. - Transporting of elm wood restricted. 
    No person shall transport within the city a bark-bearing elm wood or material without first securing the written permission of the city forester. 
(Code 1993, § 10.07(7)) 
Sec. 18-97. - Interference with city forester prohibited. 
    No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the city forester or any of his agents or city employees while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this article. 
(Code 1993, § 10.07(8)) 
Secs. 18-98-18-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUBSTITUTE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-123. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this section is to promote and enhance the health, comfort, aesthetics, prosperity and overall positive quality growth of the city by providing uniform regulation of the use of tents, semi-trailers and other similar conveyances or structures as substitutes for principal and accessory buildings. The purpose is not to ban trailers that are being used to transport snowmobiles, sporting equipment, race cars or other recreational vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 10.08(1)) 
Sec. 18-124. - Substitute buildings prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to place, erect or maintain within the city any shipping container, wagon, motor vehicle, semi-trailer, truck or similar conveyance as a substitute for a principal building except as provided herein. 
(Code 1993, § 10.08(2)) 
Sec. 18-125. - Construction sites. 
    The provisions of this section shall not prevent the use of shipping containers, trailers or similar conveyances to be used temporarily as substitutes for buildings on construction sites during construction; provided, however, in no event shall such temporary substitutes for buildings remain 30 days after cessation or completion of construction and shall be removed in any event within ten days after issuance of certificate of completion. 
(Code 1993, § 10.08(4)) 
Sec. 18-126. - Tents. 
    Tents shall not be used as substitutes for principal buildings or as accessory buildings, except when erected in accordance with applicable state and local code may be used as an accessory building or for the conducting of retail sales for a period not to exceed 21 days in each calendar year. 
(Code 1993, § 10.08(5)) 
Sec. 18-127. - Temporary retail sales. 
    The provisions of this section shall not prevent the conducting of retail sales directly from semi-trailers or trucks for a period not to exceed 72 consecutive hours per placement and no more than three such placements in aggregate per address, location or parcel in any one calendar year. 
(Code 1993, § 10.08(6)) 
Sec. 18-128. - Lands zoned for residential use. 
    No person shall place, erect or maintain in the city upon any lands zoned residential any shipping container, wagon, motor vehicle, railroad car, trailer, semi-trailer, truck or similar conveyance which has not been manufactured for use exclusively for mobile recreational purposes as a substitute for an accessory building, except for mobile units that contain medical diagnostic equipment for medical facilities. 
(Code 1993, § 10.08(3)) 
Sec. 18-129. - Lands zoned for business or industrial use. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall place, erect, maintain or use in the city upon lands zoned business or industrial any shipping container, wagon, motor vehicle, railroad car, trailer, semi-trailer, truck or similar conveyance for the purpose of storage, warehousing or as the location for the operation of any business without a permit. This section shall specifically not apply to the temporary parking of any of the above while engaged in the loading and unloading of cargo and merchandise. 
(b)  Application; fee; issuance; term. Upon receipt of the appropriate application as provided by the city, plus a nonrefundable fee per unit in the amount established by the city council, the building inspector may issue a permit as required in this section. Each permit is valid from January 1 or the date of issuance until the following December 31. 
(c)  Display of permit. The permit shall be displayed on the unit in a location readily viewable by the public. 
(d)  Safety and aesthetic requirements. No permit shall be issued under this section unless the unit meets the safety and aesthetic requirements as determined by the building inspector. Vertical stacking of shipping containers or similar conveyances shall not be permitted. Such shipping containers or similar conveyances shall be kept in good repair and condition so as not to constitute a nuisance or unsightly condition. 
(Code 1993, § 10.08(7)) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Police and firefighting, Wis. Stats. § 213.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 20-19. - Established; members. 
    The city shall have a volunteer fire department consisting of not less than 25 members. The council shall by resolution from time to time prescribe the number of officers of the department and set forth the qualifications and job description of each officer. The council shall further by resolution set the payment for services to be paid to members of the department. 
(Code 1993, §§ 5.01, 5.03, 5.08) 
Sec. 20-20. - Chief; subordinates. 
    The chief of the department shall be appointed by the police and fire commission in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 62.13(3). The chief shall appoint subordinates, subject to approval by the police and fire commission pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13(4). 
(Code 1993, §§ 5.02, 5.04) 
Sec. 20-21. - Duties of chief. 
    The chief and, in his absence, the assistant chiefs in the order of their rank shall have command over the members of the department and all other persons present at fires. He shall look into the condition of all fire apparatus belonging to the city and report annually to the police and fire commission the status of the department and condition of all equipment. 
(Code 1993, § 5.05) 
Sec. 20-22. - Annual meetings. 
    The department shall hold an annual meeting at the time and place established from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 5.06) 
Sec. 20-23. - Department property. 
    All property now in the possession of the department or that may be accumulated by the department shall be the property of the city and, if the department shall disband at any time, the officers and men shall turn over the property in their possession to the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 5.07) 
Sec. 20-24. - Trustees. 
    The department shall have three trustees who shall each serve a three-year term. The terms shall be staggered so that one trustee shall be elected annually by the department members at the annual meeting. The trustees are to serve without compensation. 
(Code 1993, § 5.09) 
Sec. 20-25. - Adoption of state law. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.13 are hereby adopted and specifically incorporated herein with the exception of sub. (6) thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 5.10) 
Sec. 20-26. - Use of department equipment. 
    No apparatus shall be used for any purpose except for firefighting or in training therefor, except as approved the fire chief or the trustees. 
Sec. 20-27. - Police power of fire department. 
(a)  Authority at fires. The fire chief and his assistants or officers in command, when on duty at a fire or in response to an alarm for a fire, shall have the authority to suppress any tumult or disorder and to order all individuals or companies to leave the neighborhood at any fire and to command from the inhabitants of the city all needful assistance for the suppression of fires and in preservation of property exposed to fire. 
(b)  Removal of property. The fire chief or his assistants or officers in command shall have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire or to prevent the spread of fire or protect adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire they shall have the power to order the destruction of any property clearly necessary to prevent the further spread of fire. They shall also have the power to cause the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the same impede the work of the department during the progress of a fire. 
(c)  Right of entry. It shall be lawful for any firefighter acting under the direction of the fire chief or any officer in command to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property that is on fire for the purpose of extinguishing or preventing spreading of the fire, and no person shall hinder, resist, or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his duty as provided in this chapter. 
Secs. 20-28-20-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FUNDING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-58. - Authority and purpose. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0608 for the purpose of providing for the deposit, management and disbursement of fire department volunteer funds. 
(Code 1993, § 5.11(2)) 
Sec. 20-59. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire volunteer funds means municipal funds that are raised by employees of the municipality's fire department or by volunteers for the benefit of the fire department. 
    Public depository has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 34.01(5). 
(Code 1993, § 5.11(2)A) 
Sec. 20-60. - Dual funds created. 
    The city has created two volunteer fire department funds to be accounted for and administered by the city to the conditions stated in this article. Fund A shall be a checking account and shall be used for the initial deposit of all fire volunteer funds. Fund B shall be a savings account used for fire equipment, training and other fire protection or prevention uses deemed appropriate by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 5.11(2)B) 
Sec. 20-61. - Administration. 
    All fire volunteer funds shall remain the property of the city and shall be managed, invested and distributed as provided by this article. All funds subject to this article shall be maintained in a public depository; provided, however, that all donations and grants issued to the fire department shall be deposited with the city treasurer and are not part of the funds established in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 5.11(2)B) 
Secs. 20-62-20-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FUND A-FIRE DEPARTMENT SOCIAL FUND[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-04-04-C, § 1, adopted Apr. 8, 2008, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 20-80-20-84, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to Fund A (checking) and derived from the Code of 1993, § 5.11(2)C. 

Sec. 20-81. - Establishment; use. 
    The Tomah Volunteer Fire Department (hereinafter the "department") shall open a checking account (Fund A) to be used as the initial depository of all fire volunteer funds. Fund A may be utilized by the department for the following purposes and under the following parameters: 
(1)  Funding social expenditures, including donations to community organizations as determined appropriate by the department. 
(2)  Funding Fund B. 
(3)  Other purposes deemed appropriate and beneficial to the fire department by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-04-C, § 1, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 20-82. - Maximum amount of Fund A. 
(a)  The balance in Fund A shall not exceed $20,000.00, except when funds raisers are being conducted. The $20,000.00 cap is deemed a reasonable annual amount to fund fire department social activities, but is subject to adjustment by the city council. 
(b)  Amounts over $20,000.00 shall be deposited in Fund B within 45 days of the completion of a fund raiser. 
(c)  If additional funds raisers are held throughout the year and the $20,000.00 cap has been reached, all profits from said additional funds raisers shall be deposited in Fund B within 45 days of the completion of the funds raisers. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-04-C, § 1, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 20-83. - Deposits and withdrawals. 
(a)  All withdrawals from Fund A shall need signatures of two officers of the department. 
(b)  All deposits and withdrawals from Fund A for social expenditures shall be in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-04-C, § 1, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 20-84. - Statements and reports. 
    The department is to provide the city treasurer with a copy of the monthly bank statement for Fund A and a semiannual accounting report of Fund A to the city council. These reports shall cover January 1-June 30 and July 1-December 31 of each year, shall be submitted within 30 days of the end of the report period and shall show budgeted amounts and actual expenditures for the time period being reported. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-04-C, § 1, 4-8-2008) 
Secs. 20-85-20-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FUND B-FIRE DEPARTMENT PURPOSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-04-04-C, § 1, adopted Apr. 8, 2008, repealed the former Div. 3, §§ 20-112-20-114, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. The former Div. 3 pertained to Fund B (savings) and derived from the Code of 1993, § 5.11(2)D. 

Sec. 20-112. - Establishment;use. 
    The city treasurer shall open a separate account (Fund B) into which all funds from Fund A over $20,000.00 shall be deposited. Fund B may be utilized for the following purposes and under the following parameters: 
(1)  Purchase of materials and equipment for the fire department. 
(2)  Training for firefighters and first responders. 
(3)  Other firefighting/fire protection purposes deemed appropriate and beneficial by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-04-C, § 1, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 20-113. - Reccomendations; council approval. 
    Recommendations from the department for use of Fund B monies are welcomed and encouraged, however all expenditures from Fund B shall be approved by council and are at the council's sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-04-C, § 1, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 20-114. - Statements and reports. 
    The city treasurer shall provide a quarterly report of the activities in Fund B to the council and the department within 30 days of the end of each quarter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-04-C, § 1, 4-8-2008) 
Secs. 20-115-20-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 20-142. - Fire marshal. 
    The fire chief is hereby designated fire marshal. The fire chief hereby appoints the building inspector as a member of the fire department to do the fire prevention inspections required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. ILHR 14. 
(Code 1993, § 5.20) 
Sec. 20-143. - State regulations adopted. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts by reference the following state regulations contained in the Wisconsin Administrative Code: 
IND 19 Illumination Code IND 160-164 Existing Building Code ILHR 7 Explosive Material ILHR 9 Manufacture of Fireworks ILHR 10 Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code ILHR 11 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code ILHR 12 Compressed Natural Gas Code ILHR 13 Compressed Natural Gases ILHR 14 Fire Prevention ILHR 15 Cleaning and Dyeing ILHR 16 State Electric Code ILHR 50-64 Building, Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Code ILHR 70 Historic Building Code  
(b)  Copies of the adopted codes shall be kept on file by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 5.22) 
Sec. 20-144. - Fire code adopted. 
    For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the National Fire Prevention Association (NFPA 1) Uniform Fire Code, 2006 Edition and the whole thereof is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1993, § 5.23; Ord. No. 2007-07-07-C, § 5.23, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 20-145. - Gasoline storage restricted. 
    No person owning or residing in any residential or multiple-family district as defined in article II of chapter 52 shall store, heap or have in his possession any gasoline, unless it is stored in an approved container. Storing or keeping of gasoline hereunder is limited to 12 gallons. Excluded is gasoline in the tank of any motor vehicle or gasoline-driven engine. 
(Code 1993, § 5.25) 
Sec. 20-146. - Other flammable liquid storage restricted. 
    In addition to all other regulations and requirements of this article, each owner of a bulk flammable or combustible liquid storage facility shall reimburse the city for the total cost to the city in connection with controlling fires or spillage of combustible liquids or toxic materials at such facility. 
(Code 1993, § 5.26) 
Sec. 20-147. - Inspection; right of entry. 
    The fire marshal or any inspector may at all reasonable times enter any building or premises within his jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this chapter, he may deem necessary to be made. 
(Code 1993, § 5.24) 
Sec. 20-148. - Fire hazards; order for removal. 
    Whenever the fire marshal or any inspector of the fire department shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions, he shall order such dangerous conditions or materials removed or remedied in a manner specified by the fire marshal. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this section. Such dangerous or hazardous conditions shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive matter. 
(2)  Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment or handling or using combustible or explosive matter. 
(3)  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings or other highly inflammable materials. 
(4)  Accumulations of dust or waste materials in air conditioning systems or of grease in kitchen exhaust ducts. 
(5)  Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire. 
(6)  Any building or other structure which for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes or other exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus, or dilapidated condition or from any other cause creates a fire hazard. 
(7)  Violations or failure to comply with the regulations incorporated herein. 
(Code 1993, § 5.21) 
Secs. 20-149-20-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-180. - Prohibited acts; local regulation. 
    No person shall sell, possess, or use fireworks except as provided in this article, including the requirements relating to user and seller permits. This article shall constitute a local regulation adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 167.10(5). 
(Code 1993, § 9.06) 
Sec. 20-181. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term "fireworks" means anything manufactured, processed or packaged for exploding, emitting sparks or combustion which does not have another common use, but does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Fuel or lubricant. 
(2)  A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell. 
(3)  A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or in the operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle. 
(4)  A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space heater. 
(5)  A cap containing not more than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture, if the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which prevents direct bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion. 
(6)  A toy snake which contains no mercury. 
(7)  A model rocket engine. 
(8)  Tobacco and a tobacco product. 
(9)  A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 inches in length that is designed to produce audible or visible effects. 
(10)  A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture. 
(11)  A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or audible and visible effects, and that contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture. 
(12)  A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smoke-producing mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible or visible effects, or audible and visible effect. 
(13)  A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50. 
(14)  A cone fountain that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(1)) 
Sec. 20-182. - Restrictions relating to minors; parental liability. 
    No permit shall be issued under this division to a minor nor shall the holder of a permit sell or provide fireworks to a minor. A parent or legal guardian of a minor who consents to the use of fireworks by the minor is liable for damages caused by the minor's use of the fireworks. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(6), (9)) 
Sec. 20-183. - Storage and handling. 
(a)  Fire extinguishers required. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store or handle fireworks in premises, and no person shall be issued a fireworks permit, unless the premises are equipped with fire extinguishers approved by the fire chief. Fire extinguishers must have a current inspection tag. 
(b)  Smoking prohibited. No person may smoke where fireworks are stored or handled. 
(c)  Fire chief notified. A person who stores or handles fireworks shall notify the city fire chief of the location of fireworks stored. 
(d)  Restrictions on location. No person may store fireworks within 50 feet of a public assemblage or place where gasoline or volatile liquid is sold in quantities exceeding one gallon. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store fireworks within 50 feet of a residential dwelling. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(8)) 
Sec. 20-184. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates this article, upon conviction thereof, shall forfeit not less than $250.00 or more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate violation and offense. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(9)) 
Sec. 20-185. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked in writing by the city for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement in the application for permit. 
(2)  Any violation of any local ordinance and/or federal and state regulations and statutes regarding the use, possession, sale, transportation, and storage of fireworks and other flammable or explosive materials. 
(3)  Conducting the business of fireworks sales in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or general health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(4)  Verification by the fire chief or building inspector that the premises, means of storage, methods of sale, or other operation related to the sale, storage, or handling of fireworks is unsafe or does not meet any applicable governmental regulations. 
(5)  Any other grounds that the city sees fit to protect the public interest or safety. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(5)) 
Sec. 20-186. - Appeal. 
    Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the city in the denial or revocation of a permit may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds of the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such an appeal and notice shall be mailed by the city clerk to the appellant at the last known address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at least three days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(7)) 
Secs. 20-187-20-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USER'S PERMITS 

Sec. 20-211. - Permit required for use. 
(a)  No person may use fireworks without a user's permit obtained from the city clerk. No person may use fireworks or a device listed under section 20-181(5)-(7) and (9)-(14) while attending a fireworks display for which a permit has been issued if the display is open to the general public. 
(b)  This section does not apply to: 
(1)  The city, except that city fire officials shall be notified of the proposed use of fireworks at least two days in advance. 
(2)  The possession or use of explosives in accordance with rules or general orders of the state department of industry, labor and human relations. 
(3)  The disposal of hazardous substances in accordance with rules adopted by the state department of natural resources. 
(4)  The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in any manufacturing process. 
(5)  The possession or use of explosive or combustible material in connection with classes conducted by educational institutions. 
(6)  A possessor or manufacturer of explosives in possession of a license or permit under 18 USC 841 to 848 if the possession of the fireworks is authorized under the license or permit. 
(7)  A possessor of fireworks within the city while transporting the fireworks to a location outside the geographical jurisdiction of the city, only if such person does not remain within the city for a period of more than 12 hours. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(2)(b)) 
Sec. 20-212. - Qualifications for user's permit. 
    A user's permit under this subsection may be issued only to the following: 
(1)  A public authority. 
(2)  A fair association. 
(3)  An amusement park. 
(4)  A park board. 
(5)  A civic organization. 
(6)  A group of resident or nonresident individuals. 
(7)  An agricultural producer for the protection of crops from predatory birds or animals. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(2)(c)) 
Sec. 20-213. - Application for permit. 
    An application for a user's permit under this article must include the following information: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the permit holder. 
(2)  The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased. 
(3)  The kind and quantity of fireworks which may be purchased. 
(4)  Date and location of permitted use. 
(5)  Proof of $1,000,000.00 in liability insurance coverage. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(2)(d)) 
Sec. 20-214. - Copies of permit. 
    Copies of all user's permits issued under this article shall be given to the fire chief at least two days before the date of authorized use. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(2)(f)) 
Sec. 20-215. - Crop protection signs. 
    A person issued a permit to use fireworks for crop protection shall erect appropriate warning signs disclosing the use of fireworks for crop protection. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(2)(e)) 
Secs. 20-216-20-238. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SELLER'S PERMITS 

Sec. 20-239. - Sale of fireworks restricted. 
    No person may sell or possess with intent to sell fireworks without a seller's permit issued by the city clerk as provided herein. A person with a seller's permit may sell fireworks: 
(1)  To a person holding a permit issued under this article; 
(2)  To a municipality; or 
(3)  To entities and for purposes specified under section 20-212. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(3)) 
Sec. 20-240. - Application; fee; approval required. 
    A seller's permit may be obtained from the city clerk by application on forms provided by the city. No permit shall be issued for a longer period than one year. A nonrefundable permit application fee for each site within the city in the amount established by the city council shall accompany each application. All permits shall be approved by the fire chief prior to issuance by the city clerk. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(3)) 
Sec. 20-241. - Contents of permit. 
    A permit under this subsection shall specify the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the permit holder. 
(2)  Dates and location where the fireworks may be sold under the permit. 
(3)  The kind of fireworks which may be sold under the permit. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(3)) 
Sec. 20-242. - Display of permit. 
    The seller's permit shall at all times be publicly and continuously displayed at the permitted location. 
(Code 1993, § 9.06(3)) 
Secs. 20-243-20-262. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR BURNING 

Sec. 20-263. - Permit required. 
    No person shall kindle any grass or brush fire within the city limits without a permit from the fire department. 
(Code 1993, § 9.05(1), (4)) 
Sec. 20-264. - Certain fires prohibited. 
    No person shall kindle or cause to be kindled any fire in or upon any street, alley, public way, park or other public ground unless specifically authorized by the fire chief. 
(Code 1993, § 9.05(2)) 
Sec. 20-265. - Time and location restricted. 
    Garden waste and leaves may be burned but burning must be at least 25 feet from any building. Burning of garden waste and leaves is permitted only after 6:00 p.m. Burning may not be done in any street or alleyway. Access to a garden hose or fire extinguisher is required. 
(Code 1993, § 9.05(3)) 
Sec. 20-266. - Camp and recreational fires restricted. 
(a)  Containment required. A camp or other recreational fire must be burned within a fire pit of the type provided in this section. 
(b)  Fire pit design and specifications. The pit may be lined with rock, a fire ring, or a brick liner. The width of the fire pit liner can be no larger than four feet across and the width of the fire pit can be no larger than five feet across. The maximum height of the campfire shall be no more than three feet at any time. 
(c)  Fuel to consist of wood only. Only wood may be burned. No person shall burn garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, organic waste, animal residue, tires or other solid waste materials in a recreation fire pit. 
(d)  Time; vicinity of buildings. Campfires are permitted at any time of the day or night, but must be at least 25 feet from any building and must be attended. 
(Code 1993, § 9.05(5)) 
Sec. 20-267. - Open burning in business locations prohibited. 
    No burning permit may be issued for open burning at any business location. 
(Code 1993, § 9.05(6)) 
Chapter 22 - FLOODPLAINS, SHORELANDS, AND WETLANDS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-16. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-17. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Article for Tomah, Wisconsin. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12-15-D, § 1, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 22-18. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact and statement of purpose. 
    Statutory authorization. This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 144.26. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12-15-D, § 1, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 22-19. - Finding of fact. 
    Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base. 
(Code 1993, § 20.01.2) 
Sec. 22-20. - Statement of purpose. 
    This article is intended to regulate floodplain development to: 
(1)  Protect life, health and property; 
(2)  Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers; 
(4)  Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain; 
(6)  Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain; 
(7)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers; 
(8)  Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and 
(9)  Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Code 1993, § 20.01.3) 
Sec. 22-21. - Amendments to map. 
(a)  When required. The governing body may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this article in the manner provided by law. Actions which require an amendment include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any change to the official floodplain zoning map, including the floodway line or boundary of any floodplain area. 
(2)  Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain zoning maps. 
(3)  Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain. 
(4)  Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more. 
(5)  Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.05, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality. 
All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood fringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a firm requires prior approval by FEMA. 
Note: Consult the FEMA website - www.fema.gov - for the map change fee schedule. 
(b)  Procedures. Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any interested party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23, for cities and villages, or Wis. Stats. § 59.69, for counties. Such petitions shall include all necessary data required by sections 22-55(d) and 22-118. 
(1)  The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23, for cities and villages, or Wis. Stats. § 59.69, for counties. 
(2)  No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the department. 
(3)  All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body. 
(4)  For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the zoning agency or board shall consider data submitted by the department, the zoning administrator's visual on-site inspections and other available information. (See section 22-24(d).) 
(Code 1993, §§ 20.08.1, 20.08.2; Ord. No. 2009-12-15-D, § 2, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 22-22. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $99.00 and not more than $100.00, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Code 1993, § 20.09.0) 
Sec. 22-23. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A zones means those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A zones. The A zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
    Accessory structure or use means a facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a flood insurance study (FIS) and depicted on a flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Basement means any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
    Building. See structure. 
    Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the state department of natural resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this article. 
    Campground means any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
    Camping unit means any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, tent or other mobile recreational vehicle. 
    Certificate of compliance means a certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
    Crawlways or crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
    Deck means an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
    Department or DNR means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
    Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Dryland access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
    Encroachment means any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or development in the floodway. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Expansion to existing mobile/manufactured home park means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Federal emergency management agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
(2)  The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(3)  The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or 
(4)  The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
    Flood frequency means the probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year. 
    Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study (FIS) and a flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can be amended only by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means a technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A zones. Flood insurance rate maps that accompany the flood insurance study form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
    Flood protection elevation means an elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see freeboard. ) 
    Flood storage means those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
    Floodfringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. 
    Floodplain means land which has been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
    Floodplain island means natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
    Floodplain management means policy and procedures to ensure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities, and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
    Freeboard means a safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or streambed. 
    Habitable structure means any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation. 
    Hearing notice means publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. For appeals; a class 1 notice, published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing is required. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice exceeding these minimums. 
    High flood damage potential means damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 feet, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions, which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain, but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
    Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see development. ) 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a mobile recreational vehicle. 
    Mobile recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of mobile recreational vehicles. 
    Municipality or municipal means the county, city or village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this article. 
    NAVD or North American Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
    NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
    New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain zoning regulations, from which this article was derived, adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.) 
    Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies, such as a residence in the floodway. 
    Obstruction to flow means any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
    Official Floodplain Zoning Map means that map, adopted and made part of this article, as described in section 22-24(b), which has been approved by the department and FEMA. 
    Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
    Ordinary highwater mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
    Private sewage system means a sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the department of commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure, or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
    Public utilities means those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in the state. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the regional flood elevation (RFE) is equivalent to the base flood elevation (BFE). 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, streambed or lake bed including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
    Subdivision has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12). 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Unnecessary hardship means where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the regulation. 
    Variance means an authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning provisions. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain zoning provisions. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface profile means a graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
    Watershed means the entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
    Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. 
(Code 1993, § 20.10.0) 
Sec. 22-24. - Designated floodplain areas. 
(a)  Areas to be regulated. This article regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood. Note: Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the flood insurance study. Regional flood elevations may be derived from other studies. Areas covered by the base flood are identified as A-zones on the flood insurance rate map. 
(b)  Official maps and revisions. 
(1)  The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as floodplains or A zones on the maps listed below and any revisions in the city's floodplain appendix. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) in the flood insurance study (FIS) or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations (RFE's) on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the city clerk. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(2)  Official maps. The following maps are the official maps for purposes of this article: 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM), panel number 55081C0245D, 55081C0263D, 55081C0381D, 55081C0382D, 55081C0384D, 55081C0401D, 55081C0402D, 55081C0403D dated 01/20/2010; with corresponding profiles that are based on the flood insurance study (FIS Volume number 55081CV000A) dated 01/20/2010. 
(c)  Establishment of districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows: 
(1)  The floodway district (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters. 
(2)  The floodfringe district (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between the regional flood limits and the floodway. 
(3)  The general floodplain district (GFP) is those areas that have been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. 
(d)  Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in subsections (d)(1) or (d)(2) of this section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to section 22-21. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to section 22-122 and as follows: 
(1)  If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. 
(2)  Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale, visual on-site inspection and any information provided by the department. 
(e)  Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this article shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to section 22-21. This procedure does not remove the requirements for the mandatory purchase of flood insurance. The property owner must contact FEMA to request a Letter of Map Change (LOMC). 
(Code 1993, § 20.01.5(1)-(5); Ord. No. 2009-12-15-D, § 3, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 22-25. - Compliance. 
    Any development or use within the areas regulated by this article shall be in compliance with the terms of this article, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 20.01.5(6)) 
Sec. 22-26. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of transportation is exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. 
(Code 1993, § 20.01.5(7)) 
Sec. 22-27. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  This article supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694 for counties; Wis. Stats. § 62.23 for cities; Wis. Stats. § 61.35 for villages; or Wis. Stats. § 87.30, which relate to floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this article, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Code 1993, § 20.01.5(8)) 
Sec. 22-28. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the state statutes. If a provision of this article, required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article. 
(Code 1993, § 20.01.5(9)) 
Sec. 22-29. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
(a)  The flood protection standards in this article are based on engineering experience and scientific research. Larger floods may occur, or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. Nor does this article create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this article. 
(b)  Should any portion of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected. 
(Code 1993, § 20.01.5(10); Ord. No. 2009-12-15-D, § 5, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 22-30. - Annexed areas of cities and villages. 
    The county floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116, and the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the location of the floodway. 
(Code 1993, § 20.01.5(12)) 
Sec. 22-31. - General development standards. 
    The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a floodprone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 20.01.5(13)) 
Sec. 22-32. - General standards applicable to all floodplain districts. 
(a)  Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
(1)  Except as allowed in subsection (a)(3) of this section, no floodplain development shall: 
a.  Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, increasing regional flood height; or 
b.  Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost, which equals or exceeds 0.01 feet. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or increase regional flood heights 0.01 feet or more, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of subsection (a)(3) of this section are met. 
(3)  Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 feet may only be permitted if amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 22-21. 
Note: This section refers to obstructions or increases in base flood elevations as shown on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR. 
(b)  Watercourse alterations. 
(1)  No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the department and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(2)  As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the zoning administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or scientific data in accordance with NFIP guidelines that shall be used to revise the FIRM, risk premium rates and floodplain management regulations as required. 
(c)  Permitted development. Development which requires a permit from the department under Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles and base flood elevations (BFEs) established in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted FIRM, or other floodplain zoning maps or the floodplain zoning provisions are made according to section 22-21. 
(d)  Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
(1)  The campground is approved by the state department of health and family services. 
(2)  A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator. 
(3)  The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground are such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants. 
(4)  There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under subsection (d)(3) of this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used, and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation. 
(5)  This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the officials identified in subsection (4) of this section to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state department of health and family services and all other applicable regulations. 
(6)  Only camping units are allowed. 
(7)  The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours. 
(8)  All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section. 
(9)  The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this section. 
(10)  All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either section 22-53 or section 22-54 for the floodplain district in which the structure is located. 
(11)  The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued. 
(12)  All service facilities, including, but not limited to, refuse collection, electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Code 1993, § 20.02; Ord. No. 2009-12-15-D, § 6, 12-15-2009) 
Secs. 22-33-22-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS 

Sec. 22-53. - Floodway district (FW). 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 22-55(d). 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway areas of the general floodplain district, if they are not prohibited by any other ordinance; they meet the standards in subsections (c) and (d) of this section; and all permits or certificates have been issued according to sections 22-119 and 22-120: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
(3)  Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of subsection (c) of this section. 
(4)  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(5)  Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with subsection (d) of this section. 
(6)  Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31. 
(7)  Public utilities. 
(c)  Standards for developments in floodway areas. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  Any development in floodway areas shall comply with section 22-32 and have a low flood damage potential. 
b.  Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to section 22-32(a). 
1.  A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or 
2.  An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height. 
c.  The zoning administrator/building inspector shall deny the permit application if the project will increase flood elevations upstream or downstream 0.01 feet or more, based on the data submitted for subsection (1)b of this section. 
(2)  Accessory structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria: 
a.  The structure is not designed for human habitation and does not have a high flood damage potential; 
b.  It must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
c.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
d.  It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood. 
(3)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if: 
a.  Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and 
b.  Construction meets the development standards of section 22-32(a). 
(4)  Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: 
a.  The requirements of section 22-32(a) are met; 
b.  No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is issued by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 30, and a permit pursuant to s. 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this section are met; 
c.  The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and 
d.  The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in subsection (b) of this section are prohibited, including the following uses: 
(1)  Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open-space uses; 
(2)  Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life; 
(3)  Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts; 
(4)  Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 83; 
(5)  Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812; 
(6)  Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(7)  Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under Wis. Admin. Code NR 110.15(3)(b); 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which comply with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Code 1993, § 20.03) 
Sec. 22-54. - Floodfringe district (FF). 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 22-55(d). 
(b)  Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the floodfringe district if the standards in subsection (c) of this section are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in sections 22-119 and 22-120 have been issued. 
(c)  Standards for development in floodfringe areas. Section 22-32 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use requested. 
(1)  Residential uses. Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved into the floodfringe area, shall meet or exceed the following standards: 
a.  The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. The department may authorize other floodproofing measures if the elevations of existing streets or sewer lines make compliance with the fill standards impractical. 
b.  The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation. 
c.  Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside the floodplain, except as provided in subsection (1)d of this section. 
d.  In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with subsection (1)c of this section impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where access roads are at or below the regional flood elevation, if: 
1.  The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structures by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
2.  The municipality has a natural disaster plan approved by Wisconsin Emergency Management and the department. 
(2)  Accessory structures or uses. 
a.  Except as provided in subsection (2)b of this section, an accessory structure which is not connected to a principal structure may be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation. 
b.  An accessory structure which is not connected to the principal structure and which is less than 600 square feet in size and valued at less than $10,000.00 may be constructed with its lowest floor no more than two feet below the regional flood elevation if it is subject to flood velocities of no more than two feet per second and it meets all of the provisions of sections 22-53(c) and 22-54(c)5. 
(3)  Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall meet the requirements of subsection (c)(1) of this section. Subject to the requirements of subsection (c)(5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(4)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall be protected to the flood protection elevation using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other floodproofing measures in section 22-124. Subject to the requirements of subsection (c)(5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(5)  Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with section 22-124. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(6)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and: 
a.  When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction of and substantial improvements to such facilities may be permitted only if they are floodproofed in compliance with section 22-124 to the flood protection elevation; 
b.  Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(7)  Sewage systems. All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 22-124, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 83. 
(8)  Wells. All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 22-124, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(9)  Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas. 
(10)  Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this article. 
(11)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities. 
b.  In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and 
2.  Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
c.  Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(12)  Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in subsection (c)(11) of this section. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Code 1993, § 20.04) 
Sec. 22-55. - General floodplain district (GFP). 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains for which flood profiles are not available, or where flood profiles are available but floodways have not been delineated. Floodway and floodfringe districts shall be delineated when adequate data is available. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or floodfringe area. 
(2)  Those uses permitted in floodway, section 22-53(b), and floodfringe areas, section 22-54(b), are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of subsection (c) of this section, provided that all permits or certificates required under sections 22-119 and 22-120 have been issued. 
(c)  Standards for development in the general floodplain district. Section 22-53 applies to floodway areas, section 22-54 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this division applies to either district. 
(d)  Determining floodway and floodfringe limits. Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures; 
(2)  Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries: 
a.  A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel, the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed development, and all historic high water information; 
b.  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information; 
c.  Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream; 
d.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(3)  Transmit one copy of the information described in subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section to the department regional office along with a written request for technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations and, where applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of section 22-113 apply, the applicant shall provide all required information and computations to delineate floodway boundaries and the effects of the project on flood elevations. 
(Code 1993, § 20.05) 
Secs. 22-56-22-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 22-84. - Applicability. 
(a)  If these standards conform with Wis. Stats. § 59.69(10), for counties, or Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), for cities and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any amendment thereto. 
(b)  The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may continue subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this article. 
a.  The terms "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. 
b.  Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered an extension, modification or addition; these include painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components, and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not include any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure. 
c.  The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this article. 
(3)  The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent. 
(4)  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use which over the life of the structure would exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with subsection 22-54(c)(1). The costs of elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provisions of this subsection. 
(5)  Damage or destruction of nonconforming structure. 
a.  Except as provided in section 22-32, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current article requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition exceeds 50 percent of the structure's present equalized assessed value. 
b.  For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by a non-flood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building may be permitted in order to restore it after the non-flood disaster, provided that the nonconforming building will meet all of the minimum requirements under applicable FEMA regulations, 44 CFR 60, or the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(6)  A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with subsection 22-53(c)(1), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with section 22-124 are used. 
(Code 1993, § 20.06.1; Ord. No. 2009-12-15-D, § 7, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 22-85. - Floodway areas. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such modification or addition: 
(1)  Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all requirements of this article; 
(2)  Meets the requirements of section 22-84; 
(3)  Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height; 
(4)  Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 22-124, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; 
(5)  If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade; 
b.  The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials; 
c.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
d.  The use must be limited to parking or limited storage. 
(b)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 83. 
(c)  No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code. chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(Code 1993, § 20.06.2) 
Sec. 22-86. - Floodfringe areas. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the standards for that particular use in section 22-54(c), except where subsection (b) of this section is applicable. 
(b)  Where compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section would result in unnecessary hardship, and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the board of adjustment/appeals, using the procedures established in section 22-122, may grant a variance from those provisions of subsection (a) of this section for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
(1)  No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
(2)  Human lives are not endangered; 
(3)  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed; 
(4)  Flood depths will not exceed two feet; 
(5)  Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and 
(6)  The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in section 22-54(c)(5). 
(c)  If neither the provisions of subsections (a) or (b) of this section can be met, one addition to an existing room in a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use may be allowed in the floodfringe, if the addition: 
(1)  Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or variance; 
(2)  Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and 
(3)  In combination with other previous modifications or additions to the building, does not exceed 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the building. 
(d)  All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm 83. 
(e)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this article and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(Code 1993, § 20.06.3) 
Secs. 22-87-22-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 22-116. - Planning commission. 
    Where a planning commission has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), these officials shall also administer this article. 
(Code 1993, § 20.07.0) 
Sec. 22-117. - Zoning administrator/building inspector; authority. 
    The zoning administrator/building inspector is authorized to administer this article and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants of the provisions of this article, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(2)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this article, and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate. 
(3)  Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(4)  Keep records of all official actions such as: 
a.  All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved; 
b.  Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations for floodplain development; 
c.  Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments; 
d.  All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures. 
(5)  Submit copies of the following items to the department regional office: 
a.  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments; 
b.  Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information required by the department including an annual summary of the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken; 
c.  Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments. Information on conducting substantial damage assessments is available on the DNR website: http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/dsfm/flood/title.htm. 
(6)  Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this article to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the department regional office. 
(7)  Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA regional office. 
(Code 1993, § 20.07.1(1)) 
Sec. 22-118. - Land use permit. 
    A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development or any structural repair or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall include: 
(1)  Information required. 
a.  Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor. 
b.  Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification. 
(2)  Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot; 
b.  Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
c.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street centerlines; 
d.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
e.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
f.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps; 
g.  The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study-either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
h.  Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of sections 22-53 and 22-54 are met; and 
i.  Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to section 22-32(a). This may include any of the information noted in section 22-53(c)(1). 
(3)  Data requirements to analyze developments. The applicant shall provide all survey data and computations required to show the effects of the project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain storage; for all subdivision proposals, as the term "subdivision" is defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 236; and for other proposed developments exceeding five acres in area or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000.00. The applicant shall provide: 
a.  An analysis of the effect of the development on the regional flood profile, velocity of flow and floodplain storage capacity; 
b.  A map showing location and details of vehicular access to lands outside the floodplain; and 
c.  A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will be minimized. 
The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural development, landscaping, access and road development, utilities, and other pertinent items, but need not include land costs. 
(4)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire 365 days after issuance. 
(Code 1993, § 20.07.1(2)) 
Sec. 22-119. - Certificate of compliance. 
    No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator/building inspector, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit; 
(3)  If all article provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is completed; 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that floodproofing measures meet the requirements of section 22-124. 
(Code 1993, § 20.07.1(3)) 
Sec. 22-120. - Other permits. 
    The applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Code 1993, § 20.07.1(4)) 
Sec. 22-121. - Zoning agency. 
(a)  The planning commission shall: 
(1)  Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and 
(2)  Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to this article, maps and text. 
(b)  This zoning agency shall not: 
(1)  Grant variances to the terms of the article in place of action by the board of adjustment/appeals; or 
(2)  Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the governing body. 
(Code 1993, § 20.07.2) 
Sec. 22-122. - Board of appeals. 
    The board of appeals, created under Wis. Stats. § 59.694, for counties, or Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this article. The board shall exercise the powers conferred by state statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning administrator/building inspector may not be the secretary of the board. 
(1)  Powers and duties. The board of appeals shall hear and decide petitions in regard to: 
a.  Appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
b.  Boundary disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map. 
c.  Variances from the article standards upon appeal. 
(2)  Appeals to the board. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator/building inspector or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days, unless otherwise provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the matter appealed. 
a.  Notice and hearing for appeals including variances. 
1.  Notice. The board shall: 
(i)  Fix a reasonable time for the hearing; 
(ii)  Publish adequate notice pursuant to state statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; 
(iii)  Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the department regional office at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
2.  Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The board shall: 
(i)  Resolve boundary disputes according to subsection (3) of this section. 
(ii)  Decide variance applications according to subsection (4) of this section. 
(iii)  Decide appeals of permit denials according to section 22-123. 
b.  Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall: 
1.  Be made within a reasonable time; 
2.  Be sent to the department regional office within ten days of the decision; 
3.  Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the board; 
4.  State the specific facts which are the basis for the board's decision; 
5.  Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction, or grant or deny the variance application; 
6.  Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the board proceedings. 
(3)  Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries: 
a.  If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined. 
b.  In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board. 
c.  If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should inform the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to section 22-21. 
(4)  Variance. 
a.  The board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this article if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
1.  Literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will cause unnecessary hardship; 
2.  The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain provisions and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises, in which case the article or map must be amended; 
3.  The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and 
4.  The variance is consistent with the purpose of this article in section 22-20. 
b.  In addition to the criteria in subsection (4)(a) of this section, to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met: 
1.  The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation; 
2.  Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE; 
3.  Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the article. 
c.  A variance shall not: 
1.  Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district. 
2.  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss. 
3.  Be granted for a hardship which is self-created. 
4.  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area. 
5.  Allow actions without the amendments to this article or maps required in section 22-21(a). 
6.  Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
d.  When a floodplain variance is granted the board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase flood insurance premiums and risks to life and property. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record. 
(Code 1993, § 20.07.3) 
Sec. 22-123. - To review appeals of permit denials. 
(a)  The zoning agency (section 22-121) or board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include: 
(1)  Permit application data listed in section 22-118. 
(2)  Floodway/floodfringe determination data in section 22-55(d). 
(3)  Data listed in section 22-53(c)(1) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator. 
(4)  Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(b)  For appeals of all denied permits the board shall: 
(1)  Follow the procedures of section 22-122; 
(2)  Consider zoning agency recommendations; and 
(3)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(c)  For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the board shall: 
(1)  Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners. 
(2)  Grant the appeal where the board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(Code 1993, § 20.07.4) 
Sec. 22-124. - Floodproofing. 
(a)  No permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation. 
(b)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed to: 
(1)  Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional flood factors; 
(2)  Protect structures to the flood protection elevation; 
(3)  Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; and 
(4)  Ensure that structural walls and floors are watertight to the flood protection elevation, and the interior remains completely dry during flooding without human intervention. 
(c)  Floodproofing measures could include: 
(1)  Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure. 
(2)  Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation. 
(3)  Placing essential utilities above the flood protection elevation. 
(4)  Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve foundation wall and basement floor pressures. 
(5)  Constructing water supply wells and waste treatment systems to prevent the entry of floodwaters. 
(6)  Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity flow basement drains. 
(Code 1993, § 20.07.5) 
Sec. 22-125. - Public information. 
(a)  Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood. 
(b)  All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed. 
(c)  All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real property is in. 
(Code 1993, § 20.07.6) 
Secs. 22-126-22-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING 

Sec. 22-149. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact and statement of purpose. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 144.26. 
(b)  Finding of fact and purpose. Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and pollution of the navigable waters of the city would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare and impair the tax base. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
(2)  Maintain the storm and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands. 
(3)  Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters. 
(4)  Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitat. 
(5)  Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area. 
(6)  Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth moving activities. 
(Code 1993, § 16.01) 
Sec. 22-150. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally. 
    Accessory structure or use means a detached subordinate structure or a use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure or use. 
    Boathouse means, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.01(1d), a structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials which has one or more walls or sides. 
    Class 2 public notice means publication of a public hearing notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, in a newspaper of circulation in the affected area. Publication is required on two consecutive weeks, the last at least seven days prior to the hearing. 
    Conditional use means a use which is permitted by this article, provided that certain conditions specified in the article are met and that a permit is granted by the board of appeals or, where appropriate, the planning agency designated by the city council. 
    Department means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations and the deposition or extraction of earthen materials. 
    Drainage system means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge. 
    Environmental control facility means any facility, temporary or permanent which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities. 
    Fixed houseboat means, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.01(1r), a structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary high watermark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway. 
    Navigable waters means: 
(1)  Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within the state and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters which are navigable under the laws of this state. Under Wis. Stats. § 144.26(2)(d), notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.351 or 62.221, and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if: 
a.  Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river. 
b.  Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching. 
c.  Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
(2)  The state supreme court has declared navigable bodies of water that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis, (Muench v. Public Service Commission, (261 Wis. 492, 53 N.W.2d 514 (1952), and DeGaynor and Co., Inc., v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis.2d 936, 236 N.W.2d 217 (1975)). For example, a stream which is navigable by skiff or canoe during normal spring highwater is navigable, in fact, under the laws of this state though it may be dry during other seasons. 
    Ordinary high watermark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Planning agency means the city plan commission created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(1), a board of public land commissioners or a committee of the city council which acts on matters pertaining to planning and zoning. 
    Shorelands means lands within the following distances from the ordinary high watermark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. 
    Unnecessary hardship means that circumstance where special conditions which were not self-created affect a particular property and which make strict conformity with restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this article. 
    Variance means an authorization granted by the board of appeals to construct or alter a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional standards of this article. 
    Wetland alteration means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures, or dike and dam construction in a wetland area. 
    Wetlands means those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions. 
(Code 1993, § 16.02) 
Sec. 22-151. - Compliance. 
    The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland area of the city shall be in full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. (However, see section 22-158 for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.) All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 16.03(1)) 
Sec. 22-152. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of transportation are exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.12(4)(a) applies. 
(Code 1993, § 16.03(2)) 
Sec. 22-153. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23 or 87.30, which relate to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than this chapter, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Code 1993, § 16.03(3)) 
Sec. 22-154. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the state statutes. Where a provision of this chapter is required by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, and where the chapter provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 16.03(4)) 
Sec. 22-155. - Shoreland-wetland zoning district. 
(a)  Shoreland-wetland zoning maps. The following maps are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter and are on file in the office of the zoning administrator: 
(1)  Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map stamped final revised dated April 11, 1988, or the most recent version. 
(2)  Floodplain zoning maps entitled City of Tomah Flood Boundary, Floodway Maps And Flood Insurance Rate Map dated August 17, 1981, or the most recent version. 
(3)  United States Geological Survey maps dated 1983 or the most recent version. 
(4)  Zoning maps. 
(b)  District boundaries. 
(1)  The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the city which are five acres or more and are shown on the final wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this chapter and which are: 
a.  Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high watermark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the city shall be presumed to be navigable if they are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
b.  Within 300 feet of the ordinary high watermark of navigable rivers or streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this article. Floodplain zoning maps adopted in subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be used to determine the extent of floodplain areas. 
(2)  Determinations of navigability and ordinary high watermark location shall initially be made by the zoning administrator. When questions arise, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high watermark. 
(3)  When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district boundary shown on the official zoning maps and actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped is in error. If department staff concur with the zoning administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors shown on the official shoreland-wetland zoning maps, the zoning administrator shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period. 
(Code 1993, § 16.04) 
Sec. 22-156. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if applicable: 
(1)  Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs: 
a.  Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and boating. 
b.  The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops. 
c.  The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber. 
d.  The pasteurizing of livestock. 
e.  The cultivation of agricultural crops. 
f.  The construction and maintenance of duck blinds. 
(2)  Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
a.  The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected. 
b.  The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries. 
c.  The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible. 
d.  The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance. 
e.  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance. 
f.  The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district, provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in section 22-166(3). 
g.  The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction. 
(3)  Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a shoreland-wetland permit and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
a.  The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of the city street system, the provisions of essential utility and emergency services, or to provide access to uses permitted under subsection (1) of this section, provided that: 
1.  The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland. 
2.  The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed. 
3.  The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use. 
4.  Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only. 
5.  Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road. 
b.  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings, provided that: 
1.  The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals. 
2.  The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland. 
3.  The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area. 
4.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building are allowed. 
c.  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas; outdoor education areas; historic, natural and scientific areas; game refuges and closed areas; fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects; game bird and animal farms; wildlife preserves; and public boat launching ramps, provided that: 
1.  Any private development allowed under this subsection shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose. 
2.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed. 
3.  The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in subsection (3)(a) of this section. 
4.  Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values. 
d.  The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines, sewage collection lines and related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that: 
1.  The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland. 
2.  Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed. 
3.  Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 22-166(3). 
(Code 1993, § 16.05) 
Sec. 22-157. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Any use not listed in section 22-156 is prohibited unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this chapter. 
(b)  The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high watermark of any navigable waters are prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 16.06) 
Sec. 22-158. - Nonconforming structures and uses. 
(a)  The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the time this article or an applicable amendment to this article took effect and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article, including the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued, subject to the following conditions. 
(b)  The shoreland-wetland provisions of this article authorized by Wis. Stats. § 62.231, shall not limit the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming structure in existence on the effective date of the shoreland-wetland provisions or of any environmental control facility in existence on May 7, 1982, related to such a structure. All other modifications to nonconforming structures are subject to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), which limits total lifetime structural repairs and alterations to 50 percent of current fair market value. 
(c)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to this article. 
(d)  Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, adopted under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.351 or 62.231, may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended. 
(e)  The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the ordinary high watermark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 30.121. 
(f)  Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses. 
(Code 1993, § 16.07) 
Sec. 22-159. - Zoning administrator; duties and powers. 
    The zoning administrator shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants as to the provisions of this article and assist them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms. 
(2)  Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with this article. 
(3)  Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions. 
(4)  Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties. 
(5)  Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments within ten days after they are granted or denied to the appropriate district office of the department. 
(6)  Investigate and report violations of this article to the appropriate city planning agency and the city attorney. 
(Code 1993, § 16.08(1), Ord. No. 2008-07-08-D, § 1, 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 22-160. - Zoning permits. 
(a)  When required. Unless another section of this article specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator before any new development as defined in this article or any change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated. 
(b)  Application. An application for a zoning permit shall be made to the zoning administrator upon forms furnished by the city and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations, the following information: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property owner and contractor, where applicable. 
b.  Legal description of the property and a general description of the proposed use or development. 
c.  Whether or not a private water supply or sewage system is to be installed. 
(2)  Site development plan. The site development plan shall be submitted as a part of the permit application and shall contain the following information drawn to scale: 
a.  Dimensions and area of the lot. 
b.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and centerline of all abutting streets or highways. 
c.  Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems. 
d.  Location of the ordinary high watermark of any abutting navigable waterways. 
e.  Boundaries of all wetlands. 
f.  Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover. 
g.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from floodplain zoning maps. 
h.  Location of existing or future access roads. 
i.  Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration. 
(3)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1993, § 16.08(2)) 
Sec. 22-161. - Certificates of compliance. 
(a)  Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required, no land shall be occupied or used and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof and the proposed use thereof conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a zoning or conditional use permit. 
(3)  The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after notification of the completion of the work specified in the zoning or conditional use permit, providing the building or premises and proposed use thereof conform with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The zoning administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building, premises or part thereof pursuant to rules and regulations established by the city council. 
(c)  Upon written request from the owner, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of adoption, certifying after inspection the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 16.08(3)) 
Sec. 22-162. - Fees. 
    The city council may, by resolution, adopt fees for the following: 
(1)  Zoning permits. 
(2)  Certificates of compliance. 
(3)  Public hearings. 
(4)  Legal notice publications. 
(5)  Conditional use permits. 
(6)  Rezoning petitions. 
(Code 1993, § 16.08(4)) 
Sec. 22-163. - Recording. 
    Where a zoning permit or conditional use permit is approved, an appropriate record shall be made by the zoning administrator of the land use and structures permitted. 
(Code 1993, § 16.08(5)) 
Sec. 22-164. - Revocation. 
    Where the conditions of a zoning permit or conditional use permit are violated, the permit shall be revoked by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1993, § 16.08(6)) 
Sec. 22-165. - Board of appeals. 
    The mayor shall appoint a board of appeals under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), consisting of five members, subject to confirmation by the city council. The board of appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business as required by Wis. Stats. § 63.23(7)(e). 
(1)  Powers and duties. 
a.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
b.  Shall hear and decide applications for conditional use permits. 
c.  May authorize, upon appeal, a variance from the dimensional standards of this article where an applicant convincingly demonstrates: 
1.  That literal enforcement of the terms of the chapter will result in unnecessary hardship for the applicant. 
2.  That the hardship is due to special conditions unique to the property and is not self-created or based solely on economic gain or loss. 
3.  That such variance is not contrary to the public interest as expressed by the purpose of this article. 
4.  That such variance will not grant or increase any use of property which is prohibited in the zoning district. 
(2)  Appeals to the board. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the community affected by any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator or other administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board by filing with the official whose decision is in question and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The zoning administrator or other official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all papers constituting the record on the matter appealed. 
(3)  Public hearings. 
a.  Before making a decision on an appeal or application, the board of appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing. The board shall give public notice of the hearing by publishing a class II notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the board. At the public hearing any party may present testimony in person, by agent or by attorney. 
b.  A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the department at least ten days prior to all public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning. 
(4)  Decisions. 
a.  The final disposition of an appeal or application for a conditional use permit before the board of appeals shall be in the form of a written decision made within a reasonable time after the public hearing and signed by the board chairperson. Such decision shall state the specific facts which are the basis of the board's determination and shall either affirm, reverse or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part; dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution; or grant the application for a conditional use. 
b.  A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the department within ten days after the decision is issued. 
(Code 1993, § 16.08(7)) 
Sec. 22-166. - Amending shoreland-wetland zoning regulations. 
    The city council may alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this chapter in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, and the following: 
(1)  A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within five days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the municipal planning agency. 
(2)  All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning regulations shall be referred to the municipal planning agency and a public hearing shall be held after class II notice as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2. The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
(3)  In order to ensure that this article will remain consistent with the shoreland protection objectives of Wis. Stats. § 144.26, the city council may not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district or any portion thereof where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions: 
a.  Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity. 
b.  Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area, or the flow of groundwater through a wetland. 
c.  Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters. 
d.  Shoreline protection against erosion. 
e.  Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds. 
f.  Wildlife habitat. 
g.  Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species. 
(4)  Where the district office of the department determines that a proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (3) of this section. The department shall so notify the city of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment. 
(5)  The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with: 
a.  A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the municipal planning agency on a proposed text or map amendment within ten days after the submission of those recommendations to the city council. 
b.  Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map amendment within ten days after the action is taken. 
(6)  If the department notifies the city planning agency in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (3) of this section, that proposed amendment, if approved by the city council, shall not become effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the municipal approval was mailed to the department as required by this article. If within the 30-day period the department notifies the city that the department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the city as provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 62.231(6) and 61.351(6), the proposed amendment shall not become effective until the ordinance adoption procedure under Wis. Stats. §§ 62.231(6) or 61.351(6) is completed or otherwise terminated. 
(Code 1993, § 16.08(9)) 
Chapter 24 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Duties of building inspector. 
    The building inspector shall help to enforce the health laws, rules and regulations of the state department of health and social services, the state and the city, including the laws relating to contagious diseases contained in Wis. Stats. ch. 143. In addition, the building inspector shall strictly enforce the provisions of this chapter as well as all other public health nuisances by seeing that all violations are abated or, at a minimum, reported to the county health department. 
(Code 1993, § 11.02) 
Sec. 24-2. - Report to county authorities. 
    Any significant concerns affecting health that occur within the city shall promptly be reported by the building inspector to the county health department. 
(Code 1993, § 11.02) 
Sec. 24-3. - Right of entry. 
    The city building inspector and the county health department representative and their designees shall have the right to enter and examine any public premises or any place where meat, fish, poultry, game, milk, bakery goods or other foodstuffs are stored, prepared or dispensed for public consumption and to inspect or examine any vehicle transporting such foodstuffs for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. No person shall hinder, obstruct or prevent the city building inspector or the county health department representative from entering or carrying out his examination of premises or vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 11.13) 
Sec. 24-4. - Abatement of health nuisances. 
    The building inspector, together with the chief of police and city attorney, shall have the power to abate health nuisances in accordance with the procedure set forth in chapter 18. 
(Code 1993, § 11.14) 
Secs. 24-5-24-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 24-27. - Intent. 
    It is the intention of the common council to designate various municipal buildings and vehicles as smoke free. The council believes this ban will protect the health and comfort of the public. 
(Code 1993, § 11.16(1)) 
Sec. 24-28. - Smoking-Defined. 
    For purposes of this article, smoking means carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted smoking equipment. 
(Code 1993, § 11.16(3)) 
Sec. 24-29. - Same-Prohibited in municipal facilities. 
    No person shall smoke at any time in any municipal buildings that are work places or in any municipal vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 11.16(2)(a)) 
Sec. 24-30. - Signs required. 
    Signs designating the said building to be smoke free shall be posted. 
(Code 1993, § 11.16(2)(b)) 
Sec. 24-31. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates this article shall upon conviction forfeit $25.00 plus court costs for the first offense and not more than $100.00 plus court costs for the second and subsequent offenses. Upon default of payment of the forfeiture or cost of any part thereof, such person shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and cost are paid, but not to exceed five days. 
(Code 1993, § 11.16(4)) 
Secs. 24-32-24-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR HEATING DEVICES 

Sec. 24-51. - Purpose and intent. 
    This article is intended to promote and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city from the air pollution and fire hazards of outdoor solid fuel-fired heating units which are generally recognized to create noxious and hazardous smoke, soot, fumes and odors. 
(Code 1993, § 9.23(1)(a)) 
Sec. 24-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chimney means a vertical structure or stack enclosing a flue or flues that carry off smoke or exhaust from a solid fuel-fired heating device. 
    Outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device means a solid fuel-fired furnace, stove or boiler that is not located within a building intended for human habitation. 
(Code 1993, § 9.23(1)(b)) 
Sec. 24-53. - Permit required. 
    The owner of an outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device shall obtain a building permit from the building inspector before installation of the device. Application for permit shall be made on the form provided by the department and shall be submitted with a permit fee in the amount established by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 9.23(2)(a)) 
Sec. 24-54. - Installation and maintenance. 
    All outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices shall be tested, listed and labeled by an accepted testing agency pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § Comm 23.045(1). Installation, operation and maintenance shall conform with the manufacturer's instructions and regulations and all applicable local, state and federal standards. 
(Code 1993, § 9.23(2)(b)) 
Sec. 24-55. - Permitted fuels. 
    Permitted fuels for outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices shall be solid fuel specifically permitted by the manufacturer such as corn pellets, wood pellets, wood shavings, or other solid fuels specifically designed for the outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device and approved by the city inspection department. 
(Code 1993, § 9.23(2)(c)(1)) 
Sec. 24-56. - Prohibited fuels. 
    The following fuels are prohibited: 
(1)  Any wood regardless of whether the same is natural or untreated including, but not limited to, plywood, composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished or treated with preservatives, except for wood pellets or shavings specifically designed for the device by the manufacturer. 
(2)  Waste oil or other oily wastes except used oil burned in a heating device for energy recovery subject to the restrictions in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 590. 
(3)  Rubber including tires and synthetic rubber-like products. 
(4)  Any plastic material including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic containers. 
(5)  Rubbish or garbage including, but not limited to, food wastes, food wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or other household or business wastes. 
(6)  Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper and other materials that must be recycled in accordance with the city's recycling rules and regulations. 
(7)  Asphalt and products containing asphalt. 
(Code 1993, § 9.23(2)(c)(2)) 
Sec. 24-57. - Setback and yard requirements. 
    Outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices are deemed accessory structures for purposes of zoning regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 9.23(2)(c)(3)(a)) 
Sec. 24-58. - Grandfather provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. All outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices in existence on October 1, 2002, may be continued only in strict compliance with this section. The purpose of grandfathering existing devices as of October 1, 2002, is to limit the hardship to owners of such devices. However, the owner of such an existing device shall be prohibited from replacing the same with any outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device not in conformity with the regulations for devices installed after October 1, 2002, as set forth in this article. 
(b)  Operating standards. All outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices in existence on October 1, 2002 shall be permitted to continue operation provided that the devices shall meet all applicable standards of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the state department of commerce governing air quality and emissions, including any amendments thereto adopted after the effective date of this section. 
(c)  Fuel. Fuel shall be only natural untreated wood or other solid fuel specifically permitted by the manufacturer not otherwise prohibited pursuant to this article. 
(d)  Dates of permitted operation. The devices shall be operated only from October 1 through April 30. 
(e)  Chimneys. Chimneys for outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices shall have a minimum height of 20 feet measured from ground level or at least as high as the roofs of buildings within 75 feet of the chimney. Chimneys for outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices shall meet the minimum requirements of Wis. Admin. Code § Comm 23.045(3), and shall be insulated and properly braced or supported per manufacturer's recommendations and specifications. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person who constructs, erects or fails to remove, replace or modify any outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices that does not meet the requirements of this section shall forfeit $100.00 per day for each day the noncompliant unit remains on the premises. 
(Code 1993, § 9.23(2)(c)(3)(a)1-5, (4)) 
Chapter 26 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Police and firefighting, Wis. Stats. § 213.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Adoption of state law; board of fire and police commissioners. 
    Wis. Stats. § 62.13, is hereby adopted and specifically incorporated herein with the exception of subdivision (6) thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 4.07) 
Secs. 26-2-26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT AND PERSONNEL 

Sec. 26-21. - Chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall be appointed in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the state statutes. 
(Code 1993, § 4.01) 
Sec. 26-22. - Subordinates. 
    The council shall, from time to time by resolution, prescribe the number of subordinates to be employed in the police department and the qualifications for each position. The salary of each employee of the department shall also be set by the council by resolution. 
(Code 1993, § 4.02) 
Sec. 26-23. - Duties of police chief. 
(a)  Generally. The chief of police shall by himself or by a subordinate enforce and execute under the direction of the mayor any orders or resolutions of the council whose execution is not otherwise specially provided for and shall serve, distribute or post all papers, notices, circulars or bills required in the business of the council or any of its committees or of any officer or department of the city government and shall make due return, report and proof of such service, posting or distribution in all cases where needed. He shall be responsible for enforcement of all state laws and city ordinances, unless enforcement is otherwise specifically provided by the council and shall make such reports as the council shall require. 
(b)  Criminal conviction records check. The chief of police shall be required to access the TIME (Transaction Information for Management of Enforcement) system computer network and may provide to the appropriate licensing, employment or authorizing authority the criminal conviction records of candidates for city employment, bartender licenses, positions as police officers, firefighters and emergency medical technicians. 
(Code 1993, § 4.03) 
Sec. 26-24. - Powers and duties of police officers. 
(a)  Generally. The chief of police and other sworn members of the police department shall perform such duties and comply with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the council or otherwise prescribed by law. The chief of police and all policemen shall possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and be subject to the liabilities conferred and imposed by law on such officers. Every sworn member of the police department shall have full power and authority and the duty to perform the functions enumerated herein but without limitation as to other power and authority or granted by or duties imposed by law. 
(b)  Arrest. Police officers shall arrest, with or without process, all persons in the city engaged in any disturbance of the peace, violating any state law or city ordinance or aiding or abetting in such violation, take all such persons in charge and confine them and, within a reasonable time, bring them before the municipal court in the city or other court of law. 
(c)  Enforcement of city law. Each city police officer shall familiarize himself with the ordinances of the city and attend to the enforcement of such ordinances by all lawful means. 
(d)  Crime prevention. City police officers shall help prevent crimes, misdemeanors, and violations of city ordinances and otherwise protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the city and its inhabitants. 
(e)  Public safety. City police officers shall report all street and sidewalk obstructions, unlighted street lamps, unlawful street signs or signals, and defective or dangerous streets and sidewalks to the board of public works. 
(f)  Assistance to fire department. City police officers shall assist the fire department in maintaining order at the scene of a fire. 
(g)  Supervision of licensees and permittees. City police officers shall ensure that the necessary permits and licenses issued by the proper authority of the state or city are in the possession of or properly displayed by any person engaged in an activity or business within the city for which such permit or license is required and that the terms of such permits and licenses are complied with. 
(h)  Emergency assistance. With the consent of the mayor, the chief of police may, when emergency requires, appoint such necessary special policemen as the protection of the public or property may demand, and reasonable sums for the services of such special policemen shall be paid by the city. Such special policemen shall in no case be employed upon the regular police force nor shall their term of service extend beyond the existence of the emergency that required their appointment. 
(Code 1993, §§ 4.04, 4.06) 
Sec. 26-25. - Duty to assist police. 
    All persons, when called upon by the chief of police or any patrolman or other peace officer, shall promptly aid and assist in the execution of his duties, and no person when so called upon shall neglect or refuse to give such aid and assistance. 
(Code 1993, § 4.05) 
Secs. 26-26-26-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOST, STOLEN, AND ABANDONED PROPERTY 

Sec. 26-54. - Department as conservator of certain property. 
    The city police department shall be the conservator of lost, abandoned, or stolen property. 
(Code 1993, § 4.08) 
Sec. 26-55. - Disposition of property found by city employees and agents. 
(a)  Deposit required. If an official, employee or agent of the city finds $10.00 or more or any goods having a value of at least $10.00 while acting within the scope of his official duties or employment, he shall transfer custody of the found money or goods to the city police department. 
(b)  Posting of notice. The police department shall post a notice of the found money or goods in city hall and at the post office. 
(c)  Claim of property by owner. If the owner of lost money or goods appears within 30 days after the notice is posted and proves his right to the found money or goods, he shall have restitution of the money or goods or the value of the money or goods upon paying all of the costs and charges on the money or goods. 
(d)  Disposition of unclaimed property. If no owner of lost money or goods appears within 30 days after the notice is posted, the found money or goods become property of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 4.08) 
Sec. 26-56. - Disposition of other property. 
(a)  Return to owner or finder. Except as otherwise provided in this article, any personal property which has been lost, abandoned, or remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days after the city has taken possession thereof may be returned to the person finding the same or may be sold at a private or public sale pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0139. 
(b)  Presumption. The presumption shall be in favor of returning the property to the person finding the same unless the city, acting through the chief of police, determines that such a return is not appropriate or unless this article prohibits return of the property. 
(c)  Limitations. The city shall attempt to return to the rightful owner any unclaimed substances, materials or devices that have commercial value in normal business usage and do not pose an immediate threat to life or property within ten days after taking possession of the same. This specifically includes substances, materials or devices that appear to be or have been reported stolen. 
(d)  Discretion of city. In the event the rightful owner cannot be determined within said period of time or the substances, materials or devices pose a danger to life or property, the city may safely dispose of the same by any means determined to be in the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 4.08) 
Sec. 26-57. - Dangerous property. 
(a)  Weapons and ammunitions. The city shall retain or dispose of any abandoned, unclaimed or seized dangerous weapon or ammunition only in compliance with Wis. Stats. § 968.20. If the dangerous weapons or ammunition appear to be reported stolen, an attempt shall be made to return the same to the rightful owner. 
(b)  Flammable, explosive, and incendiary substances or devices. The city may, at its discretion, retain or dispose of any abandoned, unclaimed, or seized flammable, explosive, and incendiary substances or devices that pose or may pose a threat to the health or safety of persons or property. 
(Code 1993, § 4.08) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 

Sec. 28-19. - Adoption of state statutes. 
    The following sections of Wisconsin Statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order of the state are adopted by reference and define offenses against the peace and good order of the city, provided the penalty for commission of such offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under section 1-14: 
State Statute No. Municipal Violation No. Offense 29.601(2) 9-29.601(2) Waste and refuse in waters prohibited 101.123 9-101.123 Smoking prohibited in enclosed public places and places of employment 134.66 9-134.66 Sale or gift of cigarettes or nicotine or tobacco products 173.10 9-173.10 Crimes against animals 175.25 9-175.25 Illegal storage of junked vehicles 254.76 9-254.76 Causing fires by tobacco smoking 254.92 9-254.92 Purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by persons under 18 prohibited 450.11(7) 9-450.11(7) Possession of prescription drugs-Prohibited Acts 939.05 9-939.05 Parties to crime 939.22 9-939.22 Words and phrases defined 939.32 9-939.32 Attempt 940.19(1) 9-940.19(1) Battery 941.10 9-941.10 Negligent handling of burning materials 941.12(2)(3) 9-941.12(2)(3) Interfering with or failing to assist in fire fighting 941.13 9-941.13 False alarms and interference with fire fighting 941.20(1) 9-941.20(1) Endangering safety by use of dangerous weapon 941.23 9-941.23 Carrying concealed weapon 941.24 9-941.24 Possession of switchblade knife 941.316 9-941.316 Abuse of hazardous substance 943.01(1) 9-943.01(1) Criminal damage to property (less than $1,000.00) 943.07 9-943.07 Criminal damage to railroad 943.11 9-943.11 Entry into locked vehicle 943.125 9-943.125 Entry into locked coin box 943.13 9-943.13 Trespass to land 943.14 9-943.14 Criminal trespass to dwellings 943.20 9-943.20 Theft (less than $500.00) 943.21 9-943.21 Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper ($500.00 or less) 943.22 9-943.22 Use of cheating tokens 943.23(2) 9-943.23(2) Operate auto without owner's consent 943.24 9-943.24 Issue of worthless checks 943.50 9-943.50 Retail theft 943.61 9-943.61 Theft of library materials 944.20 9-944.20 Lewd and lascivious behavior 944.21 9-944.21 Obscene material or performance 944.23 9-944.23 Making lewd, obscene or indecent drawings 944.30 9-944.30 Prostitution 944.31 944.31 Patronizing prostitutes 944.34 9-944.34 Keeping place of prostitution 945.01 9-945.01 Definitions relating to gambling 945.02 9-945.02 Gambling 945.03 9-945.03 Commercial gambling 945.04 9-945.04 Permitting premises to be used for commercial gambling 946.40 9-946.40 Refusing to aid officer 946.41 9-946.41 Resisting or obstructing officer 946.42(1) 9-946.42(1) Escape 946.44 9-946.44 Assisting or permitting escape 946.66 9-946.66 False complaints of police misconduct 946.69 9-946.69 Falsely assuming to act as a public officer or employee 946.70 9-946.70 Impersonating peace officers 946.72 9-946.72 Tampering with public records and notices 947.01 9-947.01 Disorderly conduct 947.012 9-947.012 Unlawful use of telephone 947.0125 9-947.0125 Unlawful use of computerized communication systems 947.06 9-947.06 Unlawful assemblies and their suppression 947.13 9-947.13 Harassment 948.45 9-948.45 Contributing to truancy 948.51 9-948.51 Hazing 961.41(3g)(e) 9-961.41(3g)(e) Possession of marijuana 961.573 9-961.573 Possession of drug paraphernalia  
(Code 1993, § 9.29.29; Ord. No. 2007-07-04-C, § 1, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 2008-07-08-D, § 3, 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 2010-05-02D, § 1, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2012-05-03-D, § 1, 5-8-2012; Ord. No. 2013-04-03-D, § 1, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2013-12-12-D, § 1, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 2015-09-06-D, § 1, 9-8-2015) 
Secs. 28-20-28-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

Sec. 28-42. - Loitering. 
(a)  Streets and sidewalks. No person shall stand, sit, loaf or loiter or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground within the city in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place. 
(b)  Schools and public buildings. No person 14 years or older shall loiter in or about any public or private school or public building. The term "loiter" means to delay, linger, idle or present oneself within a school or upon school grounds or a public building without a lawful purpose for being present and shall further include being present without permission of school or public authorities or being present for a purpose not directly related to the normal conduct to education or business within or around a school or public building. 
(c)  Request to move. No person shall loiter in a group or a crowd upon any public street, sidewalk, bridge, public ground, including adjacent doorways or entrances, or on any private premises without invitation from the owner or occupant, after being requested to move on by any police officer or by any person in authority at such places. 
(d)  Posted private property. No person shall loiter on private property posted by means of a sign prohibiting such conduct after being requested to leave by the owner, person in charge, or their agent. 
(Code 1993, §§ 9.07, 9.17) 
Sec. 28-43. - Abandonment of enclosed structures. 
    No person shall abandon any appliance, box or structure which will fasten from the outside by the closing of a door and on which there is no method of unlocking the door thereto from the inside, unless the door is completely and permanently removed, at any place or grounds or in any place which might be frequented by children and in which such children might be accidentally imprisoned. 
(Code 1993, § 9.08) 
Sec. 28-44. - Crossing police or fire lines. 
    No individual shall cross a police or fire line that has been so designated by banner, signs or other similar identification. 
(Code 1993, § 9.09) 
Sec. 28-45. - Sound amplification. 
    No person knowingly or wantonly shall use or operate or cause to be used or operated any mechanical device, machine, apparatus or instrument for intensification or amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise in any public or private place in such manner that the peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed or that persons owning, using or occupying property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed. 
(Code 1993, § 9.10) 
Sec. 28-46. - Interference with video and audio reception. 
    No person shall knowingly and wantonly operate or cause to be operated any machine, device, apparatus or instrument of any kind whatsoever within the city, the operation of which shall cause unreasonable interference (electrical) with radio reception or television reception provided, however, that x-ray pictures, examinations or treatments may be made at any time if the machine or other apparatus used therefor is properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with radio reception or television reception and is not negligently operated. 
(Code 1993, § 9.11) 
Sec. 28-47. - Open houses. 
(a)  State law adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. § 101.22 describing and defining the regulations relating to the open housing law are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this section. 
(b)  Complaints of violation. Any complaint concerning a possible violation of the open housing law that occurs within the corporate limits of the city shall be filed with the city attorney in the manner prescribed in this section. The city attorney shall immediately thereafter forward the complaint to the department of industry, labor and human relations for further action thereon. 
(Code 1993, § 9.12) 
Sec. 28-48. - Littering. 
    No person shall throw, deposit, dump or discharge any glass, rubbish, filth or debris upon the streets, alleys, public parks or other property of the city or upon any private property not owned by him or upon the surface of any body of water in the city. No person shall operate on any street a vehicle with mud or dirt on its wheels or other parts if such operation results in depositing or tracking mud, dirt or debris on the street. 
(Code 1993, § 9.14) 
Sec. 28-49. - Sign posting. 
    No person shall post or in any other manner put up any written or printed sign, notice or advertisement upon any building, tree, or fence without the consent of the owner or lessee thereof, or in any manner that would result in violation of the city's zoning law. 
(Code 1993, § 9.15) 
Sec. 28-50. - Defacing library property. 
    No person shall mar, deface or in any way damage or mutilate any book, periodical, pamphlet, picture or other article or property belonging to or in charge of the library. 
(Code 1993, § 9.16) 
Sec. 28-51. - Inhaling toxic vapors. 
    No person shall inhale a substance or vapor containing ketone, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether chlorinated hydrocarbons, or any other substance or vapor, in a quantity to cause intoxication, stupefaction or hallucination, while the person is on a street, sidewalk, alley, public right-of-way, public park, other general public publicly-owned facility, or premises open to the general public whether the premises is publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use of the premises. 
(Code 1993, § 9.18) 
Sec. 28-52. - Use of compression brakes. 
    In order to promote the peace and order within the city limits by limiting the disturbing sound and noise which results from the repeated use of compression brakes, it shall be unlawful for any person to employ any engine braking system which utilizes engine exhaust to slow the vehicle within the city limits, except in cases of emergency. Such braking system is commonly referred to as compression braking or "jake brakes". 
(Code 1993, § 9.24) 
Sec. 28-53. - Restrictions regarding Lake Tomah. 
(a)  Bow fishing. All persons bow fishing on Lake Tomah shall comply with all rules and regulations established by the State Department of Natural Resources, for bow fishing. Bow fishing shall only be permitted during the time periods as established by the Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)  Waterfowl hunting. All persons waterfowl hunting on Lake Tomah shall comply with all rules and regulations established by the State Department of Natural Resources for waterfowl hunting. Waterfowl hunting shall only be permitted during the time periods as established by the Department of Natural Resources. 
(Code 1993, §§ 9.02(2), 9.04(3); Ord. No. 2016-01-03-D, § 1, 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 28-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-09-10-D, § 1, adopted Sept. 11, 2018, repealed former § 28-54 in its entirety which pertained to a prohibition on the hosting of events or gatherings of underage persons with alcohol present and derived from Ord. No. 2014-06-07-D, § 1, adopted June 10, 2014. 
Secs. 28-55-28-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 28-80. - Discharge of firearms. 
    No person, except a law enforcement officer, shall fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol, air or spring gun or any firearms of any description. 
    As described in subsection 28-53(b), waterfowl hunting, the discharge of firearms while lawfully waterfowl hunting on Lake Tomah is allowed. 
(Code 1993, § 9.02(1); Ord. No. 2016-01-03-D, § 2, 1-12-16) 
Sec. 28-81. - Bow hunting. 
    Bow hunting, either by bow and arrow or crossbow, within the City of Tomah shall be allowed with the following restrictions: 
(1)  All persons bow hunting shall comply with all rules and regulations established by the state department of natural resources for hunting with a bow. 
(2)  Bow hunting shall only be permitted during seasons as established by the department of natural resources. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a person to discharge a bow and arrow or crossbow within a distance of 100 yards from a building located on another person's land. This restriction shall not apply if the person who owns the land on which the building is located allows and gives written permission to the person to use or discharge an arrow or crossbow within the specified distance of the building. 
(4)  Except at the followings location bow and arrows or crossbows may not be discharged on or across any portion of land owned or occupied by the City of Tomah unless specifically authorized by the city chief of police or the chief of police's designee. 
a.  Bow hunting for deer shall be permitted on that land owned by the city and located at Bloyer Field that is east of the north-south runway and north of the east-west runway extended to the railroad tracks and south of the railroad tracks, subject to the following restrictions: 
(i)  No person shall hunt, stand, walk or drive any vehicle within 200 feet of the paved runway. 
(ii)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, all other regulations involving the airport are hereby affirmed. 
b.  Bow hunting for deer shall be permitted on that land owned by the city and located on a parcel of land so noted as Parcel ID 286-02716-0000 within the Monroe County GIS internet based system. Due to the Tomah Police Departments firearms range, bow hunting on this parcel shall be restricted to the following location within this parcel: 
(i)  Using the western most boarder line, running north and south, of Parcel ID 286-02716-0300 (440 Cardinal Avenue), and extending the same line south through Parcel ID 286-02716-0000, bow hunting is allowed to the west of this line. 
c.  Bow hunting for deer shall be permitted on that land owned by the city and located on a parcel of land so noted as Parcel ID 286-02716-4700 within the Monroe County GIS internet based system. Due to the city's waste water facility being located on this parcel of land, bow hunting on this parcel shall be restricted to the following location within this parcel: 
(i)  Bow hunting shall not be allowed within the confines of the waste water facility or within 200 yards of the confines of the facility. 
(5)  While bow hunting for deer on property that is owned by the city temporary tree stands or blinds are allowed so long as they are removed at day's end and trees are not damaged while being installed. 
(6)  Hunting may not occur across or within any public right-of-way or within 50 feet of the center of a right of way and never closer than 30 feet of the nearest border of a right-of-way. 
(7)  A bow and arrow or crossbow must be discharged toward the ground. 
(8)  Bow hunting must meet all of the following public health, safety and welfare conditions: 
a.  Arrows or other projectiles shall not enter, occupy, or traverse land owned or occupied by another without the owner's prior written consent even if otherwise used in conformance with this section. 
b.  Bow hunters must follow state hunting laws, Wisconsin DNR hunting regulations, and safe hunting practices such as ensuring no people or property are in the vicinity of the target and the area beyond the target before discharge of an arrow or bolt. 
c.  Bow hunters must use best efforts to promptly dispatch an animal on the permitted property with a safe and effective shot. If a wounded animal is not recovered on the hunter or co-applicant's property, then entry on to another's property is permitted only with the prior permission of the landowner. 
d.  Bow hunters shall take all reasonable steps to immediately and properly dispose of any portion of an animal killed or injured during a bow hunt including immediately field dressing any animal killed or injured at the site of the bow hunt, and promptly processing the meat and disposing of the by-products from the hunt. 
(9)  Bow fishing is allowed as per subsection 28-53(b) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1993, § 9.02(3); Ord. No. 2016-11-04-D, § 1, 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 28-82. - Carrying dangerous weapon. 
    No person, other than a police officer or other officer authorized to maintain the peace and to serve process, shall carry or wear any slingshot, knuckles, bowie or switchblade knife, dirk or other dangerous weapon. In all cases of conviction hereunder any and all dangerous weapons found on the person of the convicted shall be confiscated and become the property of the city and may be destroyed by order of the court. 
(Code 1993, § 9.03; Ord. No. 2011-01-11-02D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-01-11-02D, § 1, adopted Jan. 11, 2011, changed the title of § 28-82 from carrying dangerous weapons to carrying dangerous weapon. 
Sec. 28-83. - Slingshots; bows and arrows. 
    No person shall discharge or cause the discharge of any dangerous missile from any slingshot or cause the discharge of any dangerous missile from any slingshot or bow and arrow within 600 feet of any inhabited dwelling or building or any public park, square or enclosure; provided, however, that this section shall not apply: 
(1)  To the shooting or discharging of toy arrows or arrows that have a tip made of rubber or similar material. 
(2)  To a supervised archery range approved by the council or archery courses conducted under the supervision of a school or the city department of parks and recreation. 
(3)  Within the interior of a single-family dwelling. 
(4)  To the shooting or discharging of a bow and arrow for purposes of bow fishing as allowed in Sections 28-53 and 28-81. 
(5)  To the shooting or discharging of a bow and arrow for purposes of hunting as allowed in Section 28-81. 
(Code 1993, § 9.04(1), (2); Ord. No. 2016-01-04-D, § 2, 1-12-2016) 
Secs. 28-84-28-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-110. - Juvenile justice code provisions adopted. 
    The following provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 938, the Juvenile Justice Code, are adopted by reference to define the city's procedure and disposition regarding juvenile citations: 
State Statute No. City Violation No. Provision 938.01 9-938.01 Intent 938.02 9-938.02 Definitions 938.09(3) 9-938.09(3) Representation of the interests of the public 938.17(2) 9-938.17(2) Jurisdiction over civil law and ordinance violations 938.237 9-938.237 Civil law and ordinance proceedings initiated by citation in the court assigned to exercise jurisdiction 938.27 9-938.27 Notice; summons 938.273 9-938.273 Service of summons or notice; expense 938.275 9-938.275 Parental contribution to cost of court 938.28 9-938.28 Failure to obey summons; capias 938.293(1) 9-938.293(1) Discovery 938.299(1)(a), (am) 9-938.299(1)(a), (am) Procedures at hearings 938.343 9-938.343 Disposition of juvenile adjudged to have violated a civil law or an ordinance 938.344 9-938.344 Disposition; certain intoxicating liquor, beer, and drug violations 938.346(1)(a)-(d), (f), (g)(2)-(4) 9-938.346(1)(a)-(d), (f), (g)(2)-(4) Notice to victims of juvenile's acts 938.355(6)(d)(2) 9-938.355(6)(d)(2) Sanctions for violations of order, delinquency or civil law or ordinance violation 938.361 9-938.361 Payment of alcohol and other drug abuse services 938.37 9-938.37 Costs 938.396 9-938.396 Records 938.78 9-938.78 Confidentiality of records  
(Code 1993, § 9.20) 
Secs. 28-111-28-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRUANCY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-01-01-C, § 1, adopted Jan.8, 2008, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 28-134-28-136, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to truancy and derived from the Code of 1993, § 9.22. 

Sec. 28-134. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this division: 
    Acceptable excuse means an acceptable excuse as defined in Wis. Stats. § 118.15, or § 118.16(4). 
    Child means a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Dropout has the meaning given in Wis Stats. § 118.153(1)(b). 
    Habitual truant means a child who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of five or more days on which school is being held during a school semester. 
    Truant means a child who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse for part or all of any day on which school is held during a school semester. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01-01-C, § 1, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 28-135. - Prohibition. 
(a)  A child is prohibited from being a truant. 
(b)  A child is prohibited from being a habitual truant. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01-01-C, § 1, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 28-136. - Penalty for truant. 
    Upon finding that a child is a truant, the court shall enter an order making one or more of the following dispositions: 
(1)  An order for the person to attend school. 
(2)  A forfeiture of not more than $50.00 plus costs for a first violation, or a forfeiture of not more than $100.00 plus costs for any second or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, subject to [Wis. Stats.] § 938.37 and subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than $500.00 for all violations committed during a school semester. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. 
(3)  An order for the person to report to a youth report center after school, in the evening, on weekends, on other nonschool days, or at any other time that the person is not under immediate adult supervision, for participation in the social, behavioral, academic, community service, and other programming of the center as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.342(1d)(c). 
(Ord. No. 2008-01-01-C, § 1, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 28-137. - Penalty for habitual truant. 
    Upon finding that a child is a habitual truant, the court shall enter an order making one or more of the following dispositions: 
(1)  Suspend the child's operative privilege as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40) for not less than 30 days nor more than one year. The court shall immediately take possession of the suspended license and forward it to the state department of transportation, together with notice stating reason for and duration of the suspension. 
(2)  Order the child to participate in counseling community service or work program as provided under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
(3)  Order the child to remain at home except during hours in which the child is attending religious worship or a school program, including travel time required to get to and from the school program or place of worship. The order may permit a child to leave his or her home if the child is accompanied by a parent, guardian or legal custodian. 
(4)  Order the child to attend an educational program under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(7d). 
(5)  Order the department of industry, labor and job development to revoke under Wis. Stats. § 103.72 a permit under Wis. Stats. § 103.70, authorizing the employment of the child. 
(6)  Order the person to be placed in a teen court program as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.342(f). 
(7)  Order the person to attend school. 
(8)  A forfeiture of not more than $500.00 plus costs, subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.37. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. 
(9)  Any other reasonable conditions consistent with this subsection, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on specified premises and restrictions on associating with other children or adults. 
(10)  Order the person to be placed upon formal or informal supervision, as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.34(2), for up to one year. 
(11)  Order the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian to participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal custodian's expense or to attend school with the person, or both. 
(12)  An order for the person to report to a youth report center after school, in the evening, on weekends, on other nonschool days, or at any other time that the person is not under immediate adult supervision, for participation in the social, behavioral, academic, community service, and other programming of the center as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.342(1d)(c). 
(13)  If a child under age 18 and over age 16 has been adjudicated a "dropout" the court may suspend the child's operating privileges, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40), until the child reaches the age of 18. The court shall immediately take possession of any suspended license and forward it to the department of transportation together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension. (See Wis. Stats. § 938.342(2)(a) and (b). 
(14)  No order under this subsection may be entered until the parent, guardian or legal custodian is given an opportunity to be heard on the contemplated order of the court. The court shall cause notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing to be served on the parent, guardian or legal custodian personally at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The procedure in these cases shall, as far as practicable, be the same as in the other cases to the court. At the hearing, the parent, guardian or legal custodian may be represented by counsel and may produce or cross-examine witnesses. Any parent, guardian or legal custodian who fails to comply with any order issued by a court order may be proceeded against for contempt of court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01-01-C, § 1, 1-8-2008; Ord. No. 2008-07-08-D, § 2, 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 28-138. - Contempt of court. 
    Failure to comply with a truancy disposition order of the court may result in a finding of contempt of court with the imposition of a monetary or other penalty as determined by the court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01-01-C, § 1, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 28-139. - Reference to statutes. 
    References to specific statutory sections whenever used in this division shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes of 1995-96 as from time to time amended, modified, repealed or otherwise altered by the state legislature. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01-01-C, § 1, 1-8-2008) 
Secs. 28-140-28-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY 

Sec. 28-156. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to reduce the incidents of misconduct by juveniles by requiring proper supervision on the part of custodial parents. 
(Code 1993, § 9.21) 
Sec. 28-157. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Child means a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Custodial parent means a parent or legal guardian of a minor child who has custody of said child. 
    Custody means either physical custody of a child under a court order under Wis. Stats. § 767.225 or Wis. Stats. § 767.41, custody of a child under a stipulation under Wis. Stats. § 767.34, or actual physical custody of the child. Custody does not include legal custody, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 48.02(12), by an agency or a person other than the child's birth or adoptive parent. In determining which parent has custody of a child for purposes of this division, the court shall consider which parent had responsibility for caring for and supervising the child at the time that the child's violations of this division occurred. 
(Code 1993, § 9.21) 
Sec. 28-158. - Prohibited acts. 
    Every custodial parent has a duty to properly supervise his child. Any custodial parent whose child is convicted of a city code violation twice in a six-month period or three or more times within a 12-month period is guilty of failing to properly supervise said child. The six- and 12-month period shall be measured from the date of the first violation. 
(Code 1993, § 9.21) 
Sec. 28-159. - Penalties. 
    The offense described in this division shall be subject to a penalty of a minimum of $100.00 and a maximum of not more than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9.21) 
Sec. 28-160. - Defenses. 
    The following may be defenses to a violation of this division, subject to the discretion of the municipal judge, provided that the defenses shall not apply if the parent assigns his parental responsibility to another, except pursuant to legal proceedings which result in a court order effectuating the same, and provided, further, that the parent has the burden of proving their defense by clear and satisfactory evidence: 
(1)  The parent has made all reasonable and available efforts under the circumstances to prevent the juvenile misconduct; 
(2)  The parent is not legally responsible for the supervision of the juvenile at the time the misconduct occurred; 
(3)  The parent has a physical or mental disability or incompetency rendering them incapable of supervising the juvenile at the time the misconduct occurred; 
(4)  The parent can provide evidence of enrollment and ongoing participation of the parent in parenting classes, or both the parent and juvenile are in family therapy or counseling commencing before or after the misconduct which resulted in the citation. For purposes of family therapy or counseling such evidence must include documentation from the therapist or counselor stating that the parent or juvenile have been compliant with therapeutic recommendations; or 
(5)  The parent reported the misconduct of the juvenile to the appropriate authorities. 
(Code 1993, § 9.21) 
Secs. 28-161-28-188. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CURFEW 

Sec. 28-189. - Prohibited acts. 
    No child under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle or remain and no parent or guardian shall knowingly permit his child or ward of such age to loiter, idle or remain in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places in the city between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless such child is accompanied by a parent, guardian or some person of lawful age having legal custody of such child. 
(Code 1993, § 9.13) 
Sec. 28-190. - Discretion of police officers. 
    Once contact is made with a child violating this division, the police officer shall have the discretion, pursuant to department policy, to release the child, drive the child home or transport the child to the police department. 
(Code 1993, § 9.13) 
Sec. 28-191. - Exceptions. 
    This division shall not be construed to prohibit such child from performing an errand or duty if directed by his parent or guardian or of urgent necessity or from pursuing the duties of his employment in an expeditious and orderly manner or from going to or from places of business or amusement or private homes. 
(Code 1993, § 9.13) 
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 30-19. - Cumulative regulations. 
    The following special rules and regulations of this article are in addition to all other regulations in this chapter and in addition to any special rules promulgated by the parks and recreation commission and shall govern conduct in all parks, playgrounds, boulevards, pleasure drives and swimming pools. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04) 
Sec. 30-20. - Traffic; parking. 
    No person shall drive or park any motor vehicle in any park, except upon established roads and designated parking areas; provided, however, that during periods of officially sanctioned events, motor vehicles will be permitted on or in other areas that are specifically designated by officials of such events. No person shall operate any truck or other vehicle not used exclusively for carrying passengers, with the exception of the parks and recreation commission which may use such vehicles as are necessary for the maintenance of parks and parkways. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(1)(a)) 
Sec. 30-21. - Animals. 
(a)  Domestic animals. Dogs and cats shall be allowed in any park. Said animal shall be contained on a leash, cord or chain of not more than six feet and shall be under the care, custody and control of its owner/caretaker at all times. Any dog or cat in a city park must display current rabies tab and current dog/cat registration tags. The owner/caretaker of any such animal must have in his/her possession a shovel, scoop, bag or other item for removal of fecal matter left by his/her animal on park grounds. Said owner/caretaker shall remove and deposit any such fecal matter in a receptacle provided for waste. 
(b)  Transportation and recreational animals. No person shall drive or park any animal in any park, except upon established roads and designated parking areas; provided, however, that during periods of officially sanctioned events, animals will be permitted on or in other areas that are specifically designated by officials of such events. 
(c)  Wild or nondomestic animals. No person shall disturb, interfere with, handle or feed any animals or birds in any park. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(1)(b), (6), (10); Ord. No. 2009-10-11-D, § 1, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 2011-01-11-03D, § 1, 1-11-2011) 
Sec. 30-22. - Destruction of property. 
    No person shall in any manner deface or injure any building, tree, shrub, plant or other property or trespass through shrubbery borders or other plantings or upon any premises under the jurisdiction of the parks and recreation commission. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(2)) 
Sec. 30-23. - Fires. 
    No fire shall be lighted or made, except in places specifically provided for such purpose. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(3)) 
Sec. 30-24. - Weapons. 
    The use of airguns, slingshots, firearms, explosives and weapons of every character is strictly prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(4)) 
Sec. 30-25. - Swimming. 
    No person shall swim or bathe in any lake, river, lagoon, beach or swimming pool except at such places and at such times as the parks and recreation commission may direct. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(5)) 
Sec. 30-26. - Trespassing. 
    No person shall enter upon any territory in disregard of signs or posted notices forbidding the same. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(7)) 
Sec. 30-27. - Public meetings. 
    No person shall give entertainment of any kind or hold public meetings, assemblies, establish or occupy a camp, except by written consent of the parks and recreation commission. All picnics, all assemblages of persons, all business and entertainments permitted shall occupy grounds to be designated by the parks and recreation commission and shall be under its control and supervision. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(8)) 
Sec. 30-28. - Vendors. 
    No person shall sell, vend or give away any article or merchandise whatever without a written permit from the parks and recreation commission. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(10)) 
Sec. 30-29. - Circulars, signs. 
    No person shall distribute any circulars, cards or any other printed or written matter, except programs of concerts or entertainments, unless permission has been obtained from the parks and recreation commission. No person shall post, paste, paint or affix any placard, notice or sign upon any structure, fence, enclosure or thing, or erect any notice or sign. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(11)) 
Sec. 30-30. - Games and sports. 
    No person shall play ball, tennis or any other game, except upon grounds specifically established by the parks and recreation commission for such purpose. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(12)) 
Sec. 30-31. - Fences, railings, and benches. 
    No person shall sit, stand, interfere with or damage any guard fence, railing or other enclosure. No person shall remove any bench or seat from any park and no bench or seat that is permanently placed shall be moved at all. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(13)) 
Sec. 30-32. - Alcohol beverages. 
(a)  Glass containers. Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, no person shall possess or consume any alcohol beverage in a glass container in any city park or on the premises known as Recreation Park. 
(b)  Intoxicating liquor. No person shall serve, possess or consume any intoxicating liquor as defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.02(8) in any city park, unless within the confines of a permanent, enclosed building, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Fermented malt beverages. Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. No person shall possess or consume any fermented malt beverage, as defined in Wis Stats. § 125.02(6) in Gillett Park, Buckley Park or the premises known as Recreation Park unless such action taken within Recreation Park is confined to a permanent, enclosed building and or the grandstand seating arena. 
(d)  Exceptions. Individuals authorized by the licensee to dispense or serve intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages may, to the extent of their licensure, dispense or serve intoxicating liquors to persons located within the confines of a licensed temporary structure and persons located within 50 feet of a tent or camper that is parked in a designated camping area. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(17), (18); Ord. No. 2013-09-07-D, 9-10-2013) 
Sec. 30-33. - Recreation Park. 
    The buildings and grandstands located at Recreation Park shall be closed to all unauthorized individuals, except during sanctioned events. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(19)) 
Sec. 30-34. - Hours of operation. 
    The parks and recreation commission may establish a closing hour for all parks, playgrounds and swimming pools, and, after the posting of such closing hours, no person shall enter in or be upon any park, playground or swimming pool after the designated hour. The paved road and parking areas within Winnebago and Butts Park may be used after hours for the sole purposes of accessing and using Lake Tomah for recreational activities as allowed by ordinance and state law. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04(16); Ord. No. 2017-03-05-D, § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 30-35. - Removal of violators. 
    In addition to the other penalties provided in this chapter, any person violating any rules or regulations set forth in this chapter or any order or regulation established by the parks and recreation commission may be summarily removed from the parks, playgrounds, boulevards, pleasure drives or swimming areas by an employee of the parks and recreation commission or by any police officer. The director under the direction of the parks and recreation commission may prohibit violators from the park system for up to 365 days. 
(Code 1993, § 19.05; Ord. No. 2009-10-11-D, § 2, 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 30-36. - Disorderly conduct prohibited. 
    No user should engage in offensive, obscene, or abusive language, or in boisterous or noisy conduct tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or resentment in others; or to engage in brawling or fighting; or to engage in conduct creating or tending to create a disturbance or annoyance to other park users, or that interferes with their use or enjoyment of park lands and waters . 
(Ord. No. 2009-10-11-D, § 3, 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 30-37. - Littering prohibited. 
    No person shall throw, deposit, or leave any paper, article or thing except in the receptacles provided for waste 
(Ord. No. 2009-10-11-D, § 4, 10-13-2009) 
Secs. 30-38-30-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOATING 

Sec. 30-59. - Adoption of state boating laws. 
    The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to boating in the following enumerated sections of the state statutes, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this article. 
State Statute No. City Violation No. Provision 30.50 9-30.50 Definitions 30.51 9-30.51 Operation of unnumbered motorboats prohibited; exemptions 30.52 9-30.52 Certificates of number; applications; issuance; renewals; fees 30.53 9-30.53 Identification number to be displayed on boat; certification to be carried 30.541 9-30.541 Transfer of ownership of numbered boat 30.55 9-30.55 Notice of abandonment or destruction of boat or change of address 30.60 9-30.60 Classification of motorboats 30.61 9-30.61 Lighting equipment 30.62 9-30.62 Other equipment 30.64 9-30.64 Patrol boats exempt from certain traffic regulations 30.65 9-30.65 Traffic rules 30.66 9-30.66 Speed restrictions 30.67 9-30.67 Accidents and accidents reports 30.675 9-30.675 Distress signal flag 30.68 9-30.68 Prohibited operation 30.681 9-30.681 Intoxicated boating 30.682 9-30.682 Preliminary breath screening test 30.683 9-30.683 Implied consent 30.684 9-30.684 Chemical test 30.686 9-30.686 Report arrest to department 30.687 9-30.687 Officers action after arrest for violating intoxicated boating law 30.69 9-30.69 Water skiing 30.70 9-30.70 Skin diving 30.75 9-30.75 Service of process on nonresident  
(Code 1993, § 19.01) 
Sec. 30-60. - Removal of boats and fishing shanties. 
(a)  Date restrictions. No person owning or having custody of a boat or fishing shanty shall store or permit such property to remain on any city-owned real estate during the period of December 1 through May 1 of each year. 
(b)  Removal. If any boat or fishing shanty is not removed prior to December 1, the director of parks and recreation is hereby authorized to requisition, at city expense, a private company to remove such property to a lawful place of storage. 
(c)  Costs of removal. The owner of such property within 20 days of its removal may claim it by paying all costs incurred by the city but not less than $50.00. 
(d)  Disposition of unclaimed property. All property not claimed within the 20-day period shall, at the discretion of the director of parks and recreation, be either sold to the highest bidder at a public auction or destroyed. 
(Code 1993, § 19.04) 
Secs. 30-61-30-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOAT DOCKS 

Sec. 30-79. - Purpose; intent; applicability. 
    This article establishes restrictions within the city to regulate the construction and maintenance of boat docks on Lake Tomah, pursuant to the statutory authorization for municipal planning and zoning, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to protect the natural beauty of Lake Tomah. The regulations of this article apply within the city's corporate limits. 
(Code 1993, § 19.06(1)) 
Sec. 30-80. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dock means any dock, pier or other structure that is intended for human use on the surface of Lake Tomah. 
    Shore means the ordinary high-water mark for Lake Tomah as determined pursuant to the applicable local and state rules and regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 19.06(2)) 
Sec. 30-81. - Permit required. 
    No dock may be erected or maintained on the shore of Lake Tomah except in accordance with this article. Any property owner desiring to place a dock in Lake Tomah shall submit an application to the city public works and utilities commission for review and approval prior to placement in Lake Tomah. This permit shall be required prior to the initial placement of a dock in Lake Tomah and shall not be required on an annual basis. 
(Code 1993, § 19.06(3)) 
Sec. 30-82. - Inspections. 
    All docks shall be subject to periodic inspection by the public works and utilities commission or the lake district commissioners or their designee to ensure that the docks are maintained in a safe condition and in conformance with this article. 
(Code 1993, § 19.06(3)(5)) 
Sec. 30-83. - Number restricted. 
    One dock shall be allowed per 50 lineal feet of frontage abutting Lake Tomah not to exceed: 
(1)  Properties zoned "R1" by the Municipal Code shall be allowed one dock per household. 
(2)  Properties zoned "R3" by the Municipal Code shall be allowed one dock per two dwelling units. 
(3)  Properties zoned for business use shall be allowed a maximum of four docks. 
(4)  Properties zoned for agricultural use shall be allowed a maximum of one dock per property. 
(Code 1993, § 19.06; Ord. No. 2016-10-08-D, § 1, 10-11-2016) 
Sec. 30-84. - Removal requirements; construction and anchoring specifications. 
(a)  Date for removal. No dock may be placed in Lake Tomah before April 1 of the calendar year and all docks must be removed by October 15 of the same calendar year. 
(b)  Removal by city. Any dock or boat lift not removed by October 15 as required herein shall be removed by the city public works department at the expense of the property owner. The cost for removing the dock shall be the sole and exclusive responsibility of the property owner. If the property owner does not reimburse the city for the removal costs within 30 days after receiving an itemized statement of the removal costs from the city, the removal costs shall be attached as a special assessment to the property owner's real estate tax bill. 
(c)  All docks shall be temporary structures and shall be capable of being removed by the property owner within a reasonable period of time after such a request by the city. 
(d)  No dock shall exceed a maximum length of 24 lineal feet from the shore and a maximum length of 12' parallel to the shore as defined in section 30-80. 
(e)  No dock shall be less than a minimum of 30 inches wide nor more than a maximum of 48 inches wide. 
(f)  No dock shall include more than one boat lift per dock. 
(g)  All docks must be framed with metal or treated wood in accordance with the normal and customary practices in the industry. 
(h)  All docks must be securely anchored to the shoreline. 
(i)  Any dock constructed or maintained by the city, or any agency thereof, on public areas shall be subject to the specifications approved by the public works and utilities commission and the lake district commissioners of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 19.06(3) ; Ord. No. 2016-10-08-D, § 2, 10-11-2016) 
Sec. 30-85. - Appeal. 
    Any property owner denied placement of a dock pursuant to the terms of this article may appeal the decision of the city public works and utilities commission to the board of appeals and request in writing a granting of a variance. 
(Code 1993, § 19.06(4)) 
Secs. 30-86-30-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LAKE TOMAH 

Sec. 30-114. - Purpose; applicability. 
    Pursuant to the statutory authorization for municipal planning and zoning, this article is enacted to institute use regulations and restrictions on Lake Tomah to protect the fisheries of Lake Tomah and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. The regulations specified in this article shall apply within the city's corporate limits. 
(Code 1993, § 19.07) 
Sec. 30-115. - No wake zone. 
(a)  Established. The city established a no wake zone with regard to the area of Lake Tomah defined herein. 
(b)  Defined. As used in this article, the term "no wake zone" means that boat speed is restricted to that speed at which a boat moves as slowly as possible while still maintaining steerage control. 
(c)  Area encompassed. The no wake zone on Lake Tomah shall consist of: 
(1)  That area southeast of a line delineated across the mouth of the Winnebago Park bay and marked by a single buoy in its center. 
(2)  That area southwest of a line delineated by nine waterway marker buoys and two land-based coordinates with Global Positioning Coordinates shown in the table below. 
Point Description Coordinates 1 Sewer outfall, 1730 Lake View Drive N43.59.010, W90.31.730 2 Buoy N43.58.969, W90.31.671 3 Buoy N43.58.918, W90.31.598 4 Buoy N43.58.887, W90.31.558 5 Buoy N43.58.859, W90.31.517 6 Buoy N43.58.830, W90.31.478 7 Buoy N43.58.797, W90.31.429 8 Buoy N43.58.753, W90.31.370 9 Buoy N43.58.704, W90.31.299 10 Buoy N43.58.656, W90.31.232 11 Sewer outfall, 1101 Lakeside Drive N43.58.623, W90.31.190 12 Buoy at Winnebago Park bay mouth N43.58.931, W90.31.026  
(d)  Delineating markers. The public works and utilities commission or lake district commissioners or their designee shall cooperate in placing markers or buoys to delineate the no wake zone on Lake Tomah. 
(e)  Penalties. State boating penalties as found in Wis. Stats. § 30.80,and deposits as established in the Uniform Deposit and Bail Schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference, are hereby adopted by reference with all references to fines amended to forfeitures and all references to imprisonment deleted. 
(Code 1993, § 19.07; Ord. No. 2009-07-07-D, § 1, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 30-116. - Swimming prohibited. 
    No person shall swim in Lake Tomah except while in the course of engaging in water skiing, aquaplaning or similar activity not otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(Code 1993, § 19.02) 
Sec. 30-117. - Pumping water restricted. 
(a)  No individual shall pump water from Lake Tomah for the purpose of irrigating lawns or gardens. 
(b)  No individual shall pump water from Lake Tomah for any other purpose without the prior written consent of the director of public works and utilities of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 19.08) 
Sec. 30-118. - Swan migration restrictions. 
    No person shall operate a boat of any kind, hunt or trap on Lake Tomah while the lake is occupied by swans during their migration season. 
(Code 1993, § 9.04(2)) 
Sec. 30-119. - Bow fishing. 
    All persons bow fishing on Lake Tomah shall comply with all rules and regulations established by the state department of natural resources for bow fishing. Bow fishing shall be permitted only during the time periods established by the department of natural resources. 
(Code 1993, § 9.04(3)) 
Secs. 30-120-30-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY-WIDE RECREATIONAL TRAIL 

Sec. 30-137. - Cumulative regulations. 
    The special rules and regulations contained in this article are in addition to all other applicable regulations in this Code and in addition to any special rules promulgated by the parks and recreation commission to govern conduct on the city-wide recreational trail. Specifically, unless stated otherwise in this article, all rules and regulations for parks, playgrounds and swimming pools as set forth in this chapter shall apply to the city-wide recreational trail. 
(Code 1993, § 19.09) 
Sec. 30-138. - Motorized vehicles. 
    With the exception of motorized wheelchairs (or other similar transportation devices for the disabled), motorized vehicles or other modes or instrumentalities of transportation, including equipment, boats, campers, recreational vehicles, scooters, or any other machinery powered by a motor or battery shall not be permitted to be operated on the city-wide recreational trail. This section shall not apply to city- or county-owned or -operated maintenance or emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 19.09(1)) 
Sec. 30-139. - Roller blades, bicycles, and skate boards. 
    With the exception of wheelchairs (or other similar transportation devices for the disabled) and baby strollers, the use of roller blades, skate boards, bicycles or other similar devices shall not be permitted on any portion of the city-wide recreational trail that is adjacent to private property bordering Lake Tomah except for law enforcement purposes. 
(Code 1993, § 19.09(2)) 
Sec. 30-140. - Animals. 
    No domestic or domesticated animal shall be permitted on the city-wide recreational trail without being under the immediate control of the owner, his agent, or a member of his family over 12 years of age either by leash, chain, cord or other suitable material of sufficient strength of not more than six feet in length. The individual in control of an animal that defecates on, or adjacent to, the city-wide recreational trail shall be responsible for immediately cleaning up and removing the same. 
(Code 1993, § 19.09(3)) 
Sec. 30-141. - Hours of operation. 
    The parks and recreation commission has established hours of operation for the city-wide recreational trail as one-half hour before sunrise until one-half hour after sunset. After the posting of such trail hours, no person shall enter onto or remain upon said trail outside the designated hours. 
(Code 1993, § 19.09(4)) 
Chapter 32 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND DIRECT SELLERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable organization means and includes any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation or one purporting to be such. 
    Clerk means the city clerk. 
    Direct seller means any individual who for himself or for a partnership, association or corporation sells merchandise or takes sales orders for the later delivery of merchandise at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of such individual, partnership, association or corporation and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the direct seller for the retention of merchandise by a donor or prospective customer. 
    Merchandise means and includes personal property of any kind, and shall include merchandise, goods, or materials provided incidental to services offered or sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for the retention of merchandise by a donor or prospective customer. 
    Permanent merchant means any person who, for at least six months prior to the consideration of the application of this article to said merchant, has continuously operated an established place of business in the local trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale, or has continuously resided in the local trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale and now does business from his residence. 
    Sale of merchandise means a sale in which the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the merchandise constitutes the greater part of value for the price received, but not a farm auction sale conducted by or for a resident farmer of personal property used on the farm, or the sale of produce or other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident of this state except as provided herein. 
    Transient merchant means any individual who engages in the retail sale of merchandise at any place in this state temporarily, and who does not intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant of such place. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(2)) 
Sec. 32-2. - Penalties. 
    Any person adjudged in violation of any provision of this article shall forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation per day plus costs of the prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(10)) 
Secs. 32-3-32-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DIRECT SELLERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 32-23-32-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 32-48. - Registration required. 
    No direct seller shall engage in direct sales within the city without being registered for that purpose as provided herein. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(1)) 
Sec. 32-49. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this section: 
(1)  Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes. 
(2)  Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such merchandise. 
(3)  Any person selling agricultural products that the person has grown and where the sales take placement in the designated farmers' market approved by the city. 
(4)  Any permanent merchant or his employee who takes orders away from the established place of business for merchandise regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such merchandise in their regular course of business. 
(5)  Any person who has an established place of business where the merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis and in which the buyer has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by such person. 
(6)  Any person who has had or one who represents a company that has had a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement with the prospective customer. 
(7)  Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of merchandise. 
(8)  Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law. 
(9)  Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of such organization, provided that there is submitted to the clerk proof that such charitable organization is registered under Wis. Stats. § 440.41. Any charitable organization not registered under Wis. Stats. § 440.41 or which is exempt from that statute's registration requirements shall be required to register under this article. 
(10)  Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant but against whom complaint has been made to the clerk that such person is a transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the clerk proof that at least one year prior to the date complaint was made, such person had leased for at least one year or purchased the premises from which he is conducting business in this city. 
(11)  Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in Wis. Stats. § 15.01(7). 
(12)  This article does not apply to transient merchants while doing business at special events which are under the supervision and control of a local organization or business during special events specifically authorized by the common council, provided that: 
a.  Transient merchants applying under this section must be sponsored by a stated local organization or business. 
b.  The sponsoring organization or business shall be responsible for all activities of the transient merchant. 
(13)  Any person selling Christmas trees or wreaths or other fresh greenery associated with the Christmas season. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(3)) 
Sec. 32-50. - Registration form. 
    Applicants for registration shall complete and return to the clerk a registration form furnished by the clerk at least 15 days prior to issuance of the registration that shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's complete name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary address, if any; 
(2)  Applicant's age, height, weight, color or hair and eyes; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the applicant represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold; 
(4)  Temporary address and telephone from where business will be conducted, if any; 
(5)  Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the merchandise, and any services offered; 
(6)  Proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable; 
(7)  Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the applicant in the conduct of his business; 
(8)  Most recent cities, villages, or towns, not to exceed three, where the applicant conducted his business; 
(9)  Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving this city; 
(10)  Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or article violation related to applicant's transient merchant business within the last five years, and the nature of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(4)(a)) 
Sec. 32-51. - Supporting documents. 
    With the registration form, applicants shall present to the clerk for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
(2)  Where applicant's business requires the use of weighing and measuring devices, verification from any registered and independent weights and measures testing firm or company that the applicant's scales were certified within the last year from the date of application. The city reserves the right to contact the local department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection weights and measures inspection in order for the applicant's weighing and measuring devices to be reviewed. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(4)(b)) 
Sec. 32-52. - Designation of registered agent. 
    The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the clerk as his agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against him arising out of any sale or service performed by him in connection with his direct sales activities, if the applicant cannot after reasonable effort be served personally. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(4)(d)) 
Sec. 32-53. - Fees. 
    At the time the registration is returned, a fee in the amount determined by the city council shall be paid to the clerk to cover the cost of police record checks and processing of the registration. In the event the application is denied, one-half of the fee shall be refunded. The remaining one-half shall be retained by the city to cover the cost of processing. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(4)(c)) 
Sec. 32-54. - Background check. 
    Upon receipt of each application and fee, the clerk may refer it immediately to the chief of police who shall make and complete a records check of the statements made in such registration. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(5)(a)) 
Sec. 32-55. - Grounds for denial. 
    The clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined pursuant to the records check above that the application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statements; complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages or towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or article violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision provided herein. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(5)(b)) 
Sec. 32-56. - Registration; term. 
    Upon compliance with all of the foregoing conditions, including payment of the fee and designation of the registered agent, the clerk shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry. The registration shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of entry subject to subsequent refusal as provided in this section. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(4)(d)) 
Sec. 32-57. - Appeal of denial of registration. 
    Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal procedure provided by article or resolution of the council or, if none has been adopted, under the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 68.08 through 68.16. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(6)) 
Sec. 32-58. - Revocation. 
    Registration may be revoked by the council after notice and hearing if the registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for registration; made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales; violated any provision of this section; or was convicted of any crime, article or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct selling. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(9)) 
Secs. 32-59-32-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATION 

Sec. 32-90. - Duty of chief of police to report violations. 
    The chief of police shall report to the clerk all convictions for violation of this article and the clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(8)) 
Sec. 32-91. - Required and prohibited acts. 
(a)  Hours; posted property; trespass. A direct seller shall be prohibited from calling at any dwelling or other place between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(b)  Fraud and misrepresentation. A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any merchandise offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or the identity of the organization he represents. 
(c)  Disclosure by charitable organization. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of merchandise being offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the merchandise. 
(d)  Obstructing public ways. No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
(e)  Excessive noise. No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the source. 
(f)  Littering. No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he is conducting business. 
(g)  Display of registration certificate. If the business is being conducted from a vehicle or stationary structure, the certificate of registration or facsimile thereof shall be displayed prominently thereon. The permit issued by the clerk's office shall be displayed. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(7)(a), (b)4) 
Sec. 32-92. - Disclosure requirements. 
    After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of merchandise or services he offers to sell. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(7)(b)1) 
Sec. 32-93. - Buyer's right to cancel. 
    If any sale of merchandise is made by a direct seller or any sales order for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel the transaction if it involved the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.00 in accordance with the procedure in Wis. Stats. § 423.203. The seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact, such notice to conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 423.203(1)(a), (b) and (c), (2) and (3). 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(7)(b)2) 
Sec. 32-94. - Written purchase and sale agreement. 
    If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of merchandise, at the time the order is taken he shall provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement; the amount paid in advance; whether full, partial or no advance payment is made; the name, address and telephone number of the seller; the delivery or performance date; and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 12.07(7)(b)3) 
Chapter 34 - SECONDHAND GOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adequate identification means one of the following types of identification: 
(1)  A county identification card; 
(2)  A valid Wisconsin motor vehicle operator's license; 
(3)  A state identification card; 
(4)  A valid motor vehicle operator's license containing a picture, issued by another state; 
(5)  A military identification card; 
(6)  A valid passport; 
(7)  An alien registration card; 
(8)  A non-picture identification document by a state or federal government, if a dealer also obtains a clear fingerprint of the seller's right index finger; 
(9)  A senior citizen identification card containing a photograph. 
    Article means audiovisual equipment, bicycles, china, computers, printers, software and computer supplies, computer toys and games, crystal, electronic equipment, fur coats, ammunition, knives, microwave ovens, office equipment, pianos, organs, guitars, other musical instruments, silverware and flatware, small electrical appliances, and telephones. 
    Charitable organization means a corporation, trust or community chest, fund or foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
    General public means individuals, partnerships, corporations or other associations. 
    Jewelry means any tangible personal property ordinarily wearable on the person and consisting in whole or in part of any metal, mineral or gem customarily regarded as precious or semi-precious. 
    Pawnbroker means any person who engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal property, other than consumer credit transactions through financial institutions, or purchases personal property with an expressed or implied agreement of understanding to sell it back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price. 
    Secondhand means previously owned by a member of the general public. It does not mean previously owned by a wholesaler, retailer or by a secondhand dealer licensed under this section. 
    Secondhand article dealer means any person who primarily engages in the business of purchasing or selling secondhand articles. 
    Secondhand jewelry dealer means any person who engages in the business of any transaction consisting of purchasing, selling, receiving or exchanging secondhand jewelry. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(1)) 
Sec. 34-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  First offense. Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction for a first offense, forfeit not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment shall be imprisoned until such forfeiture and costs are paid, not to exceed six months. 
(b)  Second offense. Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction for the second or subsequent offenses, forfeit not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment shall be imprisoned until such forfeiture and costs are paid, not to exceed six months. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(8)) 
Sec. 34-3. - Transactions with minors. 
    No dealer licensed hereunder may engage in a transaction of purchase, receipt or exchange of any secondhand article or secondhand jewelry from any minor unless the minor is accompanied by his parent or guardian at the time of the transaction or provides to the dealer the parent's or guardian's written consent to engage in the particular transaction. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(6)) 
Sec. 34-4. - Retention of suspect items. 
    The chief of police or any police officer designated by the chief, may, in his discretion, cause any article of secondhand property that has been exchanged, pawned, or purchased, that he has reason to believe was not sold, pawned, or exchanged by the lawful owner, to be held for the purposes of identification for such reasonable length of time as the chief of police or designee deems necessary. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(6)) 
Secs. 34-5-34-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 34-27-34-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING 

Sec. 34-56. - Pawnbroker license; term; bond. 
    No person may operate as a pawnbroker in the city without first having obtained a license therefor. Each such license is valid from January 1 or the date of issuance until the following December 31. No pawnbroker license shall be issued until the applicant provides the city with a bond of $500.00, with not less than two sureties, conditioned upon the licensee's compliance with all municipal ordinances relating to pawnbrokers. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(2)) 
Sec. 34-57. - Secondhand article dealer license; term. 
    No person may operate as a secondhand article dealer in the city without first having obtained a license therefor. Each such license is valid from January 1 or the date of issuance until the following December 31. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(2)) 
Sec. 34-58. - Secondhand jewelry dealer license; term. 
    No person may operate as a secondhand jewelry dealer in the city without first having obtained a license therefor. Each such license is valid from January 1 or the date of issuance until the following December 31. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(2)) 
Sec. 34-59. - Dealer mall and flea market licenses; term. 
    The owner of any premises or land upon which two or more persons operate as secondhand article dealers may obtain a secondhand article dealer mall or flea market license for the premises or land, valid for two years, from May 1 until April 30 of the second year following the issuance thereof, if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Each secondhand article dealer occupies a separate sales location and identifies himself to the public as a separate secondhand article dealer. 
(2)  The secondhand article dealer mall or flea market is operated under one name and at one address, and is under the control of the secondhand article dealer mall or flea market license holder. 
(3)  Each secondhand article dealer delivers to the secondhand article dealer mall or flea market license holder, at the close of business on each day that the secondhand article dealer conducts business, a record of his sales including the location at which each sale was made. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(2)) 
Sec. 34-60. - Exceptions. 
    The requirements of this section do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Secondhand article dealers operating upon premises or land for which the owner has obtained a secondhand article dealer mall or flea market license. 
(2)  Transactions involving occasional garage or yard sales, estate sales, coins, gem, antique or stamp shows, conventions or auctions. 
(3)  Transactions involving the purchase of grindings, filings, slag, sweeps, scraps or dust from an industrial manufacturer, dental laboratory, dentist or agent thereof. 
(4)  Transactions involving the purchase of photographic film, including lithographic and x-ray film for reprocessing. 
(5)  Transactions between dealers licensed under this article. 
(6)  Transactions of charitable organizations or sales conducted where the proceeds are donated to a charitable organization. 
(7)  Transactions between a buyer of a new article and the person who sold the article when it involves the return of the article or the exchange of the article for a different new article. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(2)) 
Sec. 34-61. - Application for license. 
    Applications for licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk upon application forms provided by the clerk's office at least 15 days prior to the granting thereof. The city clerk shall refer each application to the committee of the whole and common council. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(3)) 
Sec. 34-62. - Qualification for licensure. 
    In addition to other requirements for licensure contained in this article, the following qualifications must be met as a prerequisite to licensure under this chapter: 
(1)  Criminal history. It is hereby deemed to be in the public interest to discourage trafficking in stolen property, and to assist the police authorities in the recovery of stolen goods and the apprehension of thieves. Therefore, no license shall be granted pursuant to this chapter to any person that has been convicted in any court, state or federal, for theft, fraud, forgery, pandering, any crime involving moral turpitude, or similar offenses. 
(2)  Residency. No license under this section shall be granted to any person who has not resided in the state continuously for a period of at least one year prior to the date of filing his application. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(3)) 
Sec. 34-63. - License fees. 
    The license fees as indicated on the schedule of fees adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council and on file with the city clerk shall accompany the application and shall not be prorated. The license fee shall not be less than the fee required under Wis. Stats. § 134.71(11). 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(4)) 
Sec. 34-64. - Assignability. 
    No license issued pursuant to this section shall be assignable, nor inure to the benefit of any person to whom the license was not originally issued. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(5)) 
Sec. 34-65. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The chief of police shall investigate or cause to be investigated each applicant for any license under this section, and shall furnish to the city clerk, in writing, the information derived from any such investigation. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(3)) 
Sec. 34-66. - Grounds for denial. 
(a)  By the clerk. The clerk shall not issue a license under this chapter to any applicant who is not of good moral character, or who has been convicted within the preceding ten years of a felony, or within the preceding five years of a misdemeanor or other offense the circumstances of which substantially relate to the circumstances of being a secondhand goods dealer. In this section, the term "applicant" includes any individual or partner, and any officer, director or agent of any corporate applicant. 
(b)  By the council. The committee of the whole of the common council is hereby granted the authority to refuse issuance of a license under this article upon cause shown. Cause for revoking or denying such license shall include, but not be limited to, the following: violations of this chapter, of Wis. Stats. § 134.17 (unlawful use of business name), violation of Wis. Stats. § 934.34 (receiving stolen property), violation of Wis. Stats. § 943.35 (receiving property from children), and violation of Wis. Stats. § 943.37 (alteration of property identification marks). 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(3)) 
Sec. 34-67. - Revocation. 
    The committee of the whole of the common council is hereby granted the authority to revoke a license issued under this article upon cause shown. Cause for revoking or denying such license shall include, but not be limited to, the following: violations of this chapter, of Wis. Stats. § 134.17 (unlawful use of business name), violation of Wis. Stats. § 934.34 (receiving stolen property), violation of Wis. Stats. § 943.35 (receiving property from children), and violation of Wis. Stats. § 943.37 (alteration of property identification marks). 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(7)) 
Secs. 34-68-34-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRECIOUS METALS AND STONES 

Sec. 34-93. - Seller's identification; report of purchase. 
    Every dealer licensed hereunder who acquires by purchase, pawn, or exchange, any article or item made in whole or in part of platinum, gold, silver, copper, brass, bronze or other precious stones or pearls shall obtain from the seller adequate identification and, within 24 hours of the dealer's receipt of the item, shall report the receipt and provide the identification information to the chief of police. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(6)) 
Sec. 34-94. - Records required; report to police. 
(a)  Form of register; inspection. Every dealer licensed hereunder shall keep a permanent register of all articles and all items made in whole or in part of platinum, gold, silver, copper, brass, bronze or other precious stones or pearls. The register shall be made available at all reasonable times for inspection by city police officers. 
(b)  Contents of register. The register shall be kept in such manner as the chief of police shall prescribe, but shall comply with the provisions of this section. The register shall be kept in ink, in English, without erasure, mutilation, or alteration. The register shall include for each transaction: 
(1)  The name, address and date of birth of the seller, together with the number of any adequate identification; 
(2)  The date, time and place of the purchase, pawn or exchange; 
(3)  An accurate description of each article and each item including but not limited to any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, description by weight and design of such article, and other identifying marks, identifying descriptions of a specific nature and, when applicable, whether the article is a male or female item. 
(c)  Declaration of seller. The dealer shall also obtain a written declaration of the seller's ownership which shall state whether the article of secondhand property is totally owned by the seller, how long the seller has owned the article, whether the seller or someone else found the article, and, if the article was found, the details of its finding. The seller shall sign his name in such register and on the declaration of ownership. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(6)) 
Sec. 34-95. - Holding times; inspection. 
    Except as otherwise provided in article I hereof, items received by a dealer licensed hereunder shall be subject to the following holding schedule: 
(1)  Precious items other than gold and silver coin or bullion. Any article of secondhand property, other than gold or silver coins or bullion, that is purchased by a dealer licensed hereunder from a member of the general public shall be kept on the dealer's premises in the form that it was received for not less than 15 days from the date of receipt purchase, during which time the article shall be held separate and apart from any other transaction and shall not be changed or altered in any manner. The dealer shall permit the chief of police or any other police officer designated by the chief to inspect the article during the 15-day period. 
(2)  Gold and silver coins or bullion. Any gold or silver coins or bullion purchased by a dealer licensed hereunder from a member of the general public shall be kept on the dealer's premises in the form that it was received for not less than 48 hours from purchase, during which time the article shall be held separate and apart from any other transaction and shall not be changed or altered in any manner. The dealer shall permit the chief of police or any other police officer designated by the chief to inspect the article during the 48-hour period. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(6)) 
Secs. 34-96-34-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FIREARMS 

Sec. 34-119. - Records required; report to police. 
    Every dealer licensed hereunder who obtains by pawn, purchase or exchange any secondhand firearm, whether smooth bore, shotgun, rifle, or handgun, must secure adequate identification from the seller and, within 24 hours after receiving the firearm, report the receipt and provide the identification information of the firearm and the seller to the chief of police. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(6)) 
Sec. 34-120. - Holding times; inspection. 
    Any firearm received in pawn, purchase or exchange by a dealer licensed hereunder from a member of the general public shall be kept in the dealer's premises in the form that it was received for not less than 15 days from the date of purchase, during which time the article shall be held separate and apart from any other transaction and shall not be changed or altered in any manner. The dealer shall permit the chief of police or any other police officer designated by the chief to inspect the article during the 15-day period. 
(Code 1993, § 12.15(6)) 
Secs. 34-121-34-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALVAGE YARDS AND DEALERS 

Sec. 34-139. - Adoption of state law. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 175.25 relative to the storage and sale of and the business of dealing in salvageable material, exclusive of penalty provisions, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein. 
(Code 1993, § 12.13(1)) 
Sec. 34-140. - License required. 
    All salvage yards operating in the city shall be licensed by the city pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 175.25. 
(Code 1993, § 12.13(2)) 
Sec. 34-141. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  Inside storage required. Unbaled papers and rags shall be stored at all times inside buildings. 
(b)  Location restrictions. No salvage yard shall be operated at a solid waste landfill area. Salvage operations shall be conducted only in areas that have appropriate zoning. 
(c)  Garbage prohibited. No garbage or similar putrescible material shall be present at salvage yards. 
(d)  Burning prohibited. Open burning of solid waste or salvageable material is prohibited. 
(e)  Screening required. The yard shall be surrounded by a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means to screen it from surrounding areas. 
(f)  Health and safety. The operation shall be conducted in an orderly manner. Effective means shall be taken to control rodents or other vermin and to prevent fire hazards. 
(Code 1993, § 12.13(3)) 
Chapter 36 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2016, amended former Ch. 36, Arts. II-IV, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 36 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code of 1993, §§ 8.11, 11.05, 11.15; Ord. No. 2015-01-D, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-2015. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Title; collection service. 
(a)  Title. This chapter shall be known as the Solid Waste Management Ordinance of the City of Tomah, hereinafter referred to as ordinance or chapter. 
(b)  Garbage, recycling and refuse collection service. All residential garbage, recycling and refuse collection service shall be provided by city personnel or by private firms under contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-2. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to enhance and improve the environment and promote the health, safety and welfare of the city by establishing minimum standards for the storage, collection, transport, processing, separation, recovery and disposal of solid waste. It is also the intent of this chapter to promote recycling, composting and resource recovery through the effective refuse collection and recycling program, as provided in Chapter 36. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-3. - Effective date. 
    All provisions shall take effect and be in force from and after passage and publication of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-4. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein unless different meanings are clearly indicated by the context. 
    Agricultural establishment. An establishment engaged in the rearing and slaughtering of animals and the processing of animal products or orchard and field crops. 
    Aluminum container. An aluminum container for food or beverages. 
    Automated refuse container. City issued size as approved by common council container for the purposes of holding garbage and rubbish for pickup by city contractor. 
    Automated recycling container. City issued size as approved by common council container for the purposes of holding recyclable materials for pickup by city personnel or city contractor. 
    Bi-metal container. A container for beverages that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum. 
    Brush site. A site designated by the City of Tomah where citizens may drop off brush, shrubs, branches, and other tree waste meeting criteria established by the public works commission. 
    Bulky waste. Items whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by normal collection, processing or disposal methods. 
    City service dwelling unit. Any building containing four or less dwelling units or any condominium or any manufactured home park that receives refuse and recycling collection service from the City of Tomah. 
    Commercial unit. Commercial units shall be all property other than city service dwelling units and multi-family dwellings and shall include boarding houses, motels, resorts, restaurants, groceries, meat markets or dwelling units attached to commercial properties regardless of the number of dwelling units. 
    Contractor. Shall mean the entity which the city contracts with for refuse or recycling collection services. 
    Curb. The back edge or curb and gutter along a paved street or where one would be if the street was paved and had curb and gutter. 
    Demolition wastes. That portion of solid wastes consisting of wastes from the repair, remodeling or reconstruction of buildings, such as lumber, roofing and sheathing scraps, rubble, broken concrete, asphalt and plaster, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation and any other materials resulting from the demolition of buildings and improvements. 
    Disposal. The orderly process of discarding useless or unwanted material. 
    DNR. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
    Dump. A land site where solid waste is disposed of in a manner that does not protect the environment. 
    Dwelling unit. A place of habitation occupied by a normal single family unit or a combination of persons who may be considered as equivalent to a single family unit for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Garbage. Includes every refuse accumulation of animals, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, which attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables originally used for foodstuffs. 
    Glass container. Containers in which food or beverages are sold that are made of clear, green, or brown glass. Drinking glasses or crystal is not included. 
    Hazardous waste. Those wastes such as toxic, radioactive or pathogenic substances which require special handling to avoid illness or injury to persons or damage to property and the environment. 
    Household non-combustible recyclable materials. Aluminum, steel, and bi-metal containers and glass containers. 
    Industrial waste. Waste material, except garbage, rubbish and refuse, directly or indirectly resulting from an industrial processing or manufacturing operation. 
    Landfill. A landsite where solid waste is disposed of in a manner to provide protections for the environment, in accordance with state regulations. 
    Large item. All large items such as appliances and furniture. 
    Litter. Solid waste scattered about in a careless manner, usually rubbish. 
    Major appliance. A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes dyer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator, stove, furnaces, boilers, dehumidifiers, water heaters, and any other appliances designated by the public works commission. 
    Multiple family dwelling. A building under one ownership containing five or more dwelling units, including those which are occupied seasonally. 
    Newspaper. Newspapers printed on newsprint. 
    Non-collectable material. Includes lead acid batteries; major appliances, waste oil; hazardous waste; toxic waste; chemicals; explosives or ammunition; tires; appliances or materials that may be designated by the public works commission. 
    Non-residential facilities and properties. Commercial, retail, industrial, institutional, and governmental facilities and properties. This term does not include multiple family dwellings. 
    Non-residential solid waste. Solid waste from agricultural, commercial, industrial or institutional activities or a building or group of buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units. 
    Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, local governmental unit, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0131(1), state agency or authority or federal agency. 
    Plastic container. An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar, or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale. 
    Plastic bottle. A Number 1 through Number 7 type plastic bottle or jug. 
    Postconsumer waste. Solid waste other than solid waste generated in the production of goods, hazardous waste as defined in Wis. Stats. § 289.01, waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in Wis. Stats § 289.01. 
    Private waste hauler. A person licensed by the DNR to provide solid waste collection services. 
    Recyclable materials. Includes yard waste; aluminum containers; glass containers; plastic #1 through #7; newspaper; steel containers; fiber board; corrugated; and bi-metal containers, and other items or materials that may be designated by the public works commission. 
    Residential solid waste. All solid waste that normally originates in a residential environment from residential dwelling units. 
    Residential unit. Residential unit shall mean an individual household capable of independent habitation by a family unit. A single family dwelling shall be considered to be one residential unit; multi-family dwelling shall be considered to be multiple residential units, the number of residential units to equal the number of family units to be housed therein. Residential units shall not include boarding houses, motels or resorts. 
    Rubbish. Includes combustible and noncombustible waste material, except rocks, concrete, bricks and similar solid materials, plaster or dirt, that is incidental to the operation of a building and shall include, by way of enumeration but not by way of limitation, tin cans, bottles, rags, paper, cardboard, sweepings. 
    Scavenging. The uncontrolled removal of materials at any point in solid waste management. 
    Solid waste. Garbage, rubbish, recyclables and other useless, unwanted or discarded material from agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial or institutional activities. Solid waste does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage. 
    Solid waste facility. Has the meaning specified in Wis. Stats, § 289.01(35). 
    Solid waste treatment. Any method, technique or process which is designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological character, or composition of solid waste. Treatment includes incineration. 
    Steel container. A steel food or beverage container commonly referred to as a tin can. 
    Storage. The interim containment of solid waste in an approved manner after generation and prior to collection and ultimate disposal. 
    Storage areas. Areas where persons place containers during non-collection days as well as areas where containers are set out on collection day. 
    Waste tire. A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
    White goods. Heavy consumer durables, namely large appliances such as air conditioners, refrigerators, stoves etc. 
    Yard waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than one inch in diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact root balls. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-5. - General regulations for city serviced dwelling units. 
(a)  General container standards. City serviced dwelling units shall each be issued one automated cart for recycling collection. The size of the automated cart shall be set by the public works commission. The automated refuse or recycling carts shall be owned by the city and shall remain at each place of issuance. 
(b)  Approved containers. All garbage, rubbish and recyclable materials set out for collection shall be placed in city automated recycling containers or garbage receptacles as stated in this section. No recyclable materials will be collected from non-city issued containers. 
(c)  Request for additional containers. City service dwelling units may request additional automated containers for recycling. Each additional cart requested shall have a fee of $70.00 for recycling. 
(d)  Automated cart replacement or damage. If Automated recycling containers are lost, damaged or destroyed by city service dwelling unit a new automated cart will be issued at a cost of $70.00. If the automated container is damaged by the city or contractor a new automated recycling container will be provided at no cost. If automated recycling containers need maintenance due to normal wear and tear city service dwelling units shall contact the public works department for scheduling repair of automated recycling containers. 
(e)  Illegal containers. Contractor shall not be obligated to pick up any garbage, rubbish or recyclable materials not within city issued automated recycling containers or garbage receptacles as stated in this section. 
(f)  Recyclables to be separated and clean. City serviced dwelling units shall separate all recyclable materials from refuse and prepare them for recycling according to requirements established and publicized by the public works commission or the Monroe County Solid Waste Department. Recycling shall be single stream deposited into the automated recycling container. To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in accordance with this section shall be substantially clean and kept free of containments such as food or product residue, oil or grease or other non-recyclable materials. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain and other inclement weather conditions until such time as the materials are set at the curb for collection. 
(g)  Special handling recyclables. No person shall place any lead acid battery, waste oil, motor vehicle tire or tractor tire with post-consumer waste. Any person having waste oil, lead acid battery, or said tires shall take it to an appropriate private retail recycler, or designated City disposal site if available. 
(h)  White goods disposition. All discharged major appliances can be placed at the curb on your normal refuse pick up day during the first full week of the month. 
(i)  Prohibition on placing recyclable materials in refuse. The following materials shall be separated from postconsumer waste. Mixing of these recyclable materials with Postconsumer Waste from residential, commercial, industrial or other sources is prohibited. All city service dwelling Units must place the materials listed below in city issued automated recycling container for pickup by contractor: 
(1)  Aluminum containers. 
(2)  Glass containers. 
(3)  Steel or bi-metal containers. 
(4)  Plastics #1 through #7. 
(5)  Newspaper. 
(6)  Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper, including glossy newspaper inserts. 
(7)  Office paper/white paper. 
(8)  Fiberboard (cereal boxes, soda cartons, beer cartons, etc.) 
(9)  Corrugated card board. 
    These recyclable materials shall not be mixed with garbage or rubbish or disposed of at any landfill or incinerator, without written permission of the public works commission, except waste tires may be burned with energy recovery in a facility licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(j)  Refusal to collect refuse or recycling in violation. The city and contractor may refuse to collect garbage, rubbish, recyclable materials and yard waste if they are not prepared in accordance with the requirements established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-6. - Collection of automated containers for city serviced dwelling units. 
(a)  Placement for collection. 
(1)  Accessibility: City automated recycling containers shall be accessible to contractor's collection crews. Automated recycling containers shall be placed immediately behind the curb of the public street, along alley or at location as determined by public works commission, for collection with a minimum of three (3) feet clear space on either side. During winter months, Automated recycling containers shall not be placed on top of the snow bank, nor shall it be placed in the roadway. The owner shall either shovel out an area behind the curb or placement area in which to place the automated recycling containers or owner shall place it in owner's driveway. Collection crews will not collect refuse and recycling unless it is placed at the curb of a public street, alley or location as determined by the public works commission. City serviced dwelling units shall bring their automated recycling containers to the public right-of-way for collection. Should collection crews be unable to discharge contents of automated recycling containers using normal handling procedures, the containers including contents, will be left at curb side. 
(2)  No automated containers for refuse or recycling other than those of the city shall be placed, kept, stored or located within the right-of-way of a street or alley; provided, however, that the common council may authorize the location of such containers within the public right-of-way at specified places and times when such location is necessary for the expeditious collection and disposition of refuse or recycling. 
(3)  City service dwelling unit physically impaired roll out service: Qualifying city service dwelling units that submit city required form and physician's note will be eligible for physically impaired roll out service. Contractor will only pick up automated recycling containers that are visible from street at driveway or alley and not within a building. Automated recycling containers will not be collected under this service if driveway is not clear of snow and ice. 
(b)  Restriction on time of placement. 
(1)  All automated recycling containers and garbage receptacles as stated in section. 36-5 shall be placed in collection locations as designated in subsection (a) above only after 7:00 p.m. on the evenings prior to the regular collection time. 
(2)  All automated recycling containers and garbage receptacles shall be removed from the curbside collection point within 12 hours after the regular collection time. 
(3)  City employees or employees of contractor will not enter any structures to access automated recycling containers or refuse. 
(c)  Collection schedule. 
(1)  The designation of the day or days of refuse and recycling collection shall be made by the common council, or the public works committee thereof, and such information shall be advertised so that all occupants, tenants and proprietors of all residential units are advised of the correct collection schedule. Unless hardship is shown, caused by extreme weather conditions or other hazardous situations, refuse shall be collected from all residential units weekly. 
(2)  The occupant, tenant or proprietor of a new residential unit shall notify the public works department that collection of refuse or recycling from such place is required. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 2018-01-01D, § 1, 1-9-2018) 
Sec. 36-7. - Recycling responsibilities for multiple family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties. 
(a)  Responsibilities of owners. Owners of designated agents of multiple family dwellings and non-residential facilities, properties and commercial units shall do all of the following to recycle materials as outlined in this section: 
(1)  Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials. 
(2)  Notify all users, tenants and occupants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the property and at least semi-annually thereafter about the established recycling program. 
(3)  Provide for the collection of the recyclable materials separated from the solid waste and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility. 
(4)  Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations, and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone 
(b)  Exemptions. The preceding requirements of subsection (a)(1)-(4) for the owners of designated agents of non-residential facilities and multiple family dwellings do not apply if the refuse generated within the facility or property is delivered to and treated at a processing facility licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling all non-combustible recyclable materials in as pure a form as is technically and practically feasible. 
(c)  Compliance audit. The city's public works department can audit up to 15 percent of all non-residential recycling programs for compliance annually. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-8. - Enforcement of reporting requirements. 
(a)  Inspections. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this section, an authorized representative of the public works department may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such an inspection. 
(b)  Citations. Any person who violated a provision of this section may be issued a citation by the city police department or an authorized agent of the public works commission or the building inspector. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-9. - General regulations for all city serviced dwelling units, multiple family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties. 
    Prohibited activities and non-collectable materials: 
(1)  Dead animals. It shall be unlawful to place any dead animal, or parts thereof, in a container for collection provided, however, this section shall not apply to animal parts from food preparation for human consumption. 
(2)  Undrained food wastes. It shall be unlawful to place any garbage or other food wastes in a container for collection unless it is first drained and wrapped. 
(3)  Ashes. It shall be unlawful to place hot ashes for collection. 
(4)  Improper placement. It shall be unlawful to place, or allow to be placed, any solid waste upon the roads, streets, public or private property within the city contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Compliance with chapter. It shall be unlawful to store, collect, transport, transfer, recover, incinerate or dispose of any solid waste within the boundaries of the city contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  Improper transportation. It shall be unlawful to transport any solid waste in any vehicle which permits the contents to blow, sift, leak or fall where from. If spillage does occur, the collection crew shall immediately return spilled materials to the collection vehicle and shall properly clean, or have cleaned, the area. All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall be durable, easily cleanable and leak-proof, if necessary, considering the type of waste and its moisture content. Collection vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent nuisances and insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(7)  Interference with authorized collector. No person other than an authorized collector shall collect or interfere with any refuse or recycling materials after it has been put into automated carts or garbage receptacles as stated in section 36-5 and deposited in the proper place for the collector, nor shall any authorized person molest, hinder, delay or in any manner interfere with an authorized refuse collector in the discharge of his duties. 
(8)  Scavenging. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any solid waste placed for collection. All city service dwelling unit recyclable material collected and deposited, as provided in this section, shall be the property of the City of Tomah unless altered by written city contract with contractor. 
(9)  Private dumps. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a dump. 
(10)  Burning of waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste in any manner, except as provided elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances. 
(11)  Non-collectible materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any of the following wastes: 
a.  Hazardous waste; 
b.  Toxic waste; 
c.  Chemicals; 
d.  Explosives or ammunition; 
e.  Drain or waste oil or flammable liquids; 
f.  Large quantities of paint; 
g.  Tires; 
h.  Stone, concrete, rubber, earth or sod; 
i.  Construction debris 
(12)  Animal or human wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place animal wastes and/or human wastes for collection unless such waste is placed in a plastic bag. These wastes should be disposed of in plastic bags or in the sanitary sewer system. Such items as "kitty litter" may be placed for collection if animal wastes are removed prior to disposal unless kitty litter is placed in a plastic bag. 
(13)  Hospital wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any pathogenic hospital wastes. 
(14)  Building waste. All waste resulting from remodeling, construction or removal of a building, roadway or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the owner, builder or contractor. 
(15)  Waste motor oil recycling. No person shall dispose of any waste motor oil by placing it with refuse for regular collection by the city, by pouring it on the ground, into storm sewers, ditches or waterways, or into gutters or city streets. Any person wishing to dispose of waste motor oil shall utilize or at any other legal waste motor oil site. 
(16)  Waste tires/tires. In order to prevent encephalitis infections, tires may not be disposed of or stored outside where they may collect rain, water and harbor a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(17)  Construction debris. City will not dispose of any construction debris. Property owner must contract with a private waste hauler. 
(18)  Collection and disposal of refuse other than by city. Refuse which is not collected by the city, its agents, employees or contractors may be collected and disposed of by private rubbish haulers. All vehicles used to transport rubbish shall be provided with equipment to prevent rubbish from blowing out of, falling from or otherwise escaping from such vehicle. AH rubbish haulers shall comply with all applicable rules and regulations established by the common council or the public works commission. 
(19)  Garbage accumulation; when a nuisance. The accumulation or deposit of garbage, trash or putrescible animal or vegetable matter in or upon any lot or land or any public or private place within the city which causes the air or environment to become noxious or offensive or to be in such a condition as to promote the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects, or to provide a habitat or breeding place for rodents or other animals, or which otherwise becomes injurious to the public health is prohibited and declared to constitute a nuisance. 
(20)  Refuse from outside the municipality. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, deposit or cause to be deposited, for collection, any waste or refuse not generated within the corporate limits of the city. 
(21)  Restriction on hours of refuse collection. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to collect refuse in the City of Tomah between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(22)  Littering. No person shall deposit, throw or place any garbage on or within any public street, alley, park, sidewalk or other public place on or within any private property whether owned, kept or controlled by such person or not, except and unless in cans, tanks or containers as provided herein. All such garbage shall be removed or otherwise disposed of at least once every ten days. 
(23)  Commercial garbage not to accumulate. All commercial garbage from restaurants, hotels, groceries and meat markets shall be removed or disposed of at least once every 48 hours. 
(24)  Unauthorized use of garbage receptacles. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in or near any private dumpster, trash can, or other private trash receptacle, any refuse, trash, recyclable materials, or other items without the consent of the owner or authorized user of such dumpster, trash can or trash receptacle. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in or near any city-owned or -leased dumpster, trash can, or other city trash receptacle any refuse, trash, recyclable materials, or other items, except that such trash as normally generated during the usual use of a city building, park, or other facility may be placed in trash receptacles provided for such waste. 
(25)  Refuse from outside the city. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or cause to be deposited for collection by the city or the city's contractor, any waste or refuse not generated within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-10. - Garbage district established; administration. 
    A garbage district is hereby established which shall include all the territory within the limits of the city. The collection, removal and disposal of garbage and rubbish within the garbage district shall be conducted under the supervision, direction and control of the director of public works and in strict conformity with the provisions of this article and with such additional rules and regulations as may be made from time to time by the council or the public works and utilities commission. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-11. - City's costs for garbage collection. 
    The expense of collection, removal and disposal of the garbage and rubbish shall be paid from garbage funds insofar as city service dwelling units. The cost of collection of commercial garbage with the exception of restaurants, hotels, groceries and meat markets shall be paid from garbage funds. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-12. - Enforcement by building inspector and/or code enforcement officer. 
    The building inspector and/or code enforcement officer shall strictly enforce the provisions of this section and see that all violations thereof are promptly abated and the violators prosecuted, and the chief of police, director of public works and utilities and police officers of the city shall give attention throughout the city to any violation and promptly report such violations to the building inspector and/or the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 2017-08-12-D, § 1, 8-8-2017) 
Sec. 36-13. - Disposal restrictions. 
    All ordinary garbage shall be drained of surplus water, securely wrapped and deposited promptly in waste containers. Refuse or garbage may be combined in a single container or placed in separate containers not exceeding a weight of 60 pounds, including the container and contents. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-14. - Amount limited. 
    Each city service dwelling unit is limited to three 32-gallon garbage cans or the equivalent amount per week. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-15. - Trees and bushes. 
    All stumps and brush from trees on private property shall be removed at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-16. - Industrial waste. 
    Industrial wastes shall be disposed of at the expense of the person producing such wastes. They shall not be taken to any public or private dump within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-17. - Construction materials. 
    Demolition and construction materials will not be picked up by the city or recycle contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-18. - Large items. 
    All large items, such as appliances and furniture, shall be placed at designated locations at times designated by city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-19. - Garbage receptacles. 
    All garbage cans shall be furnished by the property owner and shall be of galvanized metal or plastic material, watertight, and provided with fly-tight and watertight covers. All garbage cans must have two handles and may not exceed 32-gallon capacity. If containers are to be outside at all times, they should be placed four inches to ten inches off the ground on a suitable platform. Garbage cans shall be kept covered at all times, except when they are being filled or emptied, and shall be kept clean and disinfected. 
(1)  Plastic bags are suitable for disposal of garbage when taken to the assigned garbage pickup site as enumerated and defined in section 36-6(b) Restriction on time of placement. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 2018-12-12-D, § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Sec. 36-20. - Violations. 
    The owner, designated agent or operator of any commercial property shall be required to provide a dumpster if such owner or operator is cited three or issued three orders to correct for violation of the city's solid waste regulations within any 12-month period. The owner, designated agent or operator of any multiple family dwelling shall be required to provide a dumpster or dumpsters of appropriate size as specified by the building and inspections or public works department for the deposit of refuse and/or recycling if such owner or operator is cited three or issued three orders to correct for violation of the city's solid waste regulations within any 12-month period. Refuse deposited in said dumpsters shall be collected and transported to a licensed disposal facility not less than once per week, and may be ordered to be dumped more frequently as deemed necessary by the director of public works and inspections department at the expense of the property owner. In addition to the determination as to the size of the dumpster or dumpsters, the building and inspections department is authorized to order relocation and/or screening or enclosure of any such required dumpster or dumpsters in order to eliminate any nuisance with respect to the same as may be determined by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Secs. 36-21-36-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DUMPSTERS 

Sec. 36-44. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Dumpster means a container over three feet in width or three feet in length used or originally intended to be used for refuse disposal. 
(2)  Street includes the traveled portion of the city streets and alleys, specifically including the area from curb to curb on a street with curbs, the area from shoulder to shoulder on a street without curbs, and the paved area of alleys, and specifically excluding the street and alley rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-45. - Placement; notice. 
    No person shall place any dumpster in a street in the city without first providing written notice to the city building inspector. All dumpsters placed on the street must have reflectors meeting the requirements for safety as determined by the director of public works and utilities. Each written notice of intent to place a dumpster on a city street shall include the specific location where the dumpster will be placed as well as the arrival times. In no event shall a dumpster be placed on a city sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-46. - Moving dumpsters. 
    From time to time, the city may determine that it is necessary to move a dumpster off of a street in the city. The city reserves the right to require the removal of a dumpster from a city street at any time for any reason, including but not limited to, for snow removal purposes, for street cleaning, for public safety, for public parades and for repair or reconstruction of public streets, sewer or water service. The determination as to removal of a dumpster shall be made by the director of public works and utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-47. - Time limitation; extension. 
    No dumpster shall be placed in a street for a time period longer than 90 days unless an extension is granted by the city building inspector. An extension may be given only pursuant to a written request and upon payment of a fee for each additional 30-day placement period in an amount determined by the city council. No extension shall be issued under this section until the applicant demonstrates a compelling reason or hardship for continued placement of a dumpster on the street. No extension shall be issued if it is determined that an alternate placement of the dumpster is available to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-48. - Owner's responsibility. 
    Compliance with this section shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property requiring use of the dumpster. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Secs. 36-49-36-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING 

Sec. 36-66. - Required. 
    Each residence, residential unit, apartment, condominium or place of business shall cooperate in the recycling of garbage and refuse within the city, as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-67. - Recyclable materials. 
    Recyclable materials shall consist of: 
(1)  Glass. All glass bottles and jars, with caps and lids removed, shall be rinsed and placed in the designated containers for recyclable materials. 
(2)  Cans. All aluminum, tin, steel, copper and brass cans shall be rinsed, labels removed therefrom and placed in designated containers for recyclable materials. 
(3)  Plastics. All plastics with #1-7 PETE symbol, with caps and lids removed, shall be rinsed and placed in the designated containers for recyclable materials. 
(4)  Cardboard. Cardboard of all types shall be flattened. 
(5)  Newsprint. 
(6)  Office paper. 
(7)  Yard waste. All yard waste, such as leaves, grass, and garden residue, shall be brought by the resident to the manned compost site. 
(8)  Tree limbs. All trees, tree limbs and brush shall be bundled in accordance with existing ordinances and placed for pickup at the designated location and time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-68. - Nonrecyclable materials. 
    All nonrecyclable materials shall be grouped together and placed for proper garbage collection as required in this chapter. Nonrecyclable materials shall include the following: 
(1)  Glass. All Pyrex glass, window glass, light bulbs, mirrors, broken glass and china shall be considered nonrecyclable. 
(2)  Plastics. All Styrofoam and Melmac-type plastics, or bags, shall be considered nonrecyclable plastics. 
(3)  Paper. Tissue paper, paper toweling or wax paper shall be considered nonrecyclable paper. 
(4)  Other. All other garbage and refuse not qualifying as recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-69. - Nonauthorized pickup. 
    No person shall remove, carry away or disturb recyclable materials from pickup locations by anyone except the designated recycle contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-07-D, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Chapter 38 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Official map. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. To conserve and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, the city has adopted and established the official map of the city consisting of one sheet and depicting the city and the area outside the city over which the city has extraterritorial jurisdiction. It is the further purpose of the official map to show the width and location of streets, highways and parkways in order to promote the efficient and economical development of the city. 
(b)  Amendments. The city council, whenever and as often as it may deem it for the public interest, may change or add to the official map of the city in conformity with the state statutes. 
(c)  Filing of certificate. Immediately upon the adoption, the city clerk shall file with the county register of deeds a certificate showing the city has established the official map and shall do likewise as to any change or addition. 
(Code 1993, § 8.08(1), (3), (6)) 
State Law reference- Official maps, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6). 
Sec. 38-2. - Building permits; plot plans. 
    For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the official map, no permit shall be issued for any building in the bed of any street, highway or parkway shown or laid out on the map, except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6)(d) or (e). The proper official authorized by the city council to issue building permits shall require each applicant to submit a plot plan certified by a qualified surveyor for approval. The plot plan shall accurately show the location of any proposed building with reference to any street as shown on the official map. 
(Code 1993, § 8.08(5)) 
Sec. 38-3. - Permit fees. 
    Fees for all permits required by this chapter shall be as determined by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1993, § 8.10) 
Sec. 38-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Carriage walk means any walkway constructed between the sidewalk and the curb or lateral lines of a roadway. 
    Nonresidential property means all property other than property used exclusively as one-family and two-family dwellings. 
    Residential property means property used exclusively as one-family and two-family dwellings. 
    Sidewalk means the paved walk between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, constructed for the use of pedestrians. The term "sidewalk" shall not include carriage walks. 
(Code 1993, § 8.02) 
Sec. 38-5. - Grade of streets and sidewalks. 
    The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established by resolution by the council. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is established. No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or any part thereof by any means whatsoever unless authorized or instructed to do so by the council or the director of public works and utilities. All the alterations of grade shall be recorded by the officer authorizing the alteration. 
(Code 1993, § 8.01) 
Secs. 38-6-38-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 38-29. - Maintenance. 
    All sidewalks in the city shall be maintained in good condition or repair, free from obstructions to permit passageway by pedestrians. The council may from time to time make all needful rules and regulations for carrying these provisions into effect and regulating the use of the sidewalks of the city and preventing their obstruction. 
(Code 1993, § 8.02(2)) 
Sec. 38-30. - Snow and ice removal. 
(a)  Owners responsibility. The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel shall promptly each day, and in no event later than 24 hours after any snowstorm, remove all snow and ice which may have fallen or accumulated upon the sidewalk in front of such lot or parcel; provided, when ice has so formed that it cannot be removed, the owner or occupant shall keep the same sprinkled with a material which will prevent the sidewalk from being dangerous to pedestrians. This provision does not apply to the owner or occupant of any sidewalk 25 feet or more away from the respective property line of the owner or occupant. 
(b)  City's option to clear sidewalks. In any case where the owner, occupant or person in charge of any building or structure or unoccupied lot shall fail to clear his respective sidewalk of snow and ice as set forth above, then and in that event, the city may elect to clear said sidewalks as follows: 
(1)  Written notice shall be delivered to and left in a conspicuous place on the premises informing said person of his failure to clear said sidewalk, the city's intention to clear the same and the potential costs thereof, no less than 24 hours prior to the city's clearing said sidewalk. 
(2)  The city shall clear or cause to be cleared all snow and ice from said sidewalk, and shall charge the expenses of so doing pursuant to a fee schedule established by the city council or designated city personnel, subject to approval by the city council. The charges shall be set forth in a statement to the clerk who, in turn, shall mail the same to the owner, occupant or person in charge of the subject premises. If said statement is not paid in full within 30 days thereafter, the statement shall be reported to the clerk, who shall enter the charges on the tax roll as a special tax against said lot or parcel of land, and the same shall be collected in all respects like other taxes upon real estate, or as provided under Wis. Stats. § 66.615(3)(f). 
(c)  Deposit of snow on streets or sidewalks. 
(1)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice taken and removed from his premises or elsewhere upon any sidewalk, alley, parkway, public place or street in the city, except snow removed from sidewalk areas where there are no boulevards or terraces. Snow shall not be piled at or near intersections so as to obstruct the view of pedestrians or operators of motor vehicles. 
(2)  No person shall remove or deposit any snow from building rooftops into a public alley, except by specific permission of the director of public works, and if such permission is granted, the deposited snow must be moved from the alley within a reasonable length of time to be designated by the director of public works at the time permission is granted. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12-04-D, § 1, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 38-31. - Sidewalk construction. 
    The council may from time to time establish the width, determine the material and prescribe the method of construction of standard sidewalks. The provisions of the city's building code and its zoning regulations, as well as this chapter, shall apply to the construction of sidewalks. In the event of conflict among provisions of this Code, the more stringent regulation shall prevail. 
(Code 1993, § 8.02(3)) 
Sec. 38-32. - Unsafe and defective sidewalks. 
    The public works and utilities commission may order any sidewalk that is unsafe, defective or insufficient to be repaired or removed and replaced with a sidewalk with the standard fixed by the council. The city shall have the sole and exclusive discretion to determine whether any sidewalk is in need of repair and/or replacement. 
(Code 1993, § 8.02(4)) 
Sec. 38-33. - Repair; replacement. 
(a)  Residential property. The city shall pay for the repair or replacement of sidewalks for residential property; provided, however, that the city shall not pay for, and the owner shall bear responsibility for, any repair or replacement which is the proximate result of any intentional or negligent damage by the property owner, or the property owner's tenant, lessee, assignee, employee, agent, or guest. 
(b)  Nonresidential property. The property owner of nonresidential property shall pay for all repair or replacement of sidewalks for said property. 
(c)  Notice to owner. If the property owner is responsible for maintenance, repairs, and replacement of sidewalks pursuant to this article, the city may, by resolution or order, direct laying, removal, replacement or repair or any sidewalk or part thereof. Notice of the directive shall be served upon the responsible owner of each property either by personally delivering the same to the owner or his agent or, in case the owner or agent cannot be found in the city, by publishing one insertion in the official newspaper. 
(d)  Default by owner. If the property owner, after notice has been served as provided in this section, shall neglect for a period of 20 days after notice to lay, remove, replace or repair the sidewalk, the city may cause the work to be done at the expense of the owner. The charges shall be entered in the tax roll as a special tax to be collected in the same manner as other taxes. 
(Code 1993, § 8.02(5)-(7)) 
Sec. 38-34. - Restricted use of sidewalks. 
    No person shall operate a skateboard, scooter, roller skate, roller blades or bicycle on the sidewalks of Superior Ave. from Council St. to Washington St. 
(Code 1993, § 7.11) 
Sec. 38-35. - Street reconstruction. 
    All properties adjacent to street reconstruction where a city street section is being completed shall have sidewalk installed where none exists and sidewalk repaired or replaced when the existing sidewalk is deemed unsafe, defective or insufficient. The cost for newly constructed sidewalks and/or repair shall be paid pursuant to sections 38-33 and 38-122 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05-03D, § 2, 5-11-2010) 
Secs. 38-36-38-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 38-57. - Permit required. 
    No person shall construct or maintain any driveway across any sidewalk or curbing without first obtaining a driveway permit from the director of public works and utilities. 
(Code 1993, § 8.03(1)) 
Sec. 38-58. - Construction. 
    In addition to construction standards and specifications otherwise provided in this Code, the minimum standards set forth in this section shall apply to all driveway construction. In the event of conflicting applicable Code provisions, the most stringent regulation shall apply. 
(1)  Driveway width. No driveway shall exceed 24 feet in width at the outer or street edge of the sidewalk, unless special permission is obtained from the public works and utilities commission. 
(2)  Obstruction of intersections prohibited. At intersections no driveway shall provide direct ingress to or egress from the street intersection area nor occupy areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the council for effective traffic control or highway signs or signals. 
(3)  Interference with streets and adjacent areas prohibited. No driveway apron shall extend into the street further than the face of the curb and under no circumstances shall the driveway apron extend into the gutter area. All driveway entrances and approaches shall be so constructed that they shall not interfere with the drainage of streets, side ditches or roadside areas or any existing structure on the right-of-way. 
(4)  Drainage. When required by the director of public works and utilities to provide for adequate surface water drainage along the street, the property owner shall provide any necessary culvert pipe at his own expense. 
(5)  Paving. All driveway entrances and approaches that are constructed across sidewalks shall be paved in accordance with the requirements for sidewalk construction established by the council. 
(Code 1993, § 8.03(2)(a)-(d)) 
Sec. 38-59. - Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks. 
    When curbs or gutters are removed during driveway construction, the new connection shall be of equivalent acceptable material and curb returns provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. Driveway surfaces shall connect with the street pavement and sidewalk in a neat, workmanlike manner. Any sidewalk areas that are damaged or inadequate by reason of vehicle travel across sidewalk shall be replaced. 
(Code 1993, § 8.03(2)(e)) 
Sec. 38-60. - Liability for damages. 
    The permittee hereunder shall assume all responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or property resulting directly or indirectly during construction or repair of driveway approaches or entrances. 
(Code 1993, § 8.03(2)(e)) 
Secs. 38-61-38-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 38-79. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to excavation work under the direction of the public works and utilities commission by city employees or contractors performing work under contract with the city necessitating openings or excavations in city streets, which openings or excavations shall be regulated by the contract between the city and the contractor. 
(Code 1993, § 8.04(6)) 
Sec. 38-80. - Permit required. 
    No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation or opening in any street, alley, highway, sidewalk or other public way within the city without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works and utilities. 
(Code 1993, § 8.04(1)) 
Sec. 38-81. - Frozen ground. 
    No permit shall be issued and no opening in the streets or sidewalks for any purposes shall be permitted when the ground is frozen, except where necessary as determined by the director of public works and utilities. 
(Code 1993, § 8.04(3)(a)) 
Sec. 38-82. - Insurance required. 
    Prior to commencement of excavation work, a permittee shall furnish the director of public works and utilities satisfactory written evidence that he has in force and will maintain during the life of the permit and the period of excavation public liability insurance, bodily injury of not less than $100,000.00 for one person, $300,000.00 for one accident, and property damage insurance of not less than $50,000.00. 
(Code 1993, § 8.04(2)) 
Sec. 38-83. - Construction specifications. 
    Driveway construction shall be subject to the building and zoning provisions of this Code, as well as the specifications set forth in this section. In the event of conflicting provisions, the more stringent regulation shall apply. Driveway construction shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Preservation of surface areas. In opening any street or other public way, all paving or ballasting materials shall be removed with the least possible loss of or injury to surfacing material. 
(2)  Restoration of surface areas, monuments, and hubs. The paving materials, sand, gravel and earth or other material moved or penetrated, and all surface monuments or hubs must be replaced as nearly as possible in their original condition or position and within the same relation to the remainder as before. The city may elect to have the city make the pavement repair for any street or sidewalk opening, in which case the cost of making the repair and of maintaining for one year shall be charged to the person making the street opening. 
(3)  Backfill material. Any excavated material that in the opinion of the director of public works is not suitable for refilling shall be replaced with approved backfill material. 
(4)  Method of backfilling. In refilling the opening, the earth must be puddled or laid in layers not more than 12 feet in depth and each layer rammed, tamped or flushed to prevent after-settling. When the side of the trench will not stand, perpendicular sheathing and braces must be used to prevent caving. No timber, bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench. 
(Code 1993, § 8.04(3)(b), (d)) 
Sec. 38-84. - Trash removal. 
    All rubbish shall be immediately removed, leaving the street or sidewalk in perfect repair, the same to be so maintained for a period of one year. 
(Code 1993, § 8.04(3)(d)) 
Sec. 38-85. - Containment of excavated material. 
    Excavated material from trenches shall be placed so as to cause the least practicable inconvenience to the public and the least interference with the free flow of water along gutters. 
(Code 1993, § 8.04(3)(b)) 
Sec. 38-86. - Protective measures required; liability for damages. 
    All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectively from accidents or damage to persons or property through the period of the work. Each person making the opening shall be held liable for all damages, including costs incurred by the city in defending any action brought against it for damages, as well as the cost of any appeal that may result from the neglect by the person or his employees to take necessary precaution against injury or damage to persons, vehicles or property of any kind. Protective measures to be employed by permittees shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Barriers. Every person shall enclose with sufficient barriers each opening that he may make in the streets or public ways of the city. 
(2)  Safeguarding of equipment. All machinery and equipment shall be locked or otherwise effectively safeguarded from unauthorized use when not being used by the permittee, his agents or employees. 
(3)  Warning lights. Warning lights shall be kept burning from sunset to sunrise, one light to be placed at each end of the opening in the street or way and other lights sufficient in number and properly spaced to give adequate warning. 
(4)  Proximity to pipe installations. Except by special permission from the director of public works and utilities, no trench shall be excavated more than 250 feet in advance of pipe laying or left unfilled more than 500 feet where pipe has been laid. 
(Code 1993, § 8.04(3)(c)) 
Sec. 38-87. - Excavation of new streets limited. 
    Whenever the council determines to provide for the permanent improvement or repaving of any street, the determination shall be made not less than 30 days before the work of improvement or repaving begins. Immediately after the determination by the council, the director of public works and utilities shall notify in writing each person, utility, city department or other agency owning or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or other utility in or under the street or any real property abutting the street, that all excavation work in the street must be completed within 30 days. After the permanent improvement or repaving, no permit shall be issued to open, cut or excavate the street for a period of five years after the date of improvement or repaving, unless in the opinion of the public works and utilities commission an emergency exists which makes it absolutely essential that the permit be issued. 
(Code 1993, § 8.04(4)) 
Sec. 38-88. - Emergency excavations. 
    In the event of an emergency, any person, his agents or employees owning or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or utility in or under any street may take immediate, proper emergency measures to remedy dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health or safety without obtaining an excavation permit, provided that the person shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding business day and shall not make any permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit hereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 8.04(5)) 
Secs. 38-89-38-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NEW CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 38-120. - Sidewalk construction required. 
(1)  Within one year of the issuance of a building permit for a new residence and nonresidential parcels, the property owner shall install sidewalk for the entire length of the property at his expense provided that the proper street grade has been established. If the proper street grade has not been established, sidewalk may not be installed until an order is issued by the city. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be installed abutting properties occupied by new residential construction along any street with an urban section prior to the completion of its construction or the issuance of an occupancy permit. Those receiving permits during the winter months shall install the required sidewalk no later than June 30 th of the succeeding year. 
(3)  Exceptions. The public works and utilities commission may determine that sidewalk is not required when any one of the following conditions apply: 
a.  There is insufficient right-of-way. 
b.  The installation encourages pedestrian traffic in an otherwise dangerous area. 
c.  The installation abuts industrial zoned lands. (Unless situated between other pedestrian generating areas). 
(Code 1993, § 8.07(3); Ord. No. 2010-05-03D, § 3, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2015-09-07-D, § 1, 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 38-121. - Curb and gutter installation required. 
    Within one year of the issuance of a building permit, the property owner shall install curb and gutter for the entire length of the frontage of the property at his expense provided that the proper street grade has been established. If the proper street grade has not been established, curb and gutter may not be installed until an order is issued by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 8.07(4)) 
Sec. 38-122. - Construction costs. 
(a)  Owner responsibility. The property owner shall be responsible for the payment of new sidewalk construction, curb, and gutter and paving and shall pay the costs in accordance with the terms and policies of the council, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  City responsibility. The city shall pay 50 percent of the cost of new sidewalk, curb and gutter construction and paving on the long side of a corner lot for up to a maximum of 75 feet. 
(c)  Site work by city; cost estimates. All site work by city employees for installation of curb and gutter for existing structures shall be billed at the city rate and paid by the owner. Upon written request, the director of public works and utilities shall provide the owner with an estimate of the cost. The city shall be responsible for a portion of the cost for corner lots as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the above provisions, the owner of property zoned M-1, M-2, or M-3 shall be responsible for paying 75 percent of the cost of curb, gutter and street paving at the time of completion, and the city shall pay the balance. Payments may be made in installments established by the council. 
(Code 1993, § 8.07(1), (2), (5), (7)) 
Sec. 38-123. - Variances/exceptions. 
    The property owner may seek relief from the requirements of this article by requesting in writing a hearing before the public works and utilities commission. the request shall be made no later than the time limitations set forth in this article. For determining whether to grant relief from the sidewalk requirements, the public works and utilities commission shall use the criteria established under subsection 38-120(3) of this Code. Any variance/exception must be approved by the city council upon recommendation from the commission. 
(Code 1993, § 8.07(6); Ord. No. 2010-05-03D, § 4, 5-11-2010) 
Secs. 38-124-38-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 

Sec. 38-145. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall encroach upon any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or lands dedicated to public use or any part thereof or permit the encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or occupant, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 8.05(1)) 
Sec. 38-146. - Removal. 
    The obstructions and encroachments brought to the city's attention shall be removed within 24 hours after receipt of a warning letter from the department of public works to the property owner. If the obstruction or encroachment is not removed within 24 hours of the warning letter, a citation shall be issued. The city may then immediately cause the obstruction or encroachment to be removed and report the cost in writing to the clerk. The charge shall be entered in the tax roll as a special tax to be collected in the same manner as other taxes. 
(Code 1993, § 8.05(1)) 
Sec. 38-147. - Exceptions. 
    The prohibitions in this section do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Public utility encroachments authorized by state law or city ordinance. 
(2)  Awnings, signs, overhead sidewalk heaters and canopies, provided they are installed and maintained in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit. 
(4)  Excavations and openings in streets permitted by this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 8.05(2)) 
Chapter 40 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. The regulations are designed to lessen congestion in the streets; foster the orderly layout and use of land; ensure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; discourage any platting of land subject to flooding; provide optimum light and air; discourage overcrowding of the land; lessen concentration of population; facilitate adequate provision for transportation, public water and sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public necessities; and facilitate the further division of large tracts of land into smaller parcels. The regulations are made with reasonable consideration of, but not limited to, the present character of the city and its environs, with the objectives of conserving the value of the land and improvements placed thereon, providing the most appropriate environment for human habitation, encouraging commerce and industry and providing for the most appropriate use of land in the city. 
(Code 1993, § 18.01) 
Sec. 40-2. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.45, which permits the adoption of regulations more restrictive than those contained in the state platting statute. 
(Code 1993, § 18.02) 
Sec. 40-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Butt lot means a lot, the rear line of which abuts the side lot line of another lot or lots in the same block, but not separated by an open space. 
    Certified survey map means a map intending to create not more than four parcels of land as provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.34. Certified survey maps shall, in addition to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 236.34, bear a certificate of approval of the city's planning commission, certified by the mayor of the city. 
    Division of land means any splitting up of a recorded tract of land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Final plat means a map of a subdivision with all necessary text, certificates and affidavits to qualify it for recording in the office of the register of deeds. 
    Lot width means the width of a lot measured at the setback line. 
    Owner includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean either a natural person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or quasi-public corporation or any combination of these. 
    Plan commission means the city plan commission established in conformity with Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
    Preliminary plat means a map or sketch of a proposed subdivision or division of land. 
    Street means a public thoroughfare providing primary access to abutting property, including: 
(1)  Major thoroughfare. One designed for fast or dense and heavy traffic. 
(2)  Collector/distributor street. One that carries traffic from local streets to the system of major thoroughfares, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development, and provides for circulation within such development. 
(3)  Local street. One that is used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
(4)  Marginal access street. One which is parallel to and adjacent to major thoroughfares and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from traffic on the major street. 
(5)  Alley. A public thoroughfare that provides secondary access to abutting properties. 
(6)  Pedestrian pathway. A public thoroughfare usually running at right angles to streets which is intended for the convenience of pedestrians only. It may also provide public right-of-way for utilities. 
(7)  Easement. The area of land set aside, over or through which a liberty, privilege or advantage in land, distinct from ownership of the land, is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public. 
    Subdivision. As defined in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12). 
    Tentative approval. An approval with or without recommended alterations given to the preliminary plat by the plan commission. It shall constitute the necessary authority to proceed with the preparation and presentation of the final plat or certified survey map for the consideration of the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 18.03) 
Sec. 40-4. - Jurisdiction and approval. 
(a)  No land within the corporate limits of the city or within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction shall, after the adoption of this chapter, be divided by a subdivision plat nor may such document be entitled to be recorded in the office of the register of deeds, nor may any street be laid out nor any improvements be made to the land until the provisions of this chapter and Wis. Stats. ch. 236 are met and the plat and the plan of the subdivisions shall have been approved by the plan commission and the council and certified thereto by the city clerk. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued by the city authorizing the building on or improvement of any parcel of land not on record as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived until the provisions and requirements of this chapter have been met. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Transfer of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order. 
(2)  Leases for a term of not exceeding ten years, mortgages or easements. 
(3)  Sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property, if additional lots are not created thereby and if the resulting lots are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by Wis. Stats. ch. 236 or any ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 18.04) 
Sec. 40-5. - Material standards. 
    All improvements constructed under this chapter shall be of the standards, where applicable, established by the state department of transportation, division of highways' Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges. Where the division of highways' specifications do not apply, the standards shall be as approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1993, § 18.09) 
Secs. 40-6-40-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 40-29. - Pre-application conference and preliminary plat. 
    Any owner of land or his agent who wishes to divide such land shall comply with the general principals of design and minimum layout requirements as set forth in this article and the procedure shall in every case be as follows: 
(1)  Preapplication conference. The owner of the land, or his agent, which is located within the corporate limits of the city shall first submit to the plan commission or its representative such information as may be required by the plan commission to describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development thereof. 
(2)  Preliminary plat. 
a.  Before submitting the final plat for approval, the owner shall prepare a preliminary plat which shall conform to the provisions set forth in this article and shall file with the city clerk an application in writing for the tentative approval of the plat or map, accompanied by such copies as shall be required by the city clerk to comply with Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
b.  The preliminary plat or map shall be checked and reviewed as to its conformity to the official map and the principal standards and requirements set forth in this chapter, and copies of plats shall be referred for review and recommendations as required by Wis. Stats. § 236.12. 
c.  After review of the preliminary plat or map and conferences with the owner on any changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of public improvements which will be required, the plan commission shall, within 60 days of submission, approve, conditionally approve or reject the plat. 
d.  If the plan commission rejects the plat, it shall return it to the owner. If it approves or conditionally approves the plat, it shall so notify the city council. 
e.  If the plan commission approves the preliminary plat, the council shall, within 60 days of the date the plat was filed with the city clerk, approve conditionally or reject such plat and shall state in writing any conditions of approval or reasons for rejection, unless the time is extended by agreement by the subdivider. Failure of the council to act within 60 days or extension thereof shall constitute an approval of the preliminary plat. The clerk shall communicate to the owner the action of the council. If the plat is approved, the clerk shall endorse it for the council. 
f.  Upon filing the preliminary plat with the city, the owner shall pay the fee set by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1993, § 18.05(1), (2)) 
Sec. 40-30. - Public improvements, plans, and specifications. 
    Simultaneously with the filing of the preliminary plat, the owner shall file with the city clerk five complete sets of preliminary plans and specifications for the construction of any public improvements required by this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 18.05(3)) 
Sec. 40-31. - Final plat. 
(a)  Simultaneously with the filing of the final plat, the owner shall file with the city clerk four copies of the final plans and specifications for public improvements required by Wis. Stats. § 18.09. If the plat has not been certified by the state agencies under Wis. Stats. § 236.12(6), the copies as required by Wis. Stats. § 236.12(2) shall also be provided. 
(b)  The city clerk shall forward the plat and plans and specifications of public improvements to the plan commission. He shall forward copies of the plat as provided by Wis. Stats. § 236.12(2). 
(c)  The plan commission shall refer the final plat and final plans and specifications for public improvements to the director of public works for review. 
(d)  The director of public works shall examine the plat and final plans and specifications of public improvements for technical details and, if he finds them satisfactory, shall so certify in writing to the plan commission. 
(e)  If the plat or the plans and specifications are not satisfactory, the director of public works shall return them to the owner and so advise the plan commission. 
(f)  If the plat and the plans and specifications of public improvements are satisfactory to the plan commission, it shall so certify in writing to the council. If they are not satisfactory to the commission, they shall be rejected in writing and returned to the owner with appropriate reasons for such rejection. 
(g)  When the city council receives the approved plat and plans and specifications from the plan commission, it shall signify its action by motion or resolution. If rejected, the clerk shall so notify the owner in writing. If approved, the clerk shall endorse the plat, as required by Wis. Stats. ch. 236, and return it to the owner. After the plat is approved by the city council and returned to its owner for submittal to the state, the owner shall ensure that the city receives an approved photographic Mylar from the state. 
(Code 1993, § 18.05(4)) 
Sec. 40-32. - Construction of public improvements. 
(a)  Upon notification by the city clerk that the preliminary plat has been approved by the council, the owner shall construct and install the required public improvements. 
(b)  In lieu of subsection (a) of this section, the owner may post with the city cash, negotiable securities or a surety bond running to the city in value sufficient to cover the full estimated cost as certified to by the public works commission to assure the satisfactory installation of the improvements as outlined in article V of this chapter and contained in the plans and specifications. Such surety bond shall be approved by the mayor and the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 18.06) 
Secs. 40-33-40-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL DETAILS 

Sec. 40-53. - Preliminary plat. 
    A preliminary plat shall be a legible print made from a drawing that shows correctly the following: 
(1)  Date, scale and north point. 
(2)  Proposed name of the subdivision if a plat. 
(3)  Name and post office address of the owner or his agent. 
(4)  Small drawing showing the location of the land to be divided. 
(5)  Location and names of adjoining subdivisions and the owners of undivided lands. 
(6)  Present zoning of the land to be divided and adjoining lands. 
(7)  Reference to special requirements, if the plat is located in a floodplain zoning district. 
(8)  Location, width and names of all existing and platted streets, alleys or other public ways and easements, railroad and public utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, and bridges within 300 feet and other pertinent data as required by the plan commission of the proposed division of land or of property owned or controlled by the owner. 
(9)  Water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of survey and the approximate high and low water levels thereof. All elevations shall be referred to city datum. 
(10)  Layout, width and approximate grades of all streets and rights-of-way, such as alleys, highways, easements for sewers, water mains and other public utilities. 
(11)  Direction and distance to nearest water mains and sewer mains. 
(12)  Approximate dimensions of and areas of all lots and parcels. 
(13)  Proposed building setback lines if different from that required by chapter 52. 
(14)  Contour lines at an interval of not more than 21/2 feet with reference to city datum. 
(15)  Drainage plan. 
(Code 1993, § 18.07(1)) 
Sec. 40-54. - Construction plans. 
    The owner shall furnish with the preliminary plat necessary construction plans of public improvements. If the owner so chooses, he may obtain approval of a preliminary plat as to layout only. If only a portion of the preliminary plat is to be improved and submitted for final approval, construction plans and specifications need be prepared for only such portion. However, the design of public improvements shall be based on the needs of the whole area and such additional area as, in the judgment of the plan commission, is necessary. 
(Code 1993, § 18.07(2)) 
Sec. 40-55. - Final plat. 
    A final plat of a subdivision shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(Code 1993, § 18.07(3)) 
Sec. 40-56. - Final certified survey map. 
    A final certified survey map of a division of land not requiring a plat shall comply in all respects to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
(Code 1993, § 18.07(4)) 
Secs. 40-57-40-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN OF SUBDIVISION 

Sec. 40-86. - Compliance required; conflicting provisions. 
    In laying out a subdivision, the owner shall conform to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and all applicable ordinances of the city. In all cases where the requirements of this chapter are different from the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Code 1993, § 18.08(1)) 
Sec. 40-87. - Public parks; sites for other public areas. 
    Suitable sites for public areas such as, but not limited to, parks, recreational areas, parkways, public building areas or other public uses, but excluding schools, shall be provided by city council resolution and reviewed annually by the plan commission. 
(Code 1993, § 18.08(2)) 
Sec. 40-88. - Streets. 
(a)  Generally. Streets shall be provided for convenient access to all parcels of land to be created by the subdivision. All streets shall be dedicated to the public unless, in areas outside the corporate limits, the town board will permit private streets. Design of private streets shall be as provided by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Layout. The layout of streets shall conform to the requirements set by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Design and location. In areas not covered by the official map, the layout of streets shall conform to the plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas of the neighborhood. Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and officially planned streets, topography and natural terrain, streams and lakes and existing tree growth, public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. 
(d)  Street classification. Streets shall be classified as indicated below. Physical dimensions of streets shall conform to the established street standards. 
(1)  Major thoroughfares. Those streets which have the greatest importance to the development of the city and which are shown on the official map or have a right-of-way width of not less than 100 feet for a median divided roadway, nor less than 66 feet for a single roadway. 
(2)  Collector-distributor streets. Streets of somewhat less importance than major thoroughfares and which are shown on the official map or have a right-of-way width of not less than 60 feet. 
(3)  Local streets. Streets designed primarily for access to abutting property and have a right-of-way width of not less than 60 feet, except dead-end streets not more than 500 feet long which may have a right-of-way width of not less than 50 feet, but must be provided with a turnaround at the dead-end of not less than 120 feet in diameter. 
(4)  Marginal access streets. Marginal access streets may not be less than 50 feet wide. 
(e)  Direct connection. Provision shall be made so that all proposed streets shall have a direct connection with or be continuous and in line with existing, planned or platted streets with which they are to connect. 
(f)  Proposed streets. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the plan commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. Dead-end streets not over 500 feet in length will be approved when necessitated by the topography. 
(g)  Grades. The grade of major thoroughfares and collector-distributor streets shall not exceed 6.0 percent, unless necessitated by exceptional topography and approved by the plan commission. Grades of local streets shall not exceed 10.0 percent. The minimum grade of all streets shall be 9.4 percent. 
(h)  Horizontal curves. A minimum sight distance, with clear visibility measured along the centerline, shall be provided of at least 500 feet on major thoroughfares, 200 feet on collector-distributor streets and 120 feet on all other streets. 
(i)  Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length in feet equivalent to 30 times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade for major thoroughfares and 20 times this algebraic difference for all other streets. 
(j)  Tangents. A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves and between curves and a street intersection on major thoroughfares and collector-distributor streets. 
(k)  Street names. New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets but streets that are continuations of others already in existence and named shall bear the names of the existing streets. 
(l)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be encouraged where their control is placed in the city under conditions approved by the plan commission. 
(m)  Half-streets. Where a half-street is adjacent to the subdivision, the other half-street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. 
(n)  Intersections. 
(1)  Property lines at street intersections of major thoroughfares shall be rounded with a radius of 25 feet or to a greater radius where the plan commission considers it necessary. 
(2)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. 
(3)  The provisions of this Code with respect to traffic visibility at street intersections shall apply. 
(o)  Alleys. 
(1)  Alleys shall be provided in all commercial and industrial districts, except that the plan commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provisions are made for service access, such as off-street loading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. No alley shall connect with a major thoroughfare. 
(2)  Width of alleys shall be not less than 20 feet. 
(3)  Dead-end alleys are prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 18.08(3)) 
Sec. 40-89. - Block and lot layout. 
(a)  Blocks. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be such as are appropriate to the locality and the type of development contemplated, but block length in residential areas shall not exceed 1,500 feet nor have less than sufficient width to provide for two tiers of appropriate depth between street lines. As a general rule, blocks shall not be less than 600 feet in length. 
(b)  Pedestrian pathways. Pedestrian pathways not less than ten feet wide may be required by the plan commission through the center of a block more than 900 feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(c)  Lots, general considerations. 
(1)  The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development contemplated, provided that no residential lot shall be smaller in area than the minimum lot size for the appropriate zone as established by chapter 52 and the zoning map. 
(2)  Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of chapter 52, but in no case shall have a frontage of less than 60 feet at the building line or a depth of less than 100 feet. 
(3)  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated as required by chapter 52. 
(4)  Residential lots fronting on major streets and highways shall be platted with extra depth or designed to alleviate the effect of major street traffic on residential occupancy. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit full building setback from both streets as required by chapter 52. 
(e)  Lot to face a public street. Every lot shall abut or face a public street. Lots outside the corporate limits may abut or face a private street if permitted by the town board. 
(f)  Butt lots. Butt lots will be permitted by the plan commission only in exceptional cases. 
(g)  Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial to abutting street lines. 
(h)  Parcels of more than 11/2 acres. In case a tract is divided into parcels of more than 11/2 acres in area, such parcels shall be so arranged as to permit redividing into parcels in accordance with this chapter and chapter 52. 
(i)  Double frontage and reversed frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided, except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(Code 1993, § 18.08(4)) 
Sec. 40-90. - Flood protection. 
(a)  Filling of all lots in each subdivision is required to a point not less than one foot below the flood protection elevation for the particular area as specified on the flood profile as provided in chapter 22. 
(b)  Areas to be filled shall also include all street rights-of-way and other appropriate areas, such as parks and open space lands, so that they bear a reasonable relationship to adjoining properties. 
(Code 1993, § 18.08(5)) 
Sec. 40-91. - Easements. 
(a)  Utility easements shall be provided at the rear of all residential lots and along the side lot lines where required. Such utility easements shall be at least 12 feet wide and normally centered upon the rear or side lot line. Evidence shall be furnished to the plan commission that easements and any easement provisions to be incorporated in the plat or in deeds have been reviewed by the individual utility companies or the organization responsible for furnishing the services involved. 
(b)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream: 
(1)  There shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose and as may be necessary to comply with this section. 
(2)  Alternately, the watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream may be relocated in such a manner that the maintenance of adequate drainage will be assured and the same provided with a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming to the lines of the relocated watercourse and such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose and may be necessary to comply with this section. 
(3)  Wherever possible, it is desirable that drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. In all cases, such watercourse shall be of a minimum width established at the high watermark or, in the absence of such specification, not less than 30 feet wide. 
(Code 1993, § 18.08(6)) 
Secs. 40-92-40-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 40-111. - Completed improvements. 
    All improvements required under this article shall be constructed in accordance with its provisions prior to filing the final plat with the city clerk for approval by the council. In lieu of construction of the public improvements, the owner may furnish a surety bond as provided hereinabove. 
(Code 1993, § 18.09(1)) 
Sec. 40-112. - Guarantee of materials and workmanship. 
    The owner shall provide a surety bond running to the city for a period of one year after completion of construction in the amount of 20 percent of the cost of the improvements to guarantee workmanship and materials of construction and to save the city harmless from the cost to repair or replace the improvements. 
(Code 1993, § 18.09(2)) 
Sec. 40-113. - Procedure. 
(a)  Construction plans. Simultaneously with the filing of the preliminary plat with the city clerk or as soon thereafter as practicable, four copies of the construction plans and specifications shall be furnished for the following public improvements: 
(1)  Street grading and surfacing. 
(2)  Water and sewer mains. 
(3)  Laterals to lot line. 
(4)  Curb, gutters and sidewalks. 
(5)  Stormwater discharge permit from department of natural resources, if required. 
(b)  Action by the city engineer. The city engineer shall review or cause to be reviewed the plans and specifications for conformance with the requirements of this chapter. If he rejects the plans and specifications, he shall notify the owner, who shall modify the plans or specifications or both accordingly. When the plans and specifications are corrected, the city engineer shall approve them in writing and so notify the plan commission so that it may approve the plans and specifications for transmittal to the council. The council shall approve the plans and specifications before the improvements are installed. 
(c)  Construction and inspection. 
(1)  Prior to starting any of the work covered by plans approved above, written authorization to start the work shall be obtained from the city engineer upon receipt of all necessary permits and in accordance with the construction methods described in this article. 
(2)  Unless otherwise provided herein, construction of all improvements required by this chapter shall be completed within two years from the date of approval of the final plat by the plan commission, unless good cause can be shown for the mayor and council to grant an extension. 
(3)  During the course of construction, the city engineer shall make such inspections as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with the plans and specifications as approved. The owner shall pay the actual cost incurred by the city for such inspections. This fee shall be the actual cost to the city of inspectors, engineers and other parties necessary to ensure satisfactory work. 
(d)  As-built plans. After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance, the subdivider shall make or cause to be made a map showing the actual location of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewers, water mains and laterals to lot lines and such other facilities as the city engineer shall require. This map shall be in black ink on tracing cloth and shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in the state. The presentation of the map shall be a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and release of the surety bond assuring their completion. 
(Code 1993, § 18.09(3)) 
Sec. 40-114. - Design standards. 
(a)  Streets. 
(1)  Major thoroughfares. Major thoroughfares shall have a right-of-way width as established on the official map or as designated in this chapter. 
(2)  Collector-distributor streets. Collector-distributor streets shall have a right-of-way width as established on the official map or as designated in this chapter. 
(3)  Local streets. Local streets shall have a right-of-way width of not less than 60 feet, except for frontage streets that may be 50 feet in width. 
(4)  Turnarounds. Turnarounds at the end of dead-end streets shall be paved as provided for local streets, with an outside diameter of the turnaround of 84 feet and an inside diameter of 26 feet and shall be connected by smooth curves to the pavement of the main portion of the street. 
(b)  Alleys. Alleys provided to serve business, commercial or industrial areas shall be provided with a pavement of not less than 16 feet in width. The pavement shall consist of an eight-inch Portland cement concrete pavement or an eight-inch water-bound macadam base with a three-inch plant mix bituminous concrete wearing surface. 
(c)  Curb and gutter. 
(1)  All major thoroughfares, as determined by the board of public works, shall be provided with curb and gutter in accordance with the standard specifications of the city. 
(2)  All other streets shall have curb and gutter installed as to that real estate for which a building permit is issued within one year of the issuance of the permit. 
(d)  Sanitary sewerage system. There shall be provided a sanitary sewerage system in conformity with the master plan of sewers as approved by the council. The cost of providing and installing sewer pipe of sizes larger or at a deeper depth than required to serve the area shall be borne by the city, as agreed upon between the landowner and the council prior to approval of the final plat or certified survey map. 
(e)  Water supply system. There shall be provided a water supply system in conformity with the master plan of the water system as approved by the council. The cost of providing and installing water pipe of sizes larger than required to serve the area shall be borne by the city as agreed upon prior to the approval of the final plat. 
(f)  Sidewalks. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be installed in all new subdivisions with city streets. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be provided to serve the following areas: 
a.  Commercial property. Commercial property shall be provided with concrete sidewalks at least eight feet wide and four inches thick. 
b.  Residential property. Residential property shall be provided along each side of the street with a concrete sidewalk five feet wide and four inches thick. 
(3)  Exceptions. The owner may seek relief from the requirements of this section by written request to the planning commission and public works and utilities commission. Any request must be approved by the city council upon recommendation from both commissions. The criteria established under subsection 38-120(3) shall be used when determining whether an exemption shall be granted. 
(g)  Majority completed. 
(1)  When building permits have been issued for 75 percent or more of the subdivision and/or a block in a subdivision, the owner of all remaining land in that subdivision or block shall within one year of that date at the owner's expense install curb and gutter for the remainder of the land in the subdivision or block. 
(2)  When building permits have been issued for 75 percent or more of the subdivision or a block in a subdivision, every street within the subdivision or block shall be paved with three-inch plant mix bituminous concrete at adjacent landowner expense. 
(3)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section may, upon application to the council, qualify for the deferred assessment repayment program. 
(h)  Street and alley construction. The owner shall bring all streets and alleys to a grade established by the director. All site work by city employees shall be billed at the city rate and paid by the owner. The director shall, upon written request, provide the owner with an estimate of the cost. The pavement of the street or alley shall consist of six inches of water-bound crushed stone or gravel base course, with 21/2 inches of plant mix bituminous concrete wearing surface with two lifts. 
(Code 1993, § 18.09(4); Ord. No. 2010-05-03D, § 5, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 40-115. - Final construction plans. 
    Final construction plans shall be legible prints of a size acceptable to the city engineer and shall include the following: 
(1)  Map of plat or subdivision of lands, including title of plat or map. 
(2)  Layout of streets. 
(3)  Layout of sanitary sewers. 
(4)  Layout of water supply system. 
(5)  Plans and profiles of streets and sewers at a scale or not more than 40 feet per inch horizontal and four feet per inch vertical. 
(6)  All necessary details. 
(7)  Stormwater drainage plan. 
(8)  Grading plan. 
(Code 1993, § 18.09(5)) 
Secs. 40-116-40-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 

Sec. 40-144. - Required in newly platted areas. 
(a)  All new electric distribution lines (excluding lines of 15,000 volts or more), all new telephone lines from which lots are individually served, all new telegraph lines, community antenna television cables and other services installed within a newly platted area, mobile home park or planned development shall be underground unless the plan commission shall specifically find after study that: 
(1)  The placing of such facilities underground would not be compatible with the planned development. 
(2)  Location, topography, soil, stands of trees or other physical conditions would make underground installation unreasonable or impracticable. 
(3)  The lots to be served by such facilities can be served directly from existing overhead facilities. 
(b)  Associated equipment and facilities which are appurtenant to underground electric and communications systems such as, but not limited to, substations, pad-mounted transformers, pad-mounted sectionalizing switches and above-grade pedestal-mounted terminal boxes may be located aboveground. 
(c)  The subdivider or his agent shall furnish proof to the plan commission that such arrangements as may be required under applicable rates and rules filed with the state public service commission have been made with the owner of such lines or service for placing their respective facilities underground as required by this section as a condition precedent to approval of the final plat or certified survey map. 
(d)  Temporary overhead facilities may be installed to serve a construction site or, where necessary, because of severe weather conditions. In the latter case, within a reasonable time after weather conditions have moderated, such temporary facilities shall be replaced by underground facilities and the temporary facilities removed, subject to any exception permitted by the plan commission under subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 18.10(1)) 
Sec. 40-145. - Utility easements. 
(a)  Where the electric and communications facilities are to be installed underground, the utility easements shall be graded to within six inches of final grade by the subdivider prior to the installation of such facilities, and earth fill, piles or mounds of dirt and construction materials shall not be stored on such easement areas. 
(b)  Where the electric or communications facilities are to be installed underground, a note shall be placed on the final plat or certified survey map stating that the final grade established by the subdivider on the utility easements shall not be altered by more than six inches by the subdivider, his agent or by subsequent owners of the lots on which such utility easements are located, except with written consent of the utility involved. 
(Code 1993, § 18.10(2)) 
Sec. 40-146. - Required in existing plats. 
    Utility lines and services constructed in an area which was platted prior to the effective date of this provision and in which such lines and services have not previously been installed shall also be placed underground, subject to the applicable provisions of this article. To implement these provisions, all owners of the lots in such platted area shall grant the necessary easements for such lines and services and shall make with the owner of such lines or services such arrangements as may be required under applicable rates and rules filed with the state public service commission for the placing of such facilities underground. 
(Code 1993, § 18.10(3)) 
Sec. 40-147. - Street lighting. 
    In areas where underground electric facilities are installed, poles for street lights shall be ornamental in nature. In a newly platted area, the subdivider shall provide for the location of all street lights within the area being developed upon consultation with the electric utility serving the subdivision and as approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 1993, § 18.10(4)) 
Sec. 40-148. - Permits for utility services. 
    Permits shall be obtained for underground facilities from the director of public works for the installation of new communications, electric, power, gas and other utility lines or services to be located in the public rights-of-way shown on the final plat or certified survey map when such rights-of-way are located within the corporate limits of the city and any required fee shall be paid before any installation is begun. 
(Code 1993, § 18.10(5)) 
Sec. 40-149. - Exceptions. 
    In exceptional cases where topography or other physical conditions would cause unnecessary hardship to the owner and not provide the city substantial benefit, the plan commission may recommend to the council special provisions to relieve such hardship. Any exception needed shall be requested in writing by the owner. If recommended by the plan commission, it shall be so endorsed by the secretary and transmitted to the council. The council, if it approves, shall do so by motion or resolution and instruct the city clerk to notify the plan commission and the owner. 
(Code 1993, § 18.11) 
Chapter 42 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gross receipts has the meaning as defined in Wis. Stats. § 77.51(4)(a), (b) and (c) insofar as applicable. 
    Hotel or motel means a building or group of buildings in which the public may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including, without limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, lodginghouses, roominghouses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any other building or group of buildings in which accommodations are available to the public irrespective of whether membership is required for use of the accommodations, except accommodations rented for a continuous period of more than one month and accommodations furnished by any hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes, or by corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
    Transient means any person residing for a continuous period of less than one month in a hotel, motel or other furnished accommodations available to the public. 
(Code 1993, §§ 3.07(1), 3.09(1)) 
Sec. 42-2. - Refund of excess tax payments. 
(a)  Receipt of tax payment. The city treasurer shall accept tax payments and apply it toward the total tax due. Taxes must be paid in full and the check must not have been returned for insufficient funds before any refund can be considered. 
(b)  Determination and record of excess payments. In the event the city treasurer determines that excess taxes have been paid, the city treasurer shall record the excess payments as a separate category from the tax collections and maintain a list which includes the name and address of the taxpayer for whom a refund in excess of the tax bill amount is due, the amount of the refund in excess of the tax bill, the date payment was received and an indication that the payment has not been returned for insufficient funds. 
(c)  Approval by city administrator. Upon verification by the city treasurer that the payment has not been returned for insufficient funds, but not later than five business days after depositing, the city administrator shall approve the vouchers as a proper charge against the city treasury and endorse his approval on the vouchers after having determined that the following conditions have been complied with: 
(1)  The funds are available to pay the claim, assuming the tax payment has cleared and has not been returned as is evidenced by the treasurer's notice. 
(2)  The common council has authorized the refund of excess tax payment as established by the adoption of this article. 
(3)  The refund is a valid claim and due in the amount noticed by the city treasurer as an excess payment of the tax bill. 
(4)  The bookkeeper will credit an account payable for the excess received and debit the account payable when the refund is paid back to the taxpayer. 
(d)  Refund to taxpayer. Upon issuance of the proper countersigned refund check, pursuant to procedures established, the refund check shall be delivered to the taxpayer/claimant or mailed to the last known address of the taxpayer within 15 business days of the initial tax payment. 
(Code 1993, § 3.08) 
Sec. 42-3. - City treasurer exempted from bond requirement for the collection of state and county taxes. 
    The City of Tomah Treasurer is exempted from giving the bond specified in Section 70.67(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes. Pursuant to Section 70.67(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes, the city shall be obligated to pay, in case the treasurer thereof shall fail to do so, all state and county taxes required by law to be paid by such treasurer to the county treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12-15-D, § 1, 12-12-2017) 
Secs. 42-4-42-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL-MOTEL ROOM TAX 

Sec. 42-23. - Tax imposed. 
    Pursuant to Wis Stats. § 66.0615, a tax is hereby imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, rooms or lodging to transients by hotel keepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Such tax shall be a rate of eight percent of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis. Stats. § 77.52(2)(a)1. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(2); Ord. No. 2013-08-05-D, § 1, 8-13-2013) 
Sec. 42-24. - License required. 
    Every person obligated for the payment of taxes pursuant to this article is required to obtain a business license as provided in chapter 12. 
Sec. 42-25. - Bond. 
    In order to protect the revenue of the city, the city treasurer may require any person liable for the tax imposed by this article to place with him, before or after a license is issued, the security, not in excess of $5,000.00, as the city treasurer determines. If any taxpayer fails or refuses to place the security, the city treasurer may refuse or revoke the license. If any taxpayer is delinquent in the payment of the taxes imposed by this article, the city treasurer may, upon ten days' notice, recover the taxes, interest and penalties from the security placed with the city treasurer by the taxpayer. No interest shall be paid or allowed by the city to any person for the deposit of the security. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(8)) 
Sec. 42-26. - Penalties. 
    Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this article who fails to obtain a license, who fails or refuses to permit the inspection of his records by the city treasurer, who fails to file a return as provided in this article, or who violates any other provision of this article, shall upon conviction thereof, and in addition to any other penalty imposed herein, forfeit not less than $20.00 nor more than $500.00 and the costs of prosecutions and, in default of payment of such forfeiture, be confined in the county jail until such payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, but not exceeding 90 days for each violation. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues is hereby deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(11)) 
Sec. 42-27. - Distribution of tax. 
(a)  Five percent of the tax imposed in this section shall be distributed as follows: 
(1)  Three percent of the tax shall be paid to the convention and visitor's bureau to be used in a manner deemed appropriate by the common council. 
(2)  Two percent of the tax shall be utilized to purchase land and construct a building to house the convention and visitors bureau and their affiliates. 
(b)  Three percent of the tax imposed in this section shall be allocated by the common council through the parks and recreation commission and used in the following manner: 
(1)  One percent of the revenue shall be retained by the city to be used in a manner deemed appropriate by the common council. 
(2)  One percent shall be used to fund the remaining debt on the initial construction of the multipurpose building at Recreation Park including the ice arena. 
(3)  One percent shall be used to fund an expansion of the multipurpose building to provide for, but not limited to, a warming area, concession stands and extended bathroom facilities. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(2); Ord. No. 2013-08-05-D, § 2, 8-13-2013) 
Sec. 42-28. - Administration. 
    This article shall be administered by the city treasurer. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(3)) 
Sec. 42-29. - Tax returns; payment of taxes. 
(a)  Due date. The tax imposed for each month is due and payable on the last day of the month next succeeding the month for which imposed. 
(b)  Filing of return; due date. A return shall be filed with the treasurer by those furnishing at retail such rooms and lodging, on or before the same date on which such tax is due and payable. 
(c)  Contents of return. Such return shall show the gross receipts of the preceding month for such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the treasurer deems necessary. 
(d)  Filing of copy of state tax return. The return shall be accompanied by a copy of the state sales tax return filed by the person filing the room tax return for the same period of time set forth in the room tax return. 
(e)  Filing extensions. The treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but in no event longer than one month from the filing date. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(3); Ord. No. 2013-12-13-D, § 1, 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 42-30. - Liability on sale of business. 
    If any person liable for any amount of tax under this article sells the licensed business or stock of goods or quits the business, the licensee's successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the treasurer that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person subject to the tax imposed by this article fails to withhold such amount of tax from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the price of the accommodations valued in money. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(5)) 
Sec. 42-31. - In-office audits. 
    The city treasurer may, by office audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the city or the refund due to any person under this article. This determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any of the information within the city treasurer's possession. One or more such office audit determinations may be made of the amount due for any one or for more than one period. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(6)) 
Sec. 42-32. - Field audits; records inspection. 
    The city treasurer may, by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the city or the refund due to any person under this article. The determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or upon any other information within the city treasurer's possession. The city treasurer is authorized to examine and inspect the books, records, memoranda, and property of any person in order to verify the tax liability of that person or of another person. Nothing herein shall prevent the city treasurer from making a determination of tax at any time. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(6)) 
Sec. 42-33. - Failure to file return. 
(a)  Estimated gross receipts. If any person fails to file a return as required by this article, the city treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts upon which taxes are to be calculated. The estimate shall be made for the period for which the person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information that is in the city treasurer's possession or may come into his possession. 
(b)  Estimated tax; penalty. On the basis of the estimated gross receipts, the city treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to ten percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or more than one period. 
(c)  Interest. All unpaid taxes under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month following the month in which the tax is paid or deposited with the city treasurer. 
(d)  Delinquency; late filing fee. Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to $10.00 late filing fee. The tax imposed by this article shall become delinquent if not paid: 
(1)  In the case of a timely filed return, within 30 days after the due date of the return, or within 30 days after the expiration of an extension period if one has been granted. 
(2)  In the case of no return filed or a return filed late, by the due date of the return. 
(e)  Penalty for negligent failure to file or erroneous filing. If due to negligence no return is filed, or a return is filed late, or an incorrect return is filed, the entire tax finally determined shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the tax exclusive of interest or other penalties. 
(f)  Penalty for false or fraudulent returns. If a person fails to file a return when due or files a false or fraudulent return with the intent in either case to defeat or evade the tax imposed by this article, a penalty of 50 percent shall be added to the tax required to be paid, exclusive of interest and other penalties. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(7)) 
Sec. 42-34. - Records. 
    Every person liable for the tax imposed by this article shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city treasurer requires. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(9)) 
Sec. 42-35. - Confidentiality. 
    No person having administrative duty under this article shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records of any person on whom a tax is imposed by this article, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided herein. The contents of all tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to such returns, on file with the city treasurer may be divulged to the following persons and no others: 
(1)  The person who filed the return. 
(2)  Officers, agents, or employees of the federal internal revenue service or the state department of revenue. 
(3)  Officers, employees or agents of the city treasurer. 
(4)  Such other public officials of the city when deemed necessary. 
(Code 1993, § 3.07(10)) 
Secs. 42-36-42-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REAL PROPERTY TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-59-42-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSTALLMENT PAYMENT 

Sec. 42-113. - Installment payment of real estate taxes. 
(a)  Payment schedule. Owners of real estate in the city may elect to pay all real estate taxes in installments as follows: One-fourth of the tax on or before January 31 of each year and the remainder in three equal installments payable on March 31, May 31 and July 31 of the same year. 
(b)  Default. If any owner of real estate elects to pay his general property taxes in installments for any year as is set out in subsection (a) of this section, and if any installment of the extended tax shall not be paid on or before the installment paying date, the taxpayer shall be subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 74.12, as it pertains to the installment payments. 
(c)  Special assessments. All special assessments that are placed in the tax roll are due on the same dates and in the same percentage as installments of real property taxes, except that if the total special assessment is less than $100.00, it shall be paid in full on or before January 31. 
(Code 1993, § 3.01) 
Chapter 44 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Incorporation of state law and rules. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. chs. 340 to 348 and Wis. Stats. § 941.01(1), describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, and Wis. Stats. ch. 350, describing and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles, inclusive of any provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the state. 
(b)  In addition, the following provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby adopted by reference, except any reference to fines or terms of imprisonment: 
Statute Provision 218.0116(3)(a)(1) Dealer to have display and repair facilities 218.20 Motor vehicle salvage dealers 218.23 Motor vehicle salvage dealers 218.30 Motor vehicle auction dealers to be licensed  
(c)  In addition, the following chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code are hereby adopted by reference: 
Statute Provision MVD 3 Reciprocity - nonresident motor carriers MVD 4 Lettering on vehicles, display of evidence of registration and dual permit TRANS 305 Standards for motor vehicle equipment MVD 6 Transportation of explosives by motor vehicles MVD 8 Requirements for trailer and semi-trailer brake, hitch and coupling, safety chains, cables and leveling bars MVD 17 Transportation of school children  
(Code 1993, § 7.01) 
Secs. 44-2-44-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADDITIONAL ROAD RULES AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 44-21. - Weight limits and route limitations. 
    The director of public works and utilities shall have the authority to impose special or seasonal weight limits to prevent injury to the roadway of any highway, bridge or culvert within jurisdiction of the city or for the safety of users of such highway, bridge or culvert and shall be responsible for erecting signs giving notice thereof in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 349.16. 
(Code 1993, § 7.12) 
Sec. 44-22. - Power and speed exhibitions. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the limits of the city in any manner that is or tends to be an exhibition of power or speed. The term "exhibition of power or speed" means and includes the operation of a motor vehicle in any manner where power in excess of that necessary for safe operation is used and from which it may reasonably be inferred that a display of unique power is intended, or acceleration is very rapid from any position in a roadway (moving, stopped or parked) from public facilities, private drives, stop signs or traffic signals. It is also to include the "revving" of the engine where such revving is not intended to be for efficient operation of the engine and is immediately preceding the squealing or spinning of tires of such duration that it may be reasonably inferred therefrom that a display of acceleration is intended. 
(Code 1993, § 7.14) 
Sec. 44-23. - Railroad crossings. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to the extent that it is not contrary to or inconsistent with Wis. Stats. ch. 195, federal law, or the federal and state constitutions. 
(b)  Street obstruction by trains. No conductor, engineer or other person shall stop any railroad train, locomotive or car upon or across any highway or street crossing within the city limits or leave same standing on such crossing longer than ten minutes, except in case of an accident. 
(c)  Gate and signal operation. No conductor, engineer or other person shall leave railroad crossing guards down or leave any railroad crossing signals in operation on any highway or street crossing in the city when there is no train, locomotive or car on the crossing, approaching the crossing or operating in the area that would create a hazard to a pedestrian or to automobiles. 
(Code 1993, § 7.17) 
Sec. 44-24. - Vehicle use at airport restricted. 
    No person shall operate any motor driven vehicle on the city airport, known as Bloyer Field, except in designated areas. This provision shall not apply to aircraft or authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 7.18) 
Sec. 44-25. - Horse riding restricted. 
    No person shall ride a horse on Superior Ave. between Washington St. and Elizabeth St., except in parades or by permission of the chief of police. 
(Code 1993, § 7.19) 
Sec. 44-26. - School bus warning lights. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 346.48(2)(b)2, as adopted by reference in this chapter, to the contrary, school bus operators shall use flashing red warning lights on streets and highways in residential and business districts when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded. This requirement shall not apply where yellow flashing lights are permitted by law. 
(Code 1993, § 7.20) 
Sec. 44-27. - Skate use restricted. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 346.94(17)(a), as adopted by reference in this chapter, to the contrary, a person riding on skates, including, but not limited to, in-line or four-wheel skates, shall not, within the city's jurisdictional limits, go upon Highways U.S. 12, U.S. 16, U.S. 21, or U.S. 131. No person shall ride such skates on any roadway within the jurisdiction during the hours of darkness as defined in the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 340.01(23). 
(Code 1993, § 7.21) 
Secs. 44-28-44-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET DESIGNATIONS 

Sec. 44-58. - Through streets designated. 
    In the interest of public safety, the following streets or portions thereof are declared to be through-highways: 
    Arthur St., from Superior Ave. to N. Glendale Ave. 
    Benton St., from Butts Ave. to Superior Ave. 
    Brownell St. E., from Glendale Ave. to Sime Ave. 
    Butts Ave., from Jackson St. to County Highway "C". 
    Center Dr., from west of Superior Ave. to city limits. 
    Clark St., from Monroe St. to Foster St. 
    Clifton St. 
    Council St. E., at the intersection of Glendale Ave. 
    Eggleson St., from LaGrange Ave. west to the city limits. 
    Glendale Ave., from Veterans St. to Monroe St. 
    Hollister Ave., from W. Clifton St. to Center Dr. 
    Hollister Ave., from Clifton St. to Jackson St. 
    Jackson St., from Superior Ave. to Glendale Ave. 
    Jackson St., from Superior Ave. to Butts Ave. 
    Juneau St. W., from Superior Ave. to Hollister Ave. 
    Juneau St. W., from Hollister Ave. to Butts Ave. 
    Kilbourn Ave., from Clifton St. to Holton St. 
    Kilbourn Ave., from Holton St. to Monowau St. 
    Kilbourn Ave., from Monowau St. to Jackson St. 
    La Crosse St. W., at Oak St. 
    La Grange Ave., from north of W. Veterans St. to city limits. 
    Lincoln Ave., from Fair St. to W. Juneau and W. Juneau to Elm St. 
    Mark Ave., from W. Veterans St. N. 
    McLean Ave., from Clifton St. to Juneau St. 
    McLean Ave., from Monroe St. to Jackson St. 
    McLean Ave., from Juneau St. to Monroe St. 
    Milwaukee St., at the intersection of Woodard Ave. 
    Monowau St. E., from Superior Ave. to Sime Ave. 
    Packard St., from Hollister Ave. to Butts Ave. 
    Sime Ave., from Clifton St. to Town Line Rd. 
    Town Line Rd., east of N. Glendale to limits. 
    E. Veterans St. 
    W. Veterans St. 
(Code 1993, § 7.04) 
Sec. 44-59. - One-way streets designated. 
    The following streets and portions thereof are declared to be one-way streets and no person shall operate any vehicle thereon except in the one indicated direction: 
    East on Holton St. between Glendale Ave. and Scout St. and north on Scout St. from Holton St. to Council St. 
    East on Milwaukee St. from Superior Ave. to Kilbourn Ave. 
    West on Milwaukee St. from Superior Ave. to McLean Ave. 
(Code 1993, § 7.05) 
Secs. 44-60-44-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED LIMITS 

Sec. 44-79. - Local limits established. 
    The city council hereby determines that the statutory speed limits on the following streets or portions thereof are unreasonable, unsafe or imprudent and modifies such speed limits as follows: 
(1)  Clifton St. 
a.  Municipal jurisdiction: 30 mph west of Superior Ave. to Hollister Ave.; and 30 mph east of Superior Ave. to where the divided highway begins; 
b.  State department of transportation jurisdiction: 
1.  Forty-five mph west of Hollister Ave. to County Trunk "CM"; 
2.  Fifty-five mph west of County Trunk "CM"; 
3.  Fifty-five mph east of where the divided highway referenced in subsection (1)a of this section begins to the city limits. 
(2)  All speed limits of this subsection are subject to modification by the state department of transportation and shall be as listed above unless posted otherwise: 
Noth Ave., 35 mph from Veteran's to Parkview Dr. 
SIME Ave., 35 mph from Town Line Rd. south to U.S. 12 and 16. 
STH 131, 45 mph from Schaller St. south to the city limits. 
Superior Ave., 25 mph from Clifton St. south to Schaller St. 
Superior Ave., 30 mph from the railroad tracks to Arthur St. 
Superior Ave., 40 mph from Arthur St. to Deer Creek. 
Superior Ave., 45 mph from Deer Creek to the north city limits on U.S. 12. 
Town Line Rd., 35 mph from N. Glendale Ave. east to the city limits. 
Veterans St., 30 mph from Superior Ave. east to the city limits. 
Veterans St., 35 mph from Superior Ave. to Noth Ave. 
(Code 1993, § 7.03) 
Secs. 44-80-44-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIGNS AND SIGNALS 

Sec. 44-102. - Responsibility for installation. 
    The public works and utilities commission is authorized and directed to procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules of the state department of transportation, giving such notice of the provisions of this chapter as required by state law. Signs shall be erected in such locations and manner as the board of public works shall determine will best effect the purpose of this chapter and give adequate warning to users of the street or highway. The official list of the location of all traffic control devices in the city shall be on file in the office of the department of public works and utilities. 
(Code 1993, § 7.02) 
Sec. 44-103. - Authority for removal of unofficial signs and signals. 
    The public works and utilities commission shall have the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 349.09 and is hereby directed to order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or Wis. Stats. § 346.41. Any charge imposed on a premises for removal of such an illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the council at its next regular meeting for review and certification. 
(Code 1993, § 7.02) 
Sec. 44-104. - Location of traffic control signals. 
    Traffic control signals for the direction of traffic shall be installed and maintained at the following locations and no person shall fail to comply with the directions of the signals: 
    Intersection of Clifton St. and Superior Ave. 
    Intersection of Jackson St. and Superior Ave. 
    Intersection of Monowau St. and Superior Ave. 
    Intersection of Superior Ave. and STH 21. 
    Intersection of Superior Ave. and Veterans St. 
(Code 1993, § 7.06) 
Secs. 44-105-44-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING, STOPPING, AND STANDING 

Sec. 44-122. - Official parking. 
    The city council may designate any portion of any street or parking lot as a parking zone and restrict the time a vehicle may be parked, stopped or left standing at that location. Such designations shall be on file in the offices of the department of public works and chief of police. The parking designations shall become effective upon the placement of official signs. 
(Code 1993, § 7.08) 
Sec. 44-123. - Authority of chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall have authority to temporarily designate any portion of a street as a no parking, no stopping, no standing or loading zone when such action shall be necessary in the interest of public safety and convenience. The order of the chief of police stating the reasons for his order shall be filed with the city clerk and a copy transmitted to the council, whereupon it shall become effective until vacated by action of the council or the further order of the chief of police. The chief of police shall cause the erection of official signs and painting of curbs to designate such areas. 
(Code 1993, § 7.08) 
Sec. 44-124. - Parking restricted or prohibited. 
(a)  Parking control signs or curb marking. No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left standing at any time in violation of the time designated on an official parking control sign. No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left standing in a no parking, no stopping or no standing zone designated by an official curb marking. 
(b)  Twenty-four hour parking. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle on any street or public way within the city for a period in excess of 24 hours. 
(c)  Loading zones. No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left standing in a loading zone designated by an official sign or curb marking, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers and while the vehicle is attended by a licensed operator so that it may promptly be moved in case of an emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic. 
(d)  Night restricted parking. After the hour of 2:00 a.m. and before 6:00 a.m., motor vehicles or any other type of vehicle shall be parked on even-numbered calendar dates on the side of the street where the dwellings are even-numbered and on days having odd-numbered calendar dates on the side of the street having odd-numbered dwellings. This provision shall be effective between November 1 and April 1 following each year. The effective calendar date shall be determined as of the date at 2:00 a.m. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all streets in the city except as otherwise specified herein. 
(e)  Over-sized vehicle restrictions for street parking. None of the following vehicles shall be parked on a street within the City of Tomah between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. 
(1)  Trailer as defined in section 340.01 of the Wis. Statutes as a vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, but does not include a mobile home. Examples of this would include boat trailers, snowmobile trailers, recreational camper trailers and construction trailers. 
a.  Owners of construction trailers, which are parked at or near a construction site, may apply for a parking exemption permit through the city inspections department. 
b.  Parking exemption permits will be valid for up to 60 days. 
c.  Vehicles which have a parking exemption permit are required to abide by other parking laws and ordinances including but not limited to alternate side parking, handicap parking, and no parking zones. 
(2)  Motor homes in excess of 20 feet as defined in section 340.01 of the Wis. Statutes as a motor vehicle designed to be operated upon a highway for use as a temporary or recreational dwelling except that motor provided, however, such motor homes in excess of 20 feet shall be given at least 24 hours notice or a 24-hour warning by the police department prior to being subject to any penalties. Registered owners in violation of this subsection will be allowed three warnings/notices within each calendar year. 
(3)  Motor busses or mass transit vehicles as defined in section 340.01 of the Wis. Statutes as motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of persons rather than property and having a passenger-carrying capacity of 16 or more persons, including the operator or any vehicle used for providing transportation service, either publicly or privately owned, which provides a general transportation service to any member of the public on a regular, continuing and completely equal basis. 
(f)  Cul-de-sac parking. After the hour of 2:00 a.m. and before 6:00 a.m., motor vehicles or any other type of vehicle shall not be parked on any cul-de-sac within the city. This provision shall be effective between November 1 and April 1 following each year. 
(g)  Weight-restricted parking. No bus or vehicle with a gross weight of over 14,000 pounds or vehicle with a licensed gross weight over 14,000 pounds shall be allowed to park on any city street or alley in a residential area with the exception of those vehicles making deliveries. 
(Code 1993, §§ 7.08, 7.22, 7.23; Ord. No. 2014-08-09-D, § 1, 8-12-2014) 
Sec. 44-125. - Liability of owners. 
    If any vehicle has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this section, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty therefor. 
(Code 1993, § 7.08) 
Sec. 44-126. - Tampering with marks on tires. 
    No person shall intentionally by physical means or force or by the use of any instrument or device damage, obliterate, erase, hide or tamper with any mark placed by a city police officer or monitor on the tire of a vehicle when the purpose for placing such mark is to identify the time such vehicle was found in a parking position. Damaging, obliterating, erasing or tampering with a tire mark placed by a police officer or employee within the parked position or parking slot shall be evidence of intent to violate this section. 
(Code 1993, § 7.08) 
Sec. 44-127. - Exemptions for emergency personnel. 
    Physicians on call and emergency vehicles shall be exempt from the parking restrictions of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 7.08) 
Secs. 44-128-44-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SNOWMOBILES 

Sec. 44-153. - Authorized snowmobile route. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile on city-owned property, except over the route designated on the snowmobile route map which by reference is incorporated herein. The snowmobile trail shall be more particularly designated by officially marked signs, but is generally described as follows: 
    Commencing at the southern edge of Lake Tomah; thence southerly across private land outside the city limits; 
    Thence easterly across private land and reentering the city limits; 
    Thence southeasterly across private land to the city-owned property at Recreation Park at the gate at the junction of Grassman St. and Kristi Ln.; 
    Thence southerly across Recreation Park to the fence bordering Recreation Park; 
    Thence northeasterly along the fence and exiting Recreation Park at the gate midway between Fair St. and Hugh Dickie Dr. (CTH CM); 
    Thence southerly along Butts Ave. to the junction of Hugh Dickie Dr.; 
    Thence easterly along Hugh Dickie Dr. to the junction of W. Clifton St. (USH 16); 
    Thence southerly along W. Clifton St. and exiting the city limits; 
    Thence easterly across private land and reentering the city limits at the junction of Hollister Ave., Center Dr. and a town road (Goose Ave.); thence easterly along Center Dr. to the junction of S. Superior Ave. (STH 131); 
    Thence easterly, northerly, and northeasterly across private land and crossing Council Creek at the snowmobile bridge; 
    Thence easterly and northeasterly across private land to the junction of a town road (Grain Ave.); 
    Thence northeasterly across private land to a trail intersection; then either: 
(1)  Continuing northerly across private land to the junction of E. Clifton St. (USH 12 & 16) and King Ave. right-of-way; thence northerly on the King Ave. right-of way to the junction of E. Monowau St.; thence westerly across private land to the city-owned property at Frank G. Andres Firemen's Park; thence northerly across Firemen's Park and ending at the pedestrian bridge on the E. Monroe St. right-of-way; or, 
(2)  Easterly across private land; thence easterly across private land and exiting the city limits to a trail intersection; thence either 
(3)  Southeasterly and northeasterly across private land and reentering the city limits; thence northeasterly across private land to the junction of E. Clifton St. and Winnebago Ave.; thence easterly along E. Clifton St. and exiting the city limits; or 
(4)  Northerly across private land to the junction of E. Clifton St. and reentering the city limits; thence northeasterly across the city-owned property at Bloyer Field; thence northerly along the western boundary of the north-south airport runway; thence westerly across private land to the junction of E. Brownell St. and Sime Ave; thence northerly along Sime Ave. to the junction of Toro St.; thence westerly and northerly across private land to the junction of Plastic Ave.; thence northerly across private land to the junction of Town Line Rd.; thence westerly along Town Line Rd. to an area west of the Council Creek vehicle bridge and exiting the city limits; thence northeasterly and northerly across private land and reentering the city limits at the Lemonweir River snowmobile bridge; thence northerly across private land to the junction of E. Veterans St. (CTH ET) at a trail intersection; thence either 
(5)  Westerly along E. Veterans St. to the junction of N. Glendale Ave.; thence southerly along N. Glendale Ave. to the city-owned property at Veterans' Park; thence westerly across Veterans' Park; thence westerly across private land to the junction of N. Superior Ave. (USH 12); thence southerly along N. Superior Ave. to the junction north of Jefferson St.; thence westerly and southwesterly across private land to the junction of Hansen St.; thence westerly along Hansen St.; thence southwesterly across private land to the junction of Noth Ave. (CTH ET); thence southerly along Noth Ave. to the junction of Park View Dr. and the city-owned property at Lake Park; thence southerly across Lake Park to the northern edge of Lake Tomah; thence southerly across Lake Tomah and rejoining the trail at the southern edge of Lake Tomah; or 
(6)  Easterly on E. Veterans St. and exiting the city limits; thence easterly along CTH ET; thence northerly and westerly and northerly across private land and reentering the city limits at the junction of a town road (Foley Ave.) at a trail intersection; thence either 
(7)  Easterly along the town road and exiting the city limits; thence easterly along the town road to an area east of the I-94 bridge; thence northerly across private land and reentering the city limits at the Mud Creek snowmobile bridge; thence northerly and northeasterly across private land to the junction of STH 21; thence northerly and northwesterly across private land to the junction of E. Andres St. right-of-way; thence westerly on the E. Andres St. right-of-way and exiting the city limits to the north or rejoining the trail southerly at the junction of N. Superior Ave; or 
(8)  Westerly along a town road (Foley Ave.); thence westerly across private land to the junction of N. Superior Ave.; thence northerly along N. Superior Ave. and exiting the city limits north of the junction of E. Andres St. or rejoining the trail easterly at the junction of the E. Andres St. right-of-way. 
(Code 1993, § 7.16) 
Sec. 44-154. - Loading zones. 
    The following locations shall be the designated loading and unloading zones for snowmobiles: 
(1)  The west side of Winnebago Park. 
(2)  The south side of Recreation Park. 
(3)  The east side of Frank G. Andres Firemen's Park. 
(4)  The east side of Veteran's Park. 
(Code 1993, § 7.16) 
Secs. 44-155-44-176. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES 

Sec. 44-177. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to designate restricted all-terrain vehicle routes to aid law enforcement in parking control during the Grand National Tractor Pull and Monroe County Fair. 
(Code 1993, § 7.24) 
Sec. 44-178. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    All-terrain vehicle means an engine-driven device which has a net weight of 650 pounds or less, which has a width of 48 inches or less, which is equipped with a seat designed to be straddled by the operator and which is designed to travel on three or more tires. 
    Special events means the Grand National Tractor Pull or Monroe County Fair. 
(Code 1993, § 7.24) 
Sec. 44-179. - Routes. 
    The following portions of streets are designated as all-terrain vehicle routes, effective only during special events commencing at 7:30 a.m. on the Wednesday immediately preceding the special events until the following Sunday at 11:00 p.m.: 
    Butts Ave. from Fair St. to the north entrance of the Tomah High School parking lot; 
    Fair St. from Butts Ave. to the east entrance of the parking area on Fair St.; and 
    Grassman St. from Butts Ave. to Kristi Ln. 
(Code 1993, § 7.24) 
Sec. 44-180. - Restrictions. 
    Except as provided below regarding snow removal, the use of the all-terrain routes shall be limited to one all-terrain vehicle operated by a designated individual of the Monroe County Agriculture Society. Said all-terrain vehicle shall be required to display a yellow flashing light that can be observed from all directions around it and a sign that clearly designates the all-terrain vehicle as a parking control vehicle. The all-terrain vehicle used on the route and its designated operators shall conform with any and all equipment, registration or operating regulations of the state statutes. 
(Code 1993, § 7.24) 
Sec. 44-181. - Snow removal. 
    All-terrain vehicles may be used within the city for the purpose of snow removal from driveways and sidewalks provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The all-terrain vehicle must be properly registered with the state department of natural resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 23.33(2). 
(2)  The driver of the all-terrain vehicle must possess a valid driver's license. 
(3)  All lights on the all-terrain vehicle must be in working order. 
(4)  On an annual basis, the all-terrain vehicle must be pre-registered with the city police department on forms provided by the city. Proof of insurance shall be submitted at the time of registration. 
(5)  All-terrain vehicles must not cross federal or state highways except on a trailer. 
(6)  A "slow moving vehicle" sign must be mounted on the back of the all-terrain vehicle. 
(7)  The operator must comply with all applicable rules of operation set forth in Wis. Stats. § 23.33. 
(Code 1993, § 7.24) 
Secs. 44-182-44-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 44-201. - Definition. 
    The term "bicycle" as used in this article shall be defined by the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 340.01(5), which is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 7.11(5)) 
Sec. 44-202. - Penalties. 
    Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of $10.00 plus costs for the first offense within a year. For a second and subsequent offense within a one-year period, the penalty shall be $20.00 plus costs. 
(Code 1993, § 7.11(6)) 
Sec. 44-203. - Registration. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle upon any street or public way within the city, unless the bicycle shall first have been registered and properly licensed. Any bicycle purchased, sold or transferred shall be registered by the new owner within ten days of the date of the change in ownership. Bicycle registrations shall be issued by the police department. 
(Code 1993, § 7.11(1)) 
Sec. 44-204. - Registration form; fee. 
    The registration form shall include a complete description of the bicycle, including make, color, serial number and name and address of the registrant. The registration fee to be paid for each bicycle registration shall be set by resolution of the council and may be changed from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1993, § 7.11(1)) 
Sec. 44-205. - Issuance of registration sticker; display. 
    Immediately upon the registration of a bicycle, the police department shall issue to the owner a sticker serially numbered to correspond with the registration of such bicycle. Such sticker shall be affixed towards the rear of the bicycle in an easily conspicuous area and shall remain so fixed to the bicycle. In case of theft, loss, mutilation or defacing of such sticker, a new sticker shall be issued by the department for a fee established by the council. 
(Code 1993, § 7.11(1)) 
Sec. 44-206. - Duty to report; cancellation of registration. 
    Within ten days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall have changed ownership or be dismantled and taken out of use, the person in whose name the bicycle has been registered shall report such information to the police department. In case of change of ownership, the registration shall thereupon be canceled. 
(Code 1993, § 7.11(1)) 
Sec. 44-207. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Every person propelling or riding a bicycle upon a public roadway shall be subject to the provision of all provisions of this Code and state laws applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those provisions with reference to equipment of vehicle and except those provisions which by their nature would have no application. 
(b)  No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of Superior Ave. from Council St. to Washington St. 
(c)  Every bicycle when operated on a roadway shall be kept as close to the right-hand curb as possible, except when making a left-hand turn. 
(d)  Every person when operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride such bicycle in single file. 
(e)  No person riding upon a bicycle shall cling to or attach himself to any other moving vehicle upon a street or highway. 
(f)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. Infant seats are permitted if bolted securely to the frame at the top mount and to the axle and frame at the rear bottom mount and if provided with hand holds, foot rests, foot guards and safety belt. The use of a backpack for carrying an infant is permitted. Persons are not permitted to be located on a bicycle in front of the operator of the bicycle. 
(g)  No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the safe operation of the bicycle with at least one hand on the handlebars at all times. 
(h)  No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars or both feet from the pedals or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on any street. 
(Code 1993, § 7.11(2)) 
Sec. 44-208. - Required equipment. 
(a)  Lights required. Every bicycle operated upon the city streets and public highways between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise shall be equipped with a lamp firmly attached or affixed on the front of such vehicle, exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front end, with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, except that a red reflector approved by the state may be used in lieu of a rear light. 
(b)  Brakes required. Every bicycle when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with a brake adequate to control the movement of and to stop such vehicle whenever necessary. Such brake shall be maintained in good working order at all times. 
(Code 1993, § 7.11(3)) 
Sec. 44-209. - Parental responsibility. 
    No parent or guardian of any child shall authorize or permit such child to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 7.11(4)) 
Secs. 44-210-44-226. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 44-227. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall fail to obey the instructions of any uniform traffic control device when traveling as a pedestrian on any highway within the city, unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1993, § 7.15) 
Sec. 44-228. - Jaywalking prohibited. 
    No pedestrian shall jaywalk. The following shall constitute jaywalking and shall be deemed a violation of this section: 
(1)  Crossing a roadway at a point within 300 feet of a marked crosswalk. 
(2)  Crossing at a controlled intersection contrary to the signal lights or the direction of a traffic officer. 
(3)  Failing to walk on the extreme left side of any roadway when there are no sidewalks or pathways for pedestrian travel available adjacent to or abutting such roadway. 
(4)  Crossing a roadway intersection diagonally, unless authorized by official traffic control devices or a traffic officer. 
(5)  Crossing a roadway intersection in any manner prohibited by official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(Code 1993, § 7.15) 
Sec. 44-229. - Other prohibited pedestrian crossings. 
(a)  Crossing between controlled intersections. No pedestrian shall cross between adjacent intersections at which official traffic control signals are in operation and crosswalks are provided, unless such crossing is permitted by official traffic control devices. 
(b)  Crossing in business districts. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway, other than in a crosswalk, in any business district. 
(Code 1993, § 7.15) 
Secs. 44-230-44-251. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 44-252. - Penalty generally. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter, including those provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code or other materials which are incorporated by reference, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty assessment, as set forth below, a jail assessment if required by Wis. Stats. § 302.46, and any applicable fees prescribed in Wis. Stats. ch. 814. 
(2)  As an exception to subsection (1) of this section, persons who receive a parking ticket or parking violation notice under the provisions of this chapter may discharge the penalty by forwarding within five days of the offense to the police department the sum established by the city council. If not forwarded within five days the penalty shall be discharged by forwarding an amount equal to two times the original fine within ten days. The receipt of such tender shall be deemed an entry of appearance and a stipulation for entry of judgment for forfeiture in that amount. 
(Code 1993, § 7.30(1)) 
Sec. 44-253. - State forfeiture statutes. 
    Any forfeiture for violation of the state statutes adopted by reference in article I of this chapter shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for violation of such statutes as set forth in the State of Wisconsin Revised Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule of the Wisconsin Judicial Conference, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses, which schedule is adopted by reference. 
(Code 1993, § 7.30(2)) 
Sec. 44-254. - State fine statutes. 
    The forfeiture for violation of any statute adopted by reference hereunder for which the penalty is a fine shall not exceed the maximum fine permitted under such statute. 
(Code 1993, § 7.30(3)) 
Sec. 44-255. - Violation of local regulations. 
    The penalty for violation of provisions of this chapter that are not adopted from state law or rule shall be as provided specifically in the provision or, if no special provision is made, as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1993, § 7.30(4)) 
Sec. 44-256. - Enforcement procedure. 
    This chapter shall be enforced according to Wis. Stats. §§ 23.33, 66.12, 345.11 to 345.61, 350.17 and ch. 800. 
(Code 1993, § 7.31(1)) 
Sec. 44-257. - Deposits. 
(a)  Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may make a deposit of money as directed by the arresting officer at the police department or the office of the municipal judge or by mailing the deposit to such places. Deposits for parking or nonmoving violations shall be mailed or brought to the city police department. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall notify the arrested person, orally or in writing, that: 
(1)  If the person makes a deposit for a violation of a traffic regulation, the person need not appear in court at the time fixed in the citation and the person will be deemed to have tendered plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and penalty assessment as provided in this article, a jail assessment if required by Wis. Stats. § 53.46(1), plus any applicable fees prescribed in Wis. Stats. ch. 814, not to exceed the amount of the deposit that the court may accept as provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.37. 
(2)  If the person fails to make a deposit for a violation of a traffic regulation or appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, the court may enter a default judgment finding the person guilty of the offense or issue a warrant for his arrest. 
(b)  The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with the State of Wisconsin Revised Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference and shall include the penalty assessment as provided in this article, jail assessment and court costs. If a deposit schedule has not been established, the arresting officer shall require the alleged offender to deposit the forfeiture established by the municipal judge and approved by the city council, which shall include the penalty assessment as provided in this article. 
(c)  The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall issue the arrested person a receipt therefor as required by Wis. Stats. § 345.26(3)(b). 
(Code 1993, § 7.31(2)) 
Sec. 44-258. - Petition to reopen judgment. 
    When a person has been convicted in this state on the basis of a forfeiture of deposit or a plea of guilty or no contest and the person was not informed as required under Wis. Stats. § 345.27(1) and (2), the person may, within 60 days after being notified of the revocation or suspension of the operating privilege, petition the court to reopen the judgment and grant him an opportunity to defend on merits. If the court finds that the petitioner was not informed as required under Wis. Stats. § 345.27(1) and (2), the court shall order the judgment reopened. The court order reopening the judgment automatically reinstates the revoked or suspended operating privilege. 
(Code 1993, § 7.31(3)) 
Sec. 44-259. - Notice of demerit points; receipt. 
    Every person accepting a forfeited penalty or money deposit under this article shall receipt therefor as provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.26(3)(b). Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 343.28 and 345.26(1)(a), and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the traffic citation promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11. 
(Code 1993, § 7.31(4)) 
Sec. 44-260. - Nonmoving violations. 
    In addition to other penalties provided in this chapter and by state statute, the chief of police or his designee is authorized, according to Wis. Stats. § 345.28 to request suspension of the registration of any vehicle involved in the violation of a nonmoving traffic regulation or parking regulation of the city or request refusal of registration of any vehicle owned by the violator. The chief of police is also authorized to do all acts necessary in connection with the implementation and enforcement of Wis. Stats. § 345.28 including, but not limited to, recovery of such vehicle registration, and the person charged with a nonmoving traffic violation shall be liable for the cost of using the traffic violation and registration program. 
(Code 1993, § 7.31(5)) 
Secs. 44-261-44-283. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 44-284. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or mobile home, whether or not such vehicle is registered under Wis. Stats. ch. 341. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(2)) 
Sec. 44-285. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall abandon any vehicle unattended within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to be abandoned. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(1)) 
Sec. 44-286. - Presumption of abandonment. 
    Any vehicle left unattended for more than 48 hours on any public street or grounds or on private property where parking is prohibited, limited or restricted, without the permission of the owner or lessee, is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance, provided that the vehicle shall not be deemed abandoned under this section if left unattended on private property out of public view by permission of the owner or lessee. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(3)) 
Sec. 44-287. - Removal; impoundment; sale. 
    Any vehicle found abandoned in violation of this section shall be impounded by the police department until lawfully claimed or disposed of as provided in this section. If the chief of police or his authorized representative determines that towing costs and storage charges for the minimum impoundment period would exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked or sold prior to the expiration of the impoundment period upon determination by the chief of police that the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or any other reason, provided that vehicles in excess of 19 model years of age shall be sold or disposed of only by auction, sale or sealed bid. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(4)) 
Sec. 44-288. - Minimum impoundment period. 
    The minimum period of impoundment or storage of a vehicle found in violation of this section shall be ten days. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(5)) 
Sec. 44-289. - Notice to owner. 
    The officer removing or causing the removal of any vehicle found in violation of this section shall immediately notify the chief of police of the abandonment and location of the impounded vehicle and shall within ten days thereafter notify the owner and lienholders of record by certified mail of the impoundment and of their right to reclaim the vehicle. The notice shall set forth the information contained in Wis. Stats. § 342.40(3) and shall state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their rights to reclaim the vehicle shall be deemed a waiver of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to sale of the vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(6)) 
Sec. 44-290. - Sale; barring of claims. 
    Each retained vehicle not reclaimed by the owner or lienholder may be disposed of by sealed bid or auction sale as provided in Wis. Stats. § 342.40(3). The sale of a motor vehicle under the provisions of this section shall forever bar all prior claims thereto and interest therein except as provided below. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(7), (8)) 
Sec. 44-291. - Purchaser to remove vehicle. 
    The purchaser of any vehicle on sealed bid or auction sale shall have ten days to remove the vehicle from the storage area upon payment of a storage fee of $10.00 for each day the vehicle has remained in storage after the second business day subsequent to the sale date. Ten days after the sale, the purchaser shall forfeit all interest in the vehicle and the vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be again sold. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(9)) 
Sec. 44-292. - Request for list. 
    Any listing of vehicles to be sold pursuant to this chapter shall be made available by the police clerk to any interested person or organization who makes a written request therefor for a fee in the amount established by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(10)) 
Sec. 44-293. - Notice to department. 
    Within five days after a sale or disposition of a vehicle under this chapter, the chief of police shall advise the state department of transportation of such sale or disposition on a form supplied by the department of transportation. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(11)) 
Sec. 44-294. - Owner may file. 
    At any time within two years after the sale of a motor vehicle is provided herein, any person claiming ownership of such motor vehicle or a financial interest therein may present a claim to the city council setting forth such facts as are necessary to establish such ownership or interest and that the failure of the claimant to reclaim the vehicle prior to sale was not the result of the neglect or fault of claimant. If the council is satisfied as to the justice of such claim, it may allow the same, but in no case shall the amount allowed exceed the sum paid into the city treasury as the result of the sale of such motor vehicle nor the amount of interest of the claimant therein. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(12)) 
Sec. 44-295. - Exemption. 
    Any owner or person operating a registered vehicle which becomes disabled or inoperative for any reason and who shall be unable to cause removal of such vehicle from any alley, street, highway or public place not otherwise regulated as a restricted parking, stopping or standing zone shall, within 12 hours of such occurrence, notify the chief of police of the location of the vehicle, together with a fee in the amount established by the city council to offset the cost of towing and junking charges, and shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. When so requested by the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, the chief of police shall be authorized to order such vehicle removed and junked directly from the scene of disablement by the chief of police or contractor engaged by the city for towing of disabled vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 7.10(13)) 
Secs. 44-296-44-316. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES 

Sec. 44-317. - Definition. 
    Neighborhood electric vehicles (NEV) means a self-propelled motor vehicle that has successfully completed the neighborhood electric vehicle America test program conducted by the federal government department of energy and that conforms to the definition and requirements for low speed vehicles as adopted in the federal motor vehicle safety standards for "low speed vehicles" under 49 CRF 571.3(b) and 571.500. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07-08-D, § 1, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 44-318. - Requirements. 
    Neighborhood electric vehicles shall be four-wheeled and have a speed range of at least 20 miles per hour and not more than 25 miles per hour on a paved surface, and have a gross vehicle weight at rest of less than 2,500 pounds. A neighborhood electric vehicles does not include an electric golf cart and shall have: 
(1)  Headlights. 
(2)  Front and rear turn signals. 
(3)  Stop lamps. 
(4)  Reflex reflectors: one red on each side as far to the rear as practicable; and one red on the rear. 
(5)  An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side and either an exterior mirror on the passenger side or an interior rearview mirror. 
(6)  Parking brake. 
(7)  Windshield that conforms to the requirements of the federal motor vehicle safety standards on glazing materials as provided in CFR 571.205. 
(8)  A vehicle identification number that complies with federal law as provided in 49 CFR 565. 
(9)  A type 1 or type 2 seatbelt assembly conforming with 49 CFR 571.209 and federal motor vehicle standard no. 209, for each designated seating position. 
(10)  Meet the general test conditions under 49 CFR 571.500. 
(11)  Neighborhood electric vehicles shall be registered, titled and licensed by the state. 
(12)  To use a neighborhood electric vehicle on the streets in the city, the operator shall have a valid driver's license. 
(13)  The neighborhood electric vehicle operated pursuant to this article must be insured. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07-08-D, § 1, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 44-319. - Permitted use of neighborhood vehicles on city streets. 
(1)  Neighborhood electric vehicles may be operated on the streets of the city having a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less. If vehicle specifications are less than 35 miles per hour, the operator is required to place a slow moving vehicle sign on the rear of the vehicle. 
(2)  Each person operating a neighborhood electric vehicle on a street in the city shall observe all traffic laws and local ordinances regarding the rules of the road. 
a.  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit a neighborhood electric vehicle from crossing a state trunk highway at the following intersections: 
1.  McLean and W. Clifton. 
2.  Kilbourn and E. Clifton. 
b.  Connecting highways in the city of Tomah shall be defined as follows: 
1.  USH 12 Arthur St. to Clifton St. 
2.  STH 16 Hollister Ave. to Superior Ave. 
3.  STH 131 0.04 mile south of to Clifton St. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07-08-D, § 1, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 44-320. - Notification. 
    The city clerk shall notify the Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WDOT) of the passage of this article pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.26(3), and identify each connecting highway or state trunk highway intersection to which the ordinance will apply. If the WDOT approval is obtained, this article shall be effective throughout the city. If the WDOT denies the city's request, in whole or in part, no person may lawfully use a neighborhood vehicle to travel on a connecting highway or cross a state trunk highway intersection to which the WDOT has refused permission to cross. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07-08-D, § 1, 7-14-2009) 
Secs. 44-321-44-341. - Reserved. 
Chapter 46 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Compulsory connection. 
(a)  When required. Whenever a sewer or water main becomes available to any building used for human habitation, the department of public works and utilities shall notify the owner or his agent in writing, directing the owner or his agent to connect the building to such main in the manner prescribed by the department of public works and utilities and to install such facilities and fixtures as may be reasonably necessary to permit passage of sewage incidental to such human habitation into the sewerage system and to furnish an adequate supply of pure water for drinking and prevent creation of a health nuisance. 
(b)  Connection by city. If the owner or his agent fails to comply with the notice of the department of public works and utilities within ten days of service or mailing thereof, the department of public works and utilities may cause connection to be made and the expense thereof shall be assessed as a special tax against the property. 
(c)  Installment option. The owner or his agent may, within 30 days after completion of the work, file a written option with the city clerk stating that he cannot pay the cost of connection in one sum and electing that such sum be levied in annual installments with interest from the completion of the work. 
(Code 1993, § 11.03) 
Sec. 46-2. - Service restricted to corporate limits. 
    Except as provided herein, no establishment, building or premises shall be allowed to hook up to city water or sewer unless the establishment, building or premises is located within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 13.02(1)) 
Sec. 46-3. - Exception for certain properties. 
    City water may be extended outside the corporate limits of the city as recommended by the public works department and approved by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02-01-D, § 1, 2-1-2012) 
Secs. 46-4-46-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-27. - Incorporation of state rules. 
    All persons now receiving a water supply from the city water utility or who may hereafter make application therefor shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by the rules and regulations as filed with and approved by the state public service commission, which rules and regulations are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1993, § 13.34) 
Sec. 46-28. - No claims for damages. 
    No person shall enter a claim for damage against the city as a water utility or any officer thereof for damage to any pipe, fixture or appurtenance by reason of interrupted water supply, variations of pressure or for damage of any nature whatsoever caused by the turning off or turning on, either wholly or partially, of the water supply for the extension, alteration or repair of any water main or premises' supply or for the discontinuance of the premises' water supply for the violation of any rules or regulations of the utility. No claims will be allowed against the city on account of the interruption of the water supply caused by the breaking of pipes or machinery or by stoppage for repairs, on account of fire or other emergency, and no claims shall be allowed for any damage caused by the breakage of any pipe or machinery. 
(Code 1993, § 13.34) 
Sec. 46-29. - Tampering with city equipment. 
(a)  No person, contractor, mason or other unauthorized person shall, without authority of the city water utility, take water from another person's premises, operate any valve connected with the street or supply mains, or open any fire hydrant connected with the distribution system, except for the purpose of extinguishing fire. 
(b)  No person shall wantonly damage or impair any valve connected with the street or supply mains or any fire hydrant connected with the distribution system. 
(Code 1993, § 13.39) 
Sec. 46-30. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation of the council or state public service commission relating to the water or sewer utility; who shall turn on the water into any premises from which the water has been shut off or into which the water has not yet been turned on; who shall connect any water main or service pipe without first having obtained a permit therefor; or who shall violate any provisions of this chapter, including those provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code or other materials which are incorporated by reference, shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-14, together with the costs of prosecution and the penalty assessment, where applicable under the provisions of this Code, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment of such forfeiture and costs, but not exceeding 90 days for each violation. 
(b)  In addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. The city council shall be held harmless as a result of any expense, loss or damage incurred as a result of a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 13.50) 
Secs. 46-31-46-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONNECTIONS AND CHARGES 

Sec. 46-49. - Service rates and lateral connection specifications. 
    The rates charged for water service shall be based on rate schedules established and approved by the public service commission. All underground water laterals must be of undiminished size from main tap to the meter setting valve and of grade K copper or better. 
(Code 1993, § 13.33) 
Sec. 46-50. - Time for mandatory connection. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, business, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the jurisdiction of the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public water main shall at the owner's expense connect to the public water system within one year after the date of official notice from the department of public works and utilities. 
(Code 1993, § 13.33) 
Sec. 46-51. - Billing regardless of connection. 
    After the expiration of the one year described above and whether or not connected to the public sewer system, the property owner or user shall be charged a bill to be based on the average usage for such property as determined by the department and based on public service commission guidelines for charging for unmetered service. The amount so charged shall be collected in accordance with the procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 13.33) 
Secs. 46-52-46-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 46-76. - Construction costs. 
    All water main extensions within the city shall be extended on either a special assessment or cost advancement basis. 
(Code 1993, § 13.30) 
Sec. 46-77. - Special assessments. 
(a)  When applicable. Water main extensions shall be financed by special assessments when deemed advisable by the council. In general the special assessment method shall be used for main extensions to service areas in immediate need of service within ten years. All special assessments shall be levied in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 and this article. 
(b)  Front foot rates. Special assessments shall be determined according to benefits and levied on a front foot of benefiting abutting property on each side of the street and shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The total cost of the extension, including legal services, finance carrying charges, engineering, inspection, grading and necessary street resurfacing and other direct and indirect costs, less unapportionable costs, shall be determined. Such amount shall be divided by the total number of assessable front feet of property served by the main. 
(2)  For the purpose of this section unapportionable costs shall include any additional expenses incurred for installation of water mains in excess of eight inches in diameter, except when service required is more than normally provided, as in the case of "sprinkled" buildings or "wet" industries. Pump stations and water booster stations shall be considered unapportionable when the service provided is necessary for or of benefit to the general public or utility or when such facility is to serve a large geographic area, such as a separate or entire drainage basin. 
(3)  Pumping stations that serve a specific consumer or group of consumers or an isolated and limited geographic area shall be considered apportionable. Prior to the public hearing for any project involving pump stations or water booster stations, the public works and utilities commission shall determine whether or not the facilities are apportionable. 
(4)  The council may annually by resolution determine the amount to be levied for each front foot of benefiting abutting property on each side of the street on the basis of previous experience and estimated costs for the coming construction year. 
(c)  Single frontage lots. The special assessment on lots which abut on only one public street, shall be determined by multiplying the total number of front footage by the special assessment charge per foot. 
(d)  Corner lots. The special assessment on corner lots shall be made on the basis of the footage on the short side even though the hookup might be on the long side, providing the long side does not exceed 150 feet and, if it does, the footage in excess of 150 feet shall also be assessed on foot rate basis. A corner lot shall be defined as a lot with adjacent sides fronting on streets with the frontage on the two streets equal to approximately 50 percent of the perimeter of the lot. 
(e)  Irregular lots. The special assessment on irregular lots shall be based on the average footage of the lot or a method approved by the city council at a public hearing. 
(f)  Industrial areas. Section 46-196(f), regarding M-1, M-2, and M-3 districts shall apply. 
(Code 1993, § 13.31) 
Sec. 46-78. - Cost advancement; refunds. 
    Water main extensions shall be financed by cost advancements when deemed advisable by the council. In general the cost advancement method shall be used only when application is made for public water service that would require the extensions of mains through sparsely occupied areas to serve such applicant or through areas that in the judgment of the council are unlikely to develop extensively within the next ten years. Where extensions are authorized on a cost advancement basis, the procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  The applicant shall deposit with the city treasurer a sum equal to the estimated total amount that would have been assessed to all property that would have been assessed under section 46-49. 
(2)  The deposit shall be made before construction is started or contracted. If the actual apportionable cost shall be less than the amount deposited, the excess of the deposit over the cost shall be refunded to the applicant within 30 days after payment for the completed project. If the apportionable cost shall exceed the deposit, the applicant shall pay the deficiency prior to the granting of water service. 
(3)  When additional customers are connected to a water main that was originally financed in part by customers, the city will require a contribution from each new customer in an amount necessary to equalize the average contribution. When the amount of customer contribution computed under subsection (1) of this section is less than would have been assessed under section 46-49, the applicant for service shall pay an amount equivalent to the assessment. This amount shall then be refunded pro rata to all contributors along the extension whose remaining contribution still exceeds what would have been assessed under section 46-49. 
(4)  When refunds have reduced the contribution of any contributor to the applicable assessment per front foot, no further refund will be made to that individual. After all refunds have been made, the remaining premises that may connect will be charged at the rate per front foot established for the extension. 
(5)  All refunds pertaining to connection charges collected by the city hereunder shall be paid to the applicant, his assigns or heirs unless specifically provided otherwise in writing. 
(6)  When an extension beyond an existing extension is required to serve a new customer and the cost for a customer exceeds the average remaining contribution in the original extension, the new extension will be considered as an entirely new project without refunds or other connection with the original extension. 
(7)  When customers connect to a transmission main or connection loops laid at utility expense, there will be a contribution of an amount equivalent to the applicable assessment as determined in section 46-49. 
(8)  The development period during which refunds shall be made will be limited to 20 years. 
(Code 1993, § 13.32) 
Secs. 46-79-46-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 46-100. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the city water system and, the other, water from private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there is a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
(Code 1993, § 13.36(1)) 
Sec. 46-101. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than supply or distribution system of the municipality is interconnected with the city's water utility facilities, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the city water utility and by the state department of natural resources in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code NR 810.15. 
(Code 1993, § 13.36(2); Ord. No. 2012-07-05-D, § 1, 7-10-2012) 
Sec. 46-102. - Inspections. 
    The water utility shall cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water where deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the water utility and as approved by the DNR. On request the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property. 
(Code 1993, § 13.36(3)) 
Sec. 46-103. - Right of entry. 
    Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the water utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property served by a connection to the public water system of the city for cross connections. If entry is refused, the city may pursue a warrant as provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 13.36(4)) 
Sec. 46-104. - Disconnection of water service. 
    The water utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service or impose a fine to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. ch. 68, except as otherwise provided herein. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with this section. 
(Code 1993, § 13.36(5); Ord. No. 2012-07-05-D, § 2, 7-10-2012) 
Sec. 46-105. - Emergency disconnection. 
    If it is determined by the water utility that a cross connection or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the director and delivered to the customer's premises, service may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. ch. 68, within ten days of such emergency discontinuance. 
(Code 1993, § 13.36(6)) 
Sec. 46-106. - Adoption of state plumbing code. 
    The city adopts by reference the state plumbing code, Wis. Admin. Code SPS 382, and all subsequent amendments thereto. This section does not supersede the state plumbing code and city plumbing code, but is supplementary to them. 
(Code 1993, § 13.36(7), (8); Ord. No. 2012-07-05-D, § 3, 7-10-2012) 
Secs. 46-107-46-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agency means the city council and the public works and utilities commission that is designated by the council to administer and enforce the terms of this article. 
    Ammonia nitrogen plus organic nitrogen means the quantity of soluble nitrogen in the oxidation trinegative state combined with hydrogen and hydroxyl ions as NH4OH expressed in mg/l of nitrogen, plus the organically bound nitrogen in the oxidation trinegative state; also referred to as Kjeldahl Nitrogen; the quantity being determined by Standard Methods for the Examination of Waste and Wastewater, latest edition. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 ) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste drainage pipes inside the building and conveys same to the building sewer beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain beginning at five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall to its connection with the sanitary sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Commercial user means any user engaged in a business enterprise. Churches and nonprofit organizations shall also be considered commercial users. 
    Compatible pollutant means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria, chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus, nitrogen and nitrogen compounds within acceptable ranges. 
    Composite sampling, (24 hours) means the combination of individual samples taken at intervals of not more than one hour. 
    Control manhole means a manhole specifically designed and installed to measure flow and sample the discharge from a contributor, particularly an industrial user. This manhole shall consist of a flow rate measuring device and a separate structure for housing recording instruments and an automatic proportional sampler. The sampler shall automatically collect samples of the waste in proportion to the amount of flow. 
    Department means the city department of public works and utilities. 
    DILHR means the Wisconsin Department of Industry, Labor, and Human Relations. 
    Director means the director of public works and utilities. 
    DNR means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
    Domestic wastewater means water carrying wastes which contain approximately 300 milligrams per liter BOD 5 , approximately 275 milligrams per liter suspended solids and 25 milligrams per liter ammonia nitrogen, plus organic nitrogen, and six milligrams per liter phosphorus consistent with that emanating from a typical residential, commercial and light industrial area in the absence of significant industrial wastewaters and in the absence of infiltration/inflow. 
    Equivalent meters means the number of equivalent five-eighths inch water meters and shall be based on the following: 
Meter size No. of equivalent 5/8 -inch meters 5/8 -inch 1 3/4-inch 1.0 1-inch 2.5 11/4-inch 3.5 11/2-inch 5 2-inch 8 3-inch 15 4-inch 25 6-inch 50 8-inch 80 10-inch 125 12-inch 160  
    Fixed charge means a charge for the cost of debt retirement associated with construction, erection, modification, or rehabilitation of the wastewater treatment facility, interceptor or collection system. This charge shall be above the treatment charges and operation, maintenance, and replacement charges. 
    Flow proportional sample means a sample taken that is proportional to the volume of flow during the sampling period. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooling and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Grant means federal or state financial assistance for the construction of improvements to the public sanitary sewer collection system or wastewater treatment plant. 
    Grantee means the city council. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as chemical toilets, campers, trailers, vacuum pump tank trucks, portable restrooms, or other similar storage facilities. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant that is not a compatible pollutant. 
    Industrial user means any user defined in 40 CFR 35.905-8 that has an industrial discharge. 
    Infiltration and inflow means the portion of groundwater, surface water and rainfall that drains into a sanitary sewer. 
    Interceptor sewer (also main sewer or sanitary sewer main ) means a sewer whose primary purpose is to convey wastewater from a collection system to a wastewater treatment facility. Size of the sewer is not a factor in defining an interceptor. 
    Lateral means the privately owned service sewer pipe connecting the building sewer and the sewers of the city. The lateral is owned by the property owner and the owner is responsible for its installation and maintenance. 
    Licensed disposer means a person or business holding a valid license to do septage servicing under Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 113. 
    Major contributing industry means a nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works with a waste discharge flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday; an average workday discharge flow greater than five percent of the average daily flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 215, or a major impact defined in writing by the agency, either singly or in combination with other wastes on the publicly owned treatment works. 
    Municipal wastewater means the wastewater of a municipality, including that of the City of Tomah. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residential, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may have inadvertently entered the sewerage system of the municipality. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Noncontact cooling water means wastewater from a commercial or industrial user that has not become exposed to contamination or pollution, the sole alteration of which is in temperature increase and which does not contain toxic or deleterious substances. 
    Nonindustrial user means any user producing wastewater from residences, commercial buildings, public buildings or institutions or from any other sources not defined in 40 CFR 35.905, as amended. 
    North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) means the manual so titled, published by the Office of Management and Budget, 2007. 
    Operation and maintenance costs means all costs, direct and indirect, not including debt service but inclusive of expenditures attributable to administration, replacement of equipment, and treatment and collection of wastewaters necessary to ensure adequate wastewater collection and treatment on a continuing basis which conforms to applicable regulations and which assures optimal longterm facility management. 
    Owner means any person who holds title to a parcel of property to which this article pertains. 
    Parts per million means a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company, association, cooperative, trust, institution, partnership, state, municipality or federal agency. 
    pH means the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter of solution. 
    Phosphorus (P) means the total phosphorus in wastewater, which may be present in any of three principal forms: orthophosphates, polyphosphates, and organic phosphates. Quantitative determination of total phosphorus should be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    Pretreatment means the treating of industrial wastes as required by a government agency to remove or reduce the quantity of one or more pollutants prior to discharge into a public sewer. 
    Private sewage system means a system comprised of a septic tank and effluent absorption area designed for the purpose of processing and disposing of sewage. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sanitary sewer collection system means a system of sanitary sewers owned, maintained, operated and controlled by the agency. 
    Replacement costs means all costs necessary to accumulate the resources to replace equipment as required to maintain capacity and performance during the design life of the facility (normally 20 years). A separate segregated distinct replacement fund shall be used only for replacement of the mechanical equipment. 
    Sanitary sewer means a pipe or conduit owned and maintained by the agency that carries sewage. 
    Sanitary waste means the waste discharged from the average residential user in the city; also termed domestic wastewater. 
    Septage means the wastewater or contents of septic tanks, dosing chambers, grease interceptors, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches, or privies. 
    Service life means the expected life of individual pieces of equipment. In many instances, the service life of a piece of equipment will be shorter than the useful life of the overall treatment plant. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
    Sewer service charge means a service charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of use-related capital expenses as well as the operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs, of the facilities. 
    Significant industrial user means a nongovernmental user which is required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 101 to file effluent reports for discharges made to the public sanitary sewer collection system, which includes, but is not limited to, any facility whose discharge is a volume greater than 10,000 gallons per day and contains any one or more of the industrial wastes or toxic and hazardous substances defined in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 101, or whose discharge is less than 10,000 gallons per day but is subject to a pretreatment standard and which is classified as a major contributing industry or which has been notified in writing by the DNR that it is necessary to provide the agency with information concerning the concentration and quantity of pollutants discharged. 
    Slug load means any discharge of sewage or industrial wastewater, the concentration of any constituent of which or the quantity of flow of which exceeds instantaneously more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows of the user during normal operation. 
    Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial Wastes published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation and is in compliance with federal regulations 40 CFR 136, Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants, all as amended from time to time. Any reference to Standard Methods in this article also requires that the procedure used complies with Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 218 and NR 219. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage, garbage and domestic wastewater other than noncontact cooling water from commercial and industrial users. 
    Stormwater runoff means the portion of the rainfall that is collected and drained into the storm sewers. 
    Surcharge means any user of the wastewater treatment facility whose discharge exceeds in one or more parameters (BOD, SS, TKN, phosphorus, etc.) of the concentration of normal domestic-strength wastewater for that parameter shall be subject to a surcharge. The amount of such surcharges shall reflect the costs incurred in removing the high-strength BOD or suspended solids, or other pollutants from the wastewater. A surcharge is in addition to all fixed and variable charges. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means solids that are visible and in suspension in the liquid, the quantity being determined by Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition. 
    Total Kjeldahl nitrogent (TKN) means the quantity of organic nitrogen and ammonia as determined in accordance with Standard Methods. 
    Treatment works means any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature or necessary to recycle or reuse water at the most economical cost over the useful life of the works, including interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof, elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply, such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities and any works, including site acquisitions of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process; the land that is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment; or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste. 
    Unaltered water means water that is not changed chemically or physically as a result of use. 
    User charge means a sewer service charge. 
    Users means those residential, commercial, governmental, institutional and industrial establishments that are connected to the public sanitary sewer collection system. 
    Variable charge means a sewer use charge based upon the volume of normal domestic-strength wastewater to be transported and treated. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Wastewater. See Sewage. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or facility means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    WPDES permit means the permit issued from time to time to the city by the state department of natural resources (DNR) that authorizes the city to discharge effluent to a watercourse in the state. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(1)) 
Sec. 46-127. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Discharges onto ground. No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited any sewage on the ground surface of any public or private property, within the jurisdiction of the agency. Noncontact cooling water and foundation drain water may be deposited on the ground provided that it does not cause a nuisance. 
(b)  Discharges into natural outlets. No person shall discharge any sewage except noncontact cooling waters to any natural outlet within the jurisdiction of the agency except where authorized by the state DNR. 
(c)  Septic tanks and similar facilities. Except as otherwise herein provided, no person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  Tampering with sewer system. No unauthorized person shall alter, disturb or uncover any connections with or opening into any sanitary sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining written permission from the director. 
(e)  Water runoff connections. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, basement sump pumps or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer. If such connections are found during an inspection by the director or his representative, correction shall be ordered. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or any other unaltered water to any sanitary sewer. 
(f)  Inflow or infiltration of unpolluted waters. All building sewers, both new and existing, shall be maintained in such condition as to prevent inflow or infiltration of unpolluted waters from the groundwater table, storm runoff or other sources. If, during an inspection, upon plugging the building sewer at or near its point of entry into the sanitary sewer, unpolluted water should be observed by the director or his representative to back up into the building being served, the building sewer shall be declared defective and correction shall be ordered. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(2), (4), (5)(a)) 
Sec. 46-128. - Toilet facilities required. 
(a)  Requirement and time for connection. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, business, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the jurisdiction of the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a sanitary sewer, shall at the owner's expense install suitable toilet facilities and connect such facilities directly with the public sewer collection system in accordance with the provisions of this article within one year after the date of official notice by the department. No joint laterals may be used for two or more buildings under separate ownership. 
(b)  Charges and billing. After the expiration of one year, whether or not the property has been connected to the public system, the property owner or user shall be charged a quarterly bill based on the average usage for the property as determined by the department and based on public service commission guidelines for charging for unmetered service. The amount so charged shall be collected in accordance with the procedure in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(2)) 
Sec. 46-129. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  When required; specifications. When a sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private, individual sewage system complying with all related provisions of this article. The type, capacity, location and layout of a private, individual sewage disposal system shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code § ILHR 82.20. 
(b)  Permit; fees. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage system, the owner shall obtain a written permit signed by the director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the agency which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the director. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Inspection. A permit for a private sewage system shall not become effective until the installation is completed and approved by the director. The director shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the director. 
(d)  Subsequent availability of city system. At such time as a sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage system, a direct connection at the building drain shall be made to the sanitary sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private or individual sewage facilities shall be abandoned in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § ILHR 82.20. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(3)) 
Sec. 46-130. - Authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The director and other authorized employees of the agency bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The director or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other processes beyond that point, which have no direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sanitary sewers or wastewater treatment facilities. 
(b)  The director and other authorized employees of the agency bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage collection system of treatment works. All entry and subsequent work, if any, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of this article. 
(c)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the director or authorized employees of the agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner. The owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the agency employees with the agency indemnifying the owner against loss or damage to its property by agency employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner which grow out of the inspection, gauging or sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(11)) 
Secs. 46-131-46-158. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 46-159. - Separate sewers required. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot, and no individual sewage system is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be extended in such cases to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. In all other cases, no joint laterals will be allowed. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the director to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(4)(d), (e)) 
Sec. 46-160. - Permits. 
(a)  Classes of permits. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  Establishments producing only domestic wastewaters (including residences, institutions, public facilities and commercial establishments); and 
(2)  Establishments producing industrial wastewater. 
(b)  Application for permit; indemnification; fees. The owner or his representative shall make application on a special form furnished by the agency. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director or building inspector. The permit application shall include the owner's indemnification of the agency from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The permit and inspection fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Inspection and connection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the sanitary sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or his representative. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(4)(a), (b), (j)) 
Sec. 46-161. - Costs of construction. 
    All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(4)(c)) 
Sec. 46-162. - Excavations. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to minimize the hazard to public welfare and safety. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the agency. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(4)(k)) 
Sec. 46-163. - Construction specifications. 
(a)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code § ILHR 82.20, except that bituminous fiber pipe shall not be allowed. 
(b)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the sanitary sewer, sewage carried by such a building drain shall be lifted and discharged to the building sewer by facilities conforming to Wis. Admin. Code § ILHR 82.11(3). 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(4)(f), (g)) 
Secs. 46-164-46-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION COSTS 

Sec. 46-195. - Payment methods. 
    All sanitary sewer extensions within the city shall be extended on either a special assessment or cost advancement basis. 
(Code 1993, § 13.11) 
Sec. 46-196. - Special assessments. 
(a)  When applicable. Sanitary sewer extensions shall be financed by special assessments when deemed advisable by the council. In general the special assessment method shall be used for main extensions to service areas in immediate need of service or which are deemed likely to develop and need service within ten years. All special assessments shall be levied in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.60 and this division. 
(b)  Front foot rates. Special assessments shall be determined according to benefits and levied on a front foot basis. The amount levied for each front foot of benefiting abutting property on each side of the street shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The total estimated apportionable costs of the extension, including legal services, finance carrying charges, engineering, inspection, grading and the necessary street resurfacing and other direct and indirect costs, shall be determined. Such amount shall be divided by the total number of assessable front foot of property served by the main. 
(2)  The following items will be considered unapportionable costs as determined by an engineer hired by the public works and utilities commission: sewer mains in excess of eight feet in diameter, excavation greater than ten feet, sewage lift stations when the station provided is necessary for or of benefit to the general public or utility or when such facility is to serve a large geographic area as a separate and entire drainage basin. Prior to the public hearing for any project involving sewage lift stations, the public works and utilities commission shall determine whether or not the facilities are apportionable. 
(3)  The city council may annually by resolution determine the amount to be levied for each front foot of benefiting abutting property on each side of the street on the basis of previous experience and estimated costs for the coming construction year. 
(c)  Single frontage lots. The special assessment on lots that abut on only one public street shall be determined by multiplying the total number of front footage by the special assessment charge per foot. 
(d)  Corner lots. The special assessment on corner lots shall be made on the basis of the footage on the short side even though the hookup might be on the long side. However, if the long side exceeds 150 feet, the footage in excess of 150 feet shall also be assessed on foot rate basis. A corner lot shall be defined as a lot with adjacent sides fronting on streets with the frontage on the two streets equal to approximately 50 percent of the perimeter of the lot or a method approved by the city council at a public hearing. 
(e)  Irregular lots. The special assessment on irregular lots shall be based on a method approved by the city council at the public hearing. 
(f)  M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this section, the owner of property zoned M-1, M-2 and M-3 shall be responsible for paying 75 percent of the assessment at the time of hookup and the city shall be responsible for 25 percent of the assessment. 
(Code 1993, § 13.12) 
Sec. 46-197. - Cost advancement. 
    Sanitary sewer extensions shall be financed by cost advancements when deemed advisable by the council. In general the cost advancement method shall be used only when applications are made for sanitary sewer service that would require the extensions or mains through sparsely occupied areas to serve such applicants or through areas that in the judgment of the council are unlikely to develop extensively within the next ten years. Where extensions are authorized on a cost advancement basis, the procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  The applicant shall deposit with the city treasurer a sum equal to the estimated total amount that would have been assessed to all property that would have been assessed under section 46-196. 
(2)  Such deposit shall be made before construction is started or contracted. If the actual apportionable cost is less than the amount deposited, the excess of the deposit over the cost shall be refunded to the applicant within 30 days after payment for the completed project. If the apportionable cost exceeds the deposit, the applicant shall pay the deficiency prior to the granting of sanitary sewer service. 
(3)  When additional customers are connected to a sanitary sewer main that was originally financed in part by customers, the city shall require a contribution from each new customer in an amount necessary to equalize the average contribution. When the amount of customer contribution computed is less than would have been assessed under section 46-196, the applicant for service shall pay an amount equivalent to the assessment. This amount shall then be refunded pro rata to all contributors along the extension whose remaining contribution still exceeds what would have been assessed under section 46-196. 
(4)  When refunds have reduced the contribution of any contributor to the applicable assessment per front foot, no further refund will be made to that individual. After all refunds have been made, the remaining premises that may connect will be charged at the rate per front foot established for the extension. 
(5)  All refunds pertaining to connection charges collected by the city shall be paid to the applicant or his assigns or heirs, unless specifically provided otherwise in writing. 
(6)  When an extension beyond an existing extension is required to serve a new customer and the cost for a customer exceeds the average remaining contribution in the original extension, then the new extension will be considered as an entirely new project without refunds or any other connection to the original extension. 
(7)  When customers connect to a sanitary sewer main laid at city expense, there shall be a contribution of an amount equivalent to the applicable assessment determined in section 46-196. 
(8)  The development period during which refunds shall be made will be limited to 20 years. 
(Code 1993, § 13.13) 
Secs. 46-198-46-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-218. - Protection of sewer system. 
    The agency reserves the right to refuse or limit the amount or character of any or all industrial wastewaters from an industry or combination of industries as may be necessary to ensure adequate treatment and proper operation of the public sewer collection system. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(5)(b)) 
Sec. 46-219. - Applicability of state rules and regulations. 
    No statement contained in this subsection shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(5)(p)) 
Sec. 46-220. - Liability for damages. 
    If a discharge causes the city to incur additional expenses, the expenses shall be billed to the discharger. If a user discharges wastewaters that contain substances that cause blockage of the city's sewers, the discharger will be billed for the cost of restoring services and repairing damage to other property. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(5)(n)) 
Sec. 46-221. - Maintenance and special agreements. 
    A maintenance agreement may be required between the city and any discharger of the types of wastes enumerated in this division. No statement contained in this subsection shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the agency and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the agency for treatment subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided the agreement is not in conflict with the intent or rates established by this article or with Wisconsin Administrative Code requirements. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(5)(o)) 
Sec. 46-222. - Authority of director. 
(a)  Permission required. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the substances, materials, fluids or solids, specifically described in this division or that may harm sanitary sewers, sewage treatment processes and equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or constitute a nuisance, without the specific written permission of the director. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of wastes, the director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sanitary sewers, materials of construction of the sanitary sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. 
(b)  Discharge restrictions. If any sewage is discharged or proposed to be discharged to the public sewer collection system which contains the substances or possesses the characteristics enumerated in this division and, in the judgment of the director, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage treatment works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may in writing: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition prior to discharge to the sanitary sewers; 
(3)  Require flow equalization of the rate of discharge; or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by sewer charges under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Submission of plans and specifications. If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, plans and specifications shall be submitted to the city and, if applicable, the DNR for review and approval. 
(d)  Termination of permission. The director's permission, if given, is subject to termination at any time upon written notice. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(5)(d)-(f)) 
Sec. 46-223. - Specific substances. 
    The substances prohibited without the director's express permission as provided in this division include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive fluid or solid or wastes that may create a fire or explosion hazard in the publicly owned treatment works. 
(2)  Any fluids or solids containing toxic or poisonous elements in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other elements, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any fluids or solids having corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage treatment plant. 
(4)  Fluid or solid substances in quantities or of such size or nature as to cause obstruction to the flow in sanitary sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to, unground garbage, ashes, cinders, clay, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups or milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders, or any soluble substance that would create a viscosity of liquid greater than 1.1 in any portion of the treatment works. 
(5)  Any fluid having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit, 65 degrees Celsius. 
(6)  Any liquid containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 25 mg/l on a daily average basis or 100 mg/l on an instantaneous basis or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(7)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded or solid material or insoluble substance having any dimension greater than one-half inch. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horse power or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
(8)  Any fluid or solid containing chromium, copper, zinc, cyanide and similar objectionable or toxic substances which exceed the limits which are established for such materials. Unless more restrictive limits are established by a state or federal regulatory agency having jurisdiction, the following concentrations in milligrams per liter (mg/l) shall not be exceeded on a grab sample basis: 
Arsenic 0.50 Barium 4.00 Cadmium 0.01 Chromium 0.60 Copper 1.00 Cyanide 0.05 Lead 0.200 Mercury 0.002 Nickel 2.000 Selenium 0.004 Silver 0.100 Zinc 1.000  
Major contributing industries shall comply with the limits established in this section or with the pretreatment requirements for removal or reduction of incompatible pollutants required for discharges to publicly owned treatment works set forth for the applicable point source category or subcategory in Wis. Admin. Code, chs. NR 221 through NR 299, whichever is more stringent. 
(9)  Any fluid or solid containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the director as necessary or as are established by the state, federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. Unless other limits are established by a state or federal regulatory agency having jurisdiction, the concentration of phenol shall not exceed 0.005 mg/l on an instantaneous basis. 
(10)  Any waste containing more than 100 mg/l of antiseptic substances. 
(11)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any liquids or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or in excess of 9.0 on a daily average basis or lower than 5.0 or in excess of 10.0 on an instantaneous basis. 
(13)  Materials that exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, clays, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids detrimental to the treatment processes. 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions) or excessive odors. 
c.  Unusual chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in quantities in excess of that found in domestic sewage. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined. 
(14)  BOD 5 in excess of 5,000 mg/l on an instantaneous basis or 500 mg/l on an average daily (workday) basis. 
(15)  Total solids in excess of 20,000 mg/l on an instantaneous basis or 2,000 mg/l on an average daily (workday) basis. 
(16)  Suspended solids in excess of 10,000 mg/l on an instantaneous basis or 1,000 mg/l on an average daily (workday) basis. 
(17)  Fluids or solids containing substances which are not amenable to treatment by the sewage treatment processes employed or are untreatable to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(5)(d)) 
Sec. 46-224. - Separators and interceptors. 
    Grease and oil separators and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquids containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable fluid, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors and separators shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All separators and interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the DNR or DILHR and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory condition and effectively operated by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(5)(g), (h)) 
Sec. 46-225. - Sampling, testing, and reporting. 
(a)  Report due date. All significant industrial users shall report the characteristics of their discharges by February 1 of each year for the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  Sampling and flow measurement manhole. All significant industrial users shall install a single suitable sampling and flow measurement manhole in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § ILHR 82.04(4)(l). The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(c)  Special control manhole. All major contributing industries shall install a single special control manhole. The special control manhole shall consist of a manhole on the discharge line with a flow rate measuring device and a separate structure for housing recording instruments and an automatic proportional sampler. The sampler shall automatically (in proportion to volume) collect samples of the waste. The agency shall record volume and operate the automatic sampler on such occasions as deemed necessary to develop a basis for user charges at the owner's expense. The owner shall design, construct, operate and maintain the special control manhole at his expense. The location and access to the special control manhole shall be as provided for in Wis. Admin. Code § ILHR 82.04(4)(e). The special control manhole shall be approved by the department of natural resources and the agency prior to installation. Special control manholes may be required by the agency should the industrial wastewater contain a toxic or deleterious fluid or solid not reflected by volume, BOD 5 , suspended solids or ammonia nitrogen plus organic nitrogen, or phosphorus. 
(d)  Standards for testing and analyses. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of fluids and solids to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, by a certified or registered lab. The control manhole shall be considered to be the most representative location in the sewage flow system of the premises. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(5)(i)-(m)) 
Secs. 46-226-46-243. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HOLDING AND SEPTIC TANK WASTES 

Sec. 46-244. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person or licensed disposer using or permitting the use of the city's sewerage system or a public sewerage system for a use for which a permit may be issued under this division without first obtaining a permit, or continuing use after notice of revocation of a permit, shall forfeit to the city the sum of $1,000.00 for each violation. Such forfeiture shall be recoverable by the city in a civil action brought by the city council in the name of the city and paid into the general funds of the city for the benefit of the city. In addition, such person or licensed disposer shall pay to the city any damages, costs or expenses incurred by the city in connection with such unpermitted use. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(6)) 
Sec. 46-245. - Discharge into community sewers. 
    No person, including a licensed disposer, shall discharge any holding tank wastes, or any other liquid, gaseous or solid wastes directly into a manhole or other opening in a public sewer, except city-owned dumping stations. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(6)(a)) 
Sec. 46-246. - Discharge into city's treatment facilities. 
(a)  Holding or septic tank wastes; industrial waste. Discharge of holding tank or septic tank wastes may be allowed only at the city wastewater treatment plant in such manner and at such place as may be designated by the director. Industrial wastes, or any other liquid, gaseous or solid wastes not detrimental to the city's wastewater treatment plant, may be discharged at such plant in a manner designated by the director when, in his judgment, the waste is of such unusual character or strength that rapid discharge into the sewerage system would have detrimental effects on the wastewater facilities. 
(b)  Licensed disposers. Discharges of holding tank or septic tank wastes by a licensed disposer shall be allowed at the city's wastewater treatment plant only in such manner and at such place as may be designated by the director and subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(6)(b)) 
Sec. 46-247. - Limitations. 
(a)  Any holding tank waste or other wastes permitted to be discharged shall be of domestic origin, or contain compatible pollutants only. 
(b)  The person or licensed disposer making the discharge under this section shall comply with the provisions of any and all applicable rules and regulations; and shall comply with this article. 
(c)  Without intending to limit the application of other provisions of this article, such person or licensed disposer shall not deposit or drain any gasoline, oil, acid, alkali, grease, rags, volatile or flammable liquids, or other deleterious substances into any manhole or community sewer, or into the city's wastewater facility; nor shall such person or licensed disposer allow any grease, earth, sand or other solid materials to pass into any part of the sewerage system; nor shall such person or licensed disposer discharge any liquid, gaseous or solid wastes determined by the director to be detrimental to the sewerage system or to the city's employees or to the process of sewage treatment. 
(d)  No discharges shall be permitted directly into any of the city's interceptor sewers, unless the director so authorizes. 
(e)  If the city's sewerage system can accept some, but not all, of the holding/septic tank wastes offered for disposal, the director may accept such waste which is generated within the geographic boundaries of the city before accepting such wastes which are generated outside of the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(6)(c)) 
Sec. 46-248. - Permit required; application. 
    No discharge shall be made under this division unless the person or licensed disposer making the discharge has been issued a permit therefor. All applications for a permit shall be in writing; shall contain such information as the director deems appropriate; and shall be submitted to the director no later than September 1 of each year. No permit once issued shall be assignable or transferable by the person receiving the same. All such permits shall be valid for a period of one year, beginning on October 1, and expiring on September 30 of each year. No holder of any permit shall acquire any vested right or privilege by reason thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(6)(d)) 
Sec. 46-249. - Minimum permitting requirements. 
    If the director determines to issue a permit, such permit may be issued upon such terms and conditions as the director may provide; and any such permit shall provide at a minimum the following: 
(1)  The permit shall be conditioned upon the holder's faithful compliance with the provisions of the city's sewer use regulations. 
(2)  The agreement of the holder thereof to indemnify the city from and against any and all liability for injury or damage arising out of or related to the activities of the holder in exercising the rights granted. The director may require the holder of such permit to post a bond written by a bonding company licensed to transact business in the state, to guarantee performance of the holder thereunder. 
(3)  The agreement of the holder thereof to have in full force and effect sufficient worker's compensation insurance, public liability and property damage insurance, in such amounts as the director may reasonably require. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(6)(d)) 
Sec. 46-250. - Annual fee. 
    In the event the director issues a permit, the public works department may require the applicant to pay an annual fee in such reasonable amount as it may determine as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(6)(d)) 
Sec. 46-251. - Revocation. 
    Any permit issued hereunder shall be revocable by the city council or the director summarily for violation of the terms and conditions thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(6)(d)) 
Sec. 46-252. - Additional permit requirements for licensed disposers. 
(a)  Additional permit requirements. The permit issued to the licensed disposer hereunder shall also provide that: 
(1)  The city may accept holding tank or septic tank wastes at any time during the year during normal working hours; and reserves the right to reject and refuse acceptance under the circumstances set forth in this section. 
(2)  The city shall have the right to reject and refuse to accept holding tank wastes from the licensed disposer if: 
a.  Treatment of the waste would cause the city sewerage system to exceed its operating design capacity or to violate any applicable effluent limitations or standard water quality standards or any other legally applicable requirements, including court orders or state or federal statutes, rules, regulations or orders; 
b.  The waste is not compatible with the city's sewerage system; 
c.  The licensed disposer has not applied for and received a permit hereunder to dispose of the waste in the city's sewerage system or the licensed disposer fails to comply with the permit so issued; or 
d.  The licensed disposer fails to comply with waste disposal rules promulgated by the city from time to time or fails to pay the appropriate sewer service charges in a timely manner. 
(b)  Additional terms and conditions permissible. The director may impose reasonable terms and conditions for holding tank waste disposal into the wastewater treatment plant relating to the following: 
(1)  Specific quantities, locations, times and methods for discharge of such wastes into the city's sewerage system; 
(2)  Requirement to report the source and amount of such wastes placed in the city's sewerage system; and 
(3)  Requirements that the licensed disposer analyze representative samples of the waste placed in the city sewerage system in order to determine the characteristics of the waste and the compatibility of the waste with the city's sewerage system. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(6)(e)) 
Secs. 46-253-46-282. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LATERAL CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 46-283. - Permit required; fee. 
    No lateral connection shall be made to any main sewer, unless a permit is obtained from the plumbing inspector. The fee for such connection shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the council. Fees shall be determined on the basis of the average previous cost and estimated future costs. 
(Code 1993, § 13.14) 
Sec. 46-284. - Connection of annexed properties; charge. 
    The owners of any property annexed to the city lying adjacent to any sewer main installed prior to the annexation proceedings shall at the time of connection to the sewer main obtain a permit to connect to the sewer system from the plumbing inspector and pay the city treasurer the connection charge required by this division. The connection charge shall be equal to the assessment previously levied on each lot, part of lot or parcel of land fronting or abutting the sewer main and benefiting thereby and shall be due and payable at the time of the connection thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 13.15) 
Sec. 46-285. - Sewer pipe materials. 
    All sewer main and sewer lateral pipe used in the city sewer system and upon property of the city shall be equal to ASMD-30-34, SDR 35. 
(Code 1993, § 13.16) 
Sec. 46-286. - Floor drain closing. 
    All floor drains or low level openings to the sewer system shall be protected with backwater valves, plugs or other similar devices to prevent wastes from entering premises whenever there is an obstruction or an excessive flow in the sewer main. 
(Code 1993, § 13.17) 
Secs. 46-287-46-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - USER CHARGE SYSTEM 

Sec. 46-306. - Usage-based charges. 
    The city shall charge all users of the sanitary sewer collection system and wastewater treatment works based on the quantity and quality of their wastewater and the size of water meters serving the user. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(7)) 
Sec. 46-307. - Intent. 
    The user charge system is intended to result in the distribution of the cost of amortization of the city's capital cost, sinking fund costs for equipment replacement and the cost of operation and maintenance of treatment works to each user class in proportion to such class's contribution to the total loading by all users of the treatment works. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(7)(a)) 
Sec. 46-308. - Computation of costs. 
(a)  Separately computed. The costs of amortization of the city's capital cost and the cost of operation and maintenance shall be computed separately. 
(b)  Operation and maintenance costs. The costs of operation and maintenance upon which user charges shall be based are the costs of operation and maintenance of the previous year plus an amount to be equal to the estimated additional costs for the following year. The expected costs for the replacement of equipment during the life of the plant are used to compute the amount that must be deposited annually to have this money available at the time of replacement. 
(c)  Capital cost and bonds. Charges for recovery of the city's portion of capital cost expenditures and the retirement of bonds shall be computed using the formulas as established in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(7)(a), (b)) 
Sec. 46-309. - Computation of user charges. 
(a)  The volume, BOD 5 , suspended solids, ammonia, and phosphorus concentrations shall be used as the basis for each user's contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of costs to each. 
(b)  The characteristic of domestic wastewater from residential users will be utilized as the basis for computation of charges for nonresidential users. Nonresidential users shall pay, as a minimum, the same rate per volume as that paid by residential users. Industrial or commercial users with wastes with strengths above the level of domestic wastewater shall pay a surcharge or additional charge based upon the formula established in this article to cover the costs of treating such wastes. 
(c)  Each user which discharges any toxic pollutants that cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works as determined by the agency shall pay for such increased costs. 
(d)  The costs of operation and maintenance for all flow not directly attributable to users (e.g., infiltration and inflow) shall be distributed among all users on the basis of the flow volume of users, except where the infiltration/inflow is a measurable quantity attributable to a single user, such as that in the area of the Veteran's Administration Hospital complex. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(7)(c)-(e), (g)) 
Sec. 46-310. - Periodic review. 
    The agency shall review biannually or more often the wastewater contribution of users and user classes, the amortization of city capital costs for the coming year, the total cost of operation and maintenance of treatment facility portion of the treatment works and its system of user charges to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and user classes. 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of the treatment works. 
(3)  Apply excess revenues collected from the previous year to the cost of operation and maintenance of next year's revenues or to a reserve fund. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(7)(f)) 
Sec. 46-311. - Fixed charge basis. 
(a)  A fixed charge per billing period will be charged to each user on the basis of meter size. This charge will be independent of wastewater characteristics and will be assessed equally among users with the same meter size. In the event that a user has unmetered service, this charge will be assessed on the basis of flow equivalency to a typical residential user (five-eighths-inch meter) multiplied by 1.5. 
(b)  Fixed charges shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  Fixed charges are calculated to recover a portion of the costs of amortization of the city's capital costs. The city will determine a set charge per equivalent meter. The remaining costs to be paid by user charges will be distributed on a variable charge basis. The fixed charge rate will be subject to periodic review by the city. 
(2)  The fixed charge for a user with a five-eighths-inch or three-fourths-inch meter is the established fixed rate per equivalent meter. Users with larger than a five-eighths-inch or three-fourths-inch meter will be charged according to the number of equivalent meters that the user's meter represents. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(7)(h), (i)) 
Sec. 46-312. - Variable charge basis. 
    The variable charge portion of the user charge system covers the portion of the cost of amortization of the city's capital costs not distributed to fixed costs, cost for the equipment replacement sinking fund, and costs for the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment facility and collection system. Charges shall be based upon the following measurements: 
(1)  Residential users. Cubic feet of liquid discharged as established by city water meter readings, with credit being given for outside water usage not discharged to sewer only if an additional meter is purchased and installed by the customer prior to usage. 
(2)  Industrial, commercial and public users. Cubic feet of liquid discharged since the previous billing period as determined by city water meter readings or by meters approved pursuant to this article. 
(3)  The Veteran's Administration (VA) Hospital. The cubic feet of liquid discharged in the preceding measurement period as determined by representative recordings of the actual wastewater discharged at the VA Hospital. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(7)(j)) 
Sec. 46-313. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Private water supply. If any user wishes to utilize a private water supply, he shall obtain permission from the director and shall install at his own expense at the source of supply a water meter approved by the director. 
(b)  Commercial or industrial user separating waters. If any commercial or industrial user wishes to separate waters that are not discharged to the sanitary sewer system from those which are so discharged, he shall obtain permission from the director and shall install at his own expense a water meter approved by the director. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(7)(j)) 
Sec. 46-314. - Variable charge calculation. 
    The variable charge portion of the user charge system shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  The charges for the variable portion of the user charge system for the wastewater treatment works shall be computed according to the following formula: 
C = V u C u = V u (C t /V t ) 
Where: 
C = A user's charge for operation and maintenance costs for a billing period. 
C t = Total operation and maintenance costs and other costs distributed on a variable charge basis per year, reduced by the amount of any yearly surcharges computed under subsection (2) of this section. 
C u = Variable charge for one unit of volume. 
V u = Volume contribution from a user per billing period. 
V t = Total volume contribution from all users per year. 
(2)  Where the strength of the wastewater exceeds that of domestic wastewater, a surcharge shall be added as follows: 
C;sub§\sub; = 8.34V u [B c (B) + S c (S) + N c (N) + P c (P)] 
Where: 
C;sub§\sub; = A surcharge for wastewaters of excessive strength. 
B c = Variable charge cost for treatment of a pound of five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 ). 
B = Concentration of five-day biochemical oxygen demand from a user above that of domestic wastewater, expressed in mg/l. 
S c = Variable charge cost for treatment of a pound of suspended solids. 
S = Concentration of suspended solids from a user above that of domestic wastewater, expressed in mg/l. 
N c = Variable charge cost for treatment of a pound of ammonia nitrogen plus organic nitrogen. 
N = Concentration of ammonia nitrogen plus organic nitrogen from a user above that of domestic wastewater, expressed as mg/l. 
P c = Variable charge cost for treatment of a pound of phosphorus. 
P = Concentration of total phosphorus from a user above that of domestic wastewater, expressed in mg/l. 
V u = Volume contribution from a user per billing period, expressed in millions of gallons. 
(3)  If one or more concentrations are less than those in domestic wastewater, they shall be dropped from the calculation rather than being considered as credit. 
(4)  The method of calculation of variable user charges shall consist of the following distinct steps: 
a.  Distribution of total variable charge costs to establish a yearly unit treatment cost per gallon or per cubic foot, per pound of BOD 5 , per pound of suspended solids, per pound of ammonia nitrogen plus total nitrogen, and per pound of phosphorus. 
b.  Computation of surcharges for above normal strength domestic users based upon actual measurements according to the formula defined in this section. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(7)(k)) 
Sec. 46-315. - Charges for discharge to city's treatment system. 
    Charges for holding tank/septic tank and other wastes discharged to the city's treatment system at city-owned dumping stations or receiving stations will be calculated in a manner similar to the variable charges and surcharges described in this division. Charges will be calculated based on the amount of wastes discharged plus additional surcharges for concentrations of compatible pollutants above those set for domestic/normal strength wastewater. The city may calculate a fixed rate per volume for septic and holding tank wastes based on typical concentrations of compatible pollutants in these wastes. Any wastes received by the city containing incompatible pollutants (i.e., gas recovery system wastewater containing BTEX) may be subject to additional charges based on acceptable levels of these contaminants. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(7)(l)) 
Sec. 46-316. - Disposition of revenue. 
    The amounts received from the collection of sewer service charges shall be credited to the sanitary sewerage account that shall show all receipts and expenditures of the sewerage system. Charges collected for replacement expenses shall be credited to a segregated, nonlapsing replacement account. These funds are to be used exclusively for replacement. When appropriated by the city council, the credits to the sanitary sewerage account shall be available for the payment of the requirements for operation, maintenance, repairs, and depreciation of the sewerage system consistent with 40 CFR 35.929. Any surplus in the account outside the purview of 40 CFR 35.929 shall be available for payment of principal and interest of obligations issued and outstanding or which may be issued to provide funds for the expenses for additions and improvements and other necessary disbursements or indebtedness. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(8)(g)) 
Secs. 46-317-46-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - BILLING AND PAYMENT 

Sec. 46-336. - Computation; billing form. 
(a)  Sewer use charges that are to be assessed to users shall be computed and approved by the city council according to the rates and methodology presented in this article. 
(b)  Each customer's bill shall identify the rate and that portion of the user charges that are attributable to operation and maintenance of the treatment works and that portion dedicated to other costs of providing wastewater treatment services, such as the retirement of bonds. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(8)(a), (b)) 
Sec. 46-337. - Billing cycle; due date; late payment fees. 
    Billing intervals shall be established by the council, but not less frequently than quarterly. Bills are due and payable when rendered. Delinquent bills shall be charged a late payment penalty equal to the penalty rate set by the public service commission. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(8)(c)) 
Sec. 46-338. - Obligation for payment. 
    The obligation for payment of sewer service charges, application fees, connection fees or other charges due the city shall be a joint and several obligation of the user and property owner, where the user and property owner are not the same person. To the end that there may be attempts at avoidance of payment of such charges and fees by nonproperty-owner users, and to overcome the same, the city may send the bill for such a user in care of the property owner. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(8)(e)) 
Sec. 46-339. - Remedies for failure to make payment. 
(a)  Suit. Sewer service charges, application fees, connection fees or other charges due from any person or user shall be deemed to be a debt due to the city from that person or user. If sewer use charges, application fees, connection fees, or other charges are not paid when due, the city may commence an action in a court of competent jurisdiction and recover from such persons or users the amount of charges or fees, and damages, if any, sustained by the city as a result of such failure to pay, together with attorney's fees incurred in collecting the sums, court costs and such other costs and expenses as may be allowed by law. 
(b)  Lien on property. As an alternative to commencing an action in court for collection, the city council may direct that unpaid sewer service charges, application fees, connection fees, or other charges due from any person or user, shall be collected on tax rolls and shall be a lien upon the property, due before transfer of ownership, and not transferable to new owners. 
(c)  Remedies cumulative. All remedies provided for in this section are distinct and cumulative to any other right or remedy under any other provisions of the Code or afforded by law or equity and may be exercised by the city concurrently, independently, or successively. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(8)(d), (f)) 
Secs. 46-340-46-366. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - VIOLATIONS-PUBLIC NUISANCE 

Sec. 46-367. - Violations as public nuisance. 
    A violation of any provisions of this article, other than the failure to pay sewer service charges or other fees or costs due under this article, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(a)) 
Sec. 46-368. - Damage to city property. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure or equipment that is a part of the city's sewerage system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(b)) 
Sec. 46-369. - Liability to city. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, attorney's fees, costs, engineering fees, loss, or damage occasioned by reason of such violation that the city may suffer as a result thereof. Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, the city council shall have the right of recovery from all such persons any expense incurred by the city for the repair or replacement of any part of the public sewerage system damaged in any manner by any person by the performance of any work under its control, or by any negligent acts. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(l)) 
Sec. 46-370. - Enforcement. 
    The city council shall have the right to enforce the provisions of this article and shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under article to abate a public nuisance unless the director shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and shall have satisfied itself that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(c)) 
Sec. 46-371. - Summary abatement. 
    If the city council determines that a public nuisance exists within the city and that there is a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the city council may cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(d)) 
Sec. 46-372. - Abatement after notice. 
    If the city council determines that public nuisance exists on the private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to present great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the city council shall serve notice to the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within such ten days, the city council may cause the nuisances to be removed as provided in this division or elsewhere in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(e)) 
Sec. 46-373. - Remedy not exclusive. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the city or its officials in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(f)) 
Sec. 46-374. - Entry for abatement. 
    Except when necessary for summary abatement, the city shall not use force to obtain access to private property to abate a public nuisance, but shall request permission to enter upon private property if such premises are occupied, and, if such permission is denied, may apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of public nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(g)) 
Sec. 46-375. - Costs of abatement. 
    In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article for the erection, contrivance, creating, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the city shall be considered as a debt and shall be collected from the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, and such cost shall be assessed against the real estate of such person as a special charge. For purposes hereof, costs shall include but not be limited to reasonable attorney's fees and court costs incurred. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(h)) 
Sec. 46-376. - Continuing violations. 
    Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the notice time limit provided shall forfeit not less than $500.00 or more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day in which any violation is continued beyond the notice time limit shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(i)) 
Sec. 46-377. - Accidental discharge. 
    Any person found to be responsible for accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the public sewerage system which causes damage to the sewerage system or a receiving body of water (e.g., lake, river, stream, etc.) shall, in addition to the forfeitures provided for in this division, pay any fines, fees or damages as may be levied by other governmental authorities having appropriate jurisdiction. Any person responsible for an accidental discharge that may have a detrimental impact on the sewerage system shall immediately report the nature and amount of the discharge to the city. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(9)(j)) 
Secs. 46-378-46-397. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - APPEAL 

Sec. 46-398. - Review of administrative determinations. 
    Any person having a substantial interest which is adversely affected by an administrative determination of the director, the city engineer or the city council or any agent thereof, which determination relates to the subject matter of this article, may have such determination reviewed or provided for herein. Only administrative determinations described in Wis. Stats. § 68.02 are subject to review under this division. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, any determinations involving sewer service charges (or any component thereof), application fees, connection fees, or any other fees or costs due under this article are not subject to review hereunder. Further, any determinations involving the levying and assessment of special assessments or any of the determinations described in Wis. Stats. § 68.03 are not subject to review hereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(10)(a)) 
Sec. 46-399. - Request for review. 
    A person satisfying the requirements of this division shall first make a written request to the city council for a review of the administrative determination, which request shall be submitted to the city clerk within 15 days following the determination in question. The request shall be in writing, shall state the name and address of the person seeking the review, shall describe the circumstances surrounding the determination, and shall state the grounds upon which such person contends that the determination should be modified or reversed. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(10)(b)) 
Sec. 46-400. - Hearing. 
    Upon receipt of a request for review, the person seeking the review shall have a hearing before the city council; provided the provisions of this division are satisfied. The hearing shall be held at a time and place determined by the city council, within 45 days from the date of receipt of the request. The council shall notify such person, by mail or personal service, at least ten days before such hearing of the time and place of the hearing. Except as otherwise provided for herein, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 68.11(2). 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(10)(c)) 
Sec. 46-401. - Review fee. 
    Any written request for review shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable review fee in the amount established by the city council. In the event the person seeking review desires the hearing proceedings to be taken by stenographer or by a recording device, the expense thereof shall be paid by the person seeking the review. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(10)(d)) 
Sec. 46-402. - Decision; appeal. 
    Within 30 days of completion of the hearing under section 46-400 and the filing of briefs, if any, the city shall make its written determination on the request for review. Such determination shall be mailed or delivered to such person at the address set forth in the request for review. The decision of the city council may be subject to judicial review under Wis. Stats. § 68.13, in the manner provided for therein. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(10)(e)) 
Sec. 46-403. - Application of state law. 
    Except as to those specific statutes expressly incorporated herein, the city elects not to be governed by any other provision of Wis. Stats. ch. 68, as amended. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(10)(f)) 
Sec. 46-404. - Review and appeal costs. 
    In the event the city council does not modify or reverse the administrative determination in question following the hearing thereon, or in the event the administrative determination is sustained on appeal under Wis. Stats. § 68.13, then in either of such events, the person who has sought the review shall reimburse the city for all hearing and court costs incurred, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Code 1993, § 13.10(10)(g)) 
Secs. 46-405-46-421. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-422. - Purpose and intent. 
    Residents of the city depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of this article is to institute land use regulations and restrictions to protect the city's municipal water supply and well fields and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(2)) 
Sec. 46-423. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aquifer means a saturated, permeable geologic formation that contains and will yield significant quantities of water. 
    Existing facilities which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution means existing facilities which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution within the corporate limits of the city's well fields' recharge areas which include, but are not limited to, the state department of natural resources' draft list of Inventory of Sites or Facilities Which May Cause or Threaten to Cause Environmental Pollution;" the Wisconsin Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations (hereafter DILHR) list of Underground Storage Tanks (hereafter USTs); and the DILHR list of facilities with hazardous solid waste permits, all of which are incorporated herein as if fully set forth herein. 
    Groundwater protection overlay districts means areas in the city which contains recharge area, or zones of influence for the city's wells where contamination is of particular concern, which shall be more specifically defined as those areas contained in the map incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth. 
    Recharge area means an area in which water reaches the zone of saturation by surface infiltration and encompasses all areas or features that supply groundwater recharge to a well. This area extends beyond the corporate limits of the city. 
    Well field means a piece of land used primarily for the purpose of supplying a location for construction of wells to supply a municipal water system. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(3)) 
Sec. 46-424. - Authority; application. 
    These regulations are established pursuant to the authority granted by the state legislature in 1983, Wisconsin Act 410 (effective May 11, 1984), which specifically added groundwater protection to the statutory authorization for municipal planning and zoning in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The regulations specified in this section shall apply only within the city's corporate limits. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(2)) 
Sec. 46-425. - Penalties. 
(a)  In the event the individual or facility causes the release of any contaminants which endanger the groundwater protection overlay district, the activity causing the release shall immediately cease and desist and cleanup satisfactory to the city shall occur. 
(b)  The individual/facility causing the release of contaminants shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup and the city consultant fees at the invoice amount, plus administrative costs for oversight, review and documentation, including the following: 
(1)  The cost of city employees' time associated in any way with the cleanup based on the hourly rate paid to the employee multiplied by a factor determined by the city, representing the city's cost for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation and similar benefits. 
(2)  The cost of city equipment employed. 
(3)  The cost of mileage reimbursed to the city employees attributed to the cleanup. 
(c)  Following any such discharge, the city may require additional test monitoring, posting of bond, or other requirements. 
(d)  In addition, any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof for each violation, forfeit not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, plus the cost of the prosecution and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days or, in the alternative, shall have the cost added to their real estate property tax bill as a lien against the property. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(8)) 
Secs. 46-426-46-448. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAND USE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 46-449. - Use restricted. 
    No person shall construct or use any structure, land or water in violation of the provisions of this article. Any person who is specifically damaged by such violations may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this section. Violations of this division are punishable as set forth article. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(8)) 
Sec. 46-450. - Minimum separation distances. 
    The following minimum separation distances shall be maintained where such distances existed at the time of the creation of the groundwater overlay districts: 
(1)  Fifty feet between a well and a storm sewer main. 
(2)  Two hundred feet between a well and any sanitary sewer main, lift station or single-family residential fuel oil tank. A lesser separation distance may be allowed for sanitary sewer mains where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main materials and joints and pressure-tested in place to meet current AWWA 600 specifications. In no case may the separation distance between a well and a sanitary sewer main be less than 50 feet. 
(3)  Four hundred feet between a well and a septic tank receiving less than 8,000 gallons per day, a cemetery or a stormwater drainage pond. 
(4)  Six hundred feet between a well and any gasoline or fuel oil storage tank installation that has received written approval from the state department of industry, labor and human relations or its designated agent under Wis. Admin. Code ch. ILHR 10.10. 
(5)  One thousand feet between a well and land application of municipal, commercial or industrial waste; industrial, commercial or municipal wastewater lagoons or storage structures; manure stacks or storage structures; and septic tanks or soil adsorption units receiving 8,000 gallons per day or more. 
(6)  Twelve hundred feet between a well and any solid waste storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, one time disposal or small demolition facility; sanitary landfill; coal storage area; salt or de-icing material storage area; gasoline or fuel oil storage tanks that have not received written approval from the state department of industry, labor and human relations or its designated agent under Wis. Admin. Code ch. ILHR 10.10; bulk fuel storage facilities; and pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage facilities. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(4)) 
Sec. 46-451. - Groundwater protection overlay district zones. 
    Land uses within the groundwater overlay district shall be regulated according to the zones defined in this article. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are set forth on the map which is incorporated herein by reference. The map, together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this section as though fully set forth. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this section are set forth in the descriptions attached to the map incorporated herein. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(5)) 
Sec. 46-452. - Zone A restrictions. 
(a)  Zone identified. Zone A is identified as the primary source of water for the municipal well aquifer and as the area most likely to transmit groundwater contamination to the municipal wells. Zone A is more restrictive than zone B or zone C. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Following uses are the permitted uses within the groundwater protection zone A. Uses not listed are to be considered prohibited uses. 
(1)  Parks, provided there is no on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated with this use. 
(2)  Playgrounds. 
(3)  Wildlife areas. 
(4)  Nonmotorized trails, such as bike, skiing, nature and fitness trails. 
(5)  Residential property, municipally sewered and free of flammable and combustible liquid and USTs. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. The following are examples of uses which are prohibited and not eligible for permits under the city zoning code: 
(1)  USTs of any size. 
(2)  Pesticide or fertilizer storage, use or mixing. 
(3)  Septic or sewage sludge spreading. 
(4)  Animal waste facilities. 
(5)  Gas stations. 
(6)  Bus or truck terminals. 
(7)  Landfills or waste disposal facilities. 
(8)  Spray wastewater facilities. 
(9)  Junkyards or auto salvage yards. 
(10)  Commercial bulk fertilizer or pesticide facilities. 
(11)  Asphalt products manufacturing. 
(12)  Salt storage. 
(13)  Toxic and hazardous waste facilities. 
(14)  Recycling facilities. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(5)) 
Sec. 46-453. - Zone B restrictions. 
(a)  Zone B identified. Zone B is identified as a secondary source of water for the municipal wells because of the zone of influence caused by pumping and a greater time of travel. Zone B is less restrictive than zone A, but more restrictive than zone C. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Following are the permitted uses within the groundwater protection zone B. Uses not listed are to be considered prohibited uses: 
(1)  All uses listed as permitted uses in zone A. 
(2)  Modified agricultural activities, including any crop free of pesticides or synthetic fertilizers. 
(3)  Aboveground petroleum product storage tanks less than 660 gallons. All new or replaced tanks shall be installed in compliance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. ILHR 10. 
(4)  Residential and commercial sewered property with a state-approved sewer and septic system. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. All uses listed as prohibited uses in zone A are examples of uses which are prohibited in zone B and are eligible for permits from the public works and utilities commission. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(5)) 
Sec. 46-454. - Zone C restrictions. 
(a)  Zone C identified. Zone C is identified as the groundwater protection overlay district, excluding those areas within zone A and zone B. 
(b)  Permitted uses. All uses listed as permitted in zone A and zone B. Individuals or facilities may make a request to the public works and utilities commission to permit additional land uses in zone C. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(5)) 
Secs. 46-455-46-476. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXISTING LAND USES 

Sec. 46-477. - Approvals and certificate to be provided. 
    Facilities shall provide copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approvals or certificates and ongoing environmental monitoring results to the city and shall provide additional environmental or safety monitoring as deemed necessary by the city public works and utilities commission, specifically including the production of any and all environmental statements detailing the extent of chemical use and storage on the property. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(7)) 
Sec. 46-478. - Replacement or expansion of equipment. 
    Facilities shall replace equipment or expand in a manner that improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already in existence. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(7)) 
Sec. 46-479. - Contingency emergency plan. 
    Facilities shall have the responsibility of devising or filing with the city a contingency plan satisfactory to the public works and utilities commission for the immediate notification of the appropriate city officials in the event of an emergency. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(7)) 
Sec. 46-480. - Agricultural use exempted. 
    Property owners with an existing agricultural use shall be exempt from the requirements of this section as they relate to restrictions on agricultural uses; provided, however, that such exemption shall apply only to the property owners in existence at the time of passage of this section and this exemption shall not constitute a covenant running with the land. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(7)) 
Secs. 46-481-46-498. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROPOSED NEW LAND USES 

Sec. 46-499. - Review of application. 
    The city public works and utilities commission shall review all requests for approval of new proposed land uses and all determinations shall be made by the city public works and utilities commission within 60 days of any request for approval provided, however, that this 60-day period of limitation may be extended by the city public works and utilities commission for good cause as determined in the sole and absolute discretion of the city public works and utilities commission. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(6)) 
Sec. 46-500. - Factors considered in review. 
    Upon reviewing all requests for approval, the city public works and utilities commission shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The city's responsibility as a public water supplier to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
(2)  The degree to which the proposed land use practice, activity or facility may seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality in the city or the city recharge area. 
(3)  The economic hardship which may be faced by the landowner if the application is denied. 
(4)  The availability of alternative options to the applicant and the cost, effect and extent of availability of such alternative options. 
(5)  The proximity of the applicant's property to other potential sources of contamination. 
(6)  The then-existing condition of the city's groundwater, public water wells and well fields and the vulnerability to further contamination. 
(7)  The direction of flow of groundwater and other factors in the area of the applicant's property which may affect the speed of the groundwater flow, including topography, depth of soil, extent of aquifer, depth to water table and location of private wells. 
(8)  Any other hydrogeological data or information which is available from any public or private agency or organization. 
(9)  The potential benefit, both economic and social, from the approval of the applicant's request for a permit. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(6)) 
Sec. 46-501. - Exemptions. 
    Any exemptions granted will be made conditional and may include environmental or safety monitoring which indicates whether the facility may be emitting any releases or harmful contaminants to the surrounding environment. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(6)) 
Sec. 46-502. - Application costs. 
    The applicant shall be solely and exclusively responsible for any and all costs associated with the application, including the following: 
(1)  The cost of an environmental impact study if so required by the city or its designee. 
(2)  The cost of groundwater monitoring or groundwater wells if required by the city or its designee. 
(3)  The cost of an appraisal for the property or other property evaluation expense if required by the city or its designee. 
(4)  The cost of city employees' time associated in any way with the application based on the hourly rate paid to the employee multiplied by a factor determined by the city representing the city's costs for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation and other similar benefits. 
(5)  The cost of city equipment employed. 
(6)  The cost of mileage reimbursed to the city employees. 
(Code 1993, § 13.38(6)) 
Secs. 46-503-46-527. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PRIVATE WELLS 

Sec. 46-528. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to prevent unused and improperly constructed wells from serving as a passage for contaminated surface or near-surface waters or other materials to reach the usable groundwater. These wells shall be properly filled and sealed. 
(Code 1993, § 13.37(1)) 
Sec. 46-529. - Coverage required. 
    All private wells located on any premises which is served by the public water systems of the city shall be properly filled by January 1, 1989. Only those wells for which a well operation permit has been granted by the director may be excepted from this requirement, subject to conditions of maintenance and operation. 
(Code 1993, § 13.37(2)) 
Sec. 46-530. - Well operation permits. 
    A permit may be granted to a well owner to operate a well if the following requirements are met, except as otherwise provided herein: 
(1)  The well and pump installation meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812 and subsequent amendments, and a well constructor's report is on file with the DNR, or certification of the acceptability of the well has been granted by the private water supply section of the DNR. 
(2)  The well has a history of producing safe water. 
(3)  The proposed use of the well can be justified as being necessary in addition to water provided by the public water system. 
(4)  No physical connection shall exist between the piping of the public water system and the private well. 
(5)  A permit fee shall have been paid once every five years in an amount determined by annual resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 13.37(3)) 
Sec. 46-531. - Restricted areas. 
    To respond to USEPA and WDNR concerns, no permits for well operation will be granted within the following areas: 
(1)  On the city armory property and within the zone that extends 200 feet beyond the armory's property boundaries in all directions; and 
(2)  On the city fairgrounds property and within the zone that extends 400 feet northward beyond the north boundary of the fairgrounds property. Maps showing the property boundaries of these sites, which have been approved by the USEPA and WDNR, shall be maintained in the office of the department of public works. 
(Code 1993, § 13.37(3)) 
Sec. 46-532. - Method of filling. 
    Wells to be abandoned shall be filled according to the procedures outlined in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812, which is adopted by reference. The pump and piping shall be removed and the well checked for obstructions prior to plugging. Any obstruction or liner shall be removed. 
(Code 1993, § 13.37(4); Ord. No. 2012-07-05-D, § 4, 7-10-2012) 
Sec. 46-533. - Reports and inspections. 
    A well abandonment report shall be submitted by the owner to the department of natural resources on forms provided by that agency, available at the office of the director. The report shall be submitted immediately upon completion of the filling of the well. The filling shall be observed by a representative of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 13.37(5)) 
Chapter 48 - VEGETATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 48-1-48-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 48-19. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote responsibly maintained urban forest and green space throughout the community that has aesthetic quality and ecological benefits and to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of the people in the city by regulation of planting, maintenance, and removal of trees and other planted material. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(1), (2)) 
Sec. 48-20. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to manage the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs growing on public places in the city and to define the public nuisances and provide for their abatement in order to provide the following: 
(1)  An urban environment that is in ecological harmony with the surrounding natural and agricultural environments; 
(2)  An urban environment that brings the positive qualities of the natural environment into the city for the benefit of its residents; 
(3)  Protection of city watercourses from excessive runoff and erosion; 
(4)  Protection to the residents of the city from the adverse effects of air pollution, dust, noise, excessive heat and glare; 
(5)  Conservation of energy by minimizing the impact of winter extremes; 
(6)  Assurance that trees and shrubs planted in the public right-of-way or private property do not interfere with the orderly and safe passage of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(7)  Compensation to the city for the loss, damage or destruction of trees and shrubs and their beneficial aspects of city residents; 
(8)  Assurance that this part of the natural environment is maintained in such a way as to ensure its quality for future generations of city residents. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(2)) 
Sec. 48-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boulevard means the public area lying between the curb, or proposed curb, and the lot line. 
    City forester means the individual appointed by the city council to enforce the provisions of this article and his designees, and may also be referred to as the director of public works, unless the city council otherwise provides. 
    Public nuisance means any tree or shrub on public or private property which is specifically designated as a public nuisance in this article which by reason of its condition interferes with the use of any public place, is infected with an injurious plant disease, is infested with an injurious insect or pest, serves as a host to obnoxious or undesirable insects or other pests, has excessive fruit production, is malodorous, exhibits an aggressive reproductive nature, is detrimental to the construction of public improvements, or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of the public or its property. 
    Public place means all public parks, playgrounds, waterfront, buffer areas, beaches and other public leisure time areas. 
    Public trees and shrubs means any tree or shrub located in any public place, boulevard or public right-of-way. 
    Top or topping means a severe cutback of leaders and main scaffold branches to stubs within the tree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(3)) 
Sec. 48-22. - Administration. 
    The director of parks and recreation and director of public works, under the direction of the parks and recreation commission, shall superintend, regulate and encourage the planting, care and removal of all trees and shrubs on all boulevards and in any other public place in the city in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(4)) 
Sec. 48-23. - City forester. 
    The city has established the position of city forester. The city forester shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation of the city council, and shall receive such salary as may be authorized by the city council. Unless otherwise provided, the city forester shall be the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09) 
Sec. 48-24. - Planting and removal of trees. 
    No person shall plant any tree or shrub in any boulevard or other public place in the city without first having obtained a permit from the director of parks and recreation. The fee for issuance of permits shall be as established by the city council. Removal of trees shall not require a permit. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(4)) 
Sec. 48-25. - Maintenance of public trees. 
    All maintenance, pruning and removal of trees in boulevards or other public places in the city shall be the responsibility of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(5)) 
Sec. 48-26. - Tree height. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall prepare and maintain lists of tree species desirable for planting in boulevards according to their normal mature height: Large trees 40 feet; medium trees 25 feet to 40 feet; small trees 15 feet to 25 feet. Trees planted under any overhead utility wires shall not reach a maximum mature height of greater than 18 feet. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(5)) 
Sec. 48-27. - Undesirable trees. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall prepare and maintain a list of trees undesirable for planting in boulevards. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(5)) 
Sec. 48-28. - Planting size. 
    All large or medium trees, when planted, shall be at least eight feet high and have a minimum trunk diameter of 11/2 inches at a point six inches above the ground. All small trees, when planted, shall be at least five feet high and have five or more branches. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(5)) 
Sec. 48-29. - Boulevard plantings; tree location and spacing. 
    The planting of shrubs or evergreens shall not be permitted in boulevards. Trees shall be planted in the middle of the boulevards, in conformity with the following spacing specifications: 
(1)  Trees shall be planted at least 25 feet from street intersections. Small trees shall be planted at least five feet from driveways, and medium or large trees shall be planted at least 15 feet from driveways. 
(2)  Trees shall also be planted at least ten feet from curb box/water shutoffs and fireplugs. 
(3)  Trees shall be spaced a minimum of 30 feet apart. 
(4)  No tree shall be planted in a boulevard less than four feet in width. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(5)) 
Sec. 48-30. - Obstruction of sidewalks. 
    Trees that interfere with the construction of a full width sidewalk or with the maintenance of an existing sidewalk shall be removed at the time of the sidewalk construction or maintenance, or a design modification may be requested, if possible. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09) 
Sec. 48-31. - Removal standards. 
    In cutting down trees or shrubs, whether located in or upon any boulevard and other public place, the tree must be removed with the root stump grubbed out to the depth of at least nine inches below the grade measured in a straight line with the normal grade of the sidewalk to the top of the curb. All wood and debris must be removed from any public street prior to the end of each working day, and all holes shall be filled to normal grade level with topsoil as soon as practical. The city shall bear the responsibility to perform the tasks described in this provision. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09) 
Sec. 48-32. - Tree protection. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cause damage or destruction to public trees and shrubs by accident or intentionally, except as authorized by prior permission from the city forester. The acts prohibited by this section shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To attach any sign, poster, handbill, electrical installation, wire, or other device or material to, around, or through a public tree or shrub. 
(2)  To permit or cause fire to burn where it may kill or injure any public tree or shrub. 
(3)  To allow any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any public tree or shrub, or allow any toxic chemical, smoke, oil, gas, or other substance that may kill or damage any public trees and shrubs to come in contact with its leaves or roots. 
(4)  To use tree spurs or climbers when working in public trees, except when the tree is being removed. 
(5)  To remove any guard, stake, pole, or other device intended for the protection or stabilization of a public tree, or to close or obstruct any open space around the base of a public tree designed to permit access to air, water and fertilizer. 
(6)  To erect, alter, repair, raze or move any building, structure or other large object without placing suitable guards around public trees or shrubs that may be injured by such operations. 
(7)  To excavate any ditch, tunnel, hole, trench or place any driveway within a radius of ten feet from any public tree or shrub except by those persons under written permit from the city forester or when an emergency situation exists. 
(8)  To top any public tree. 
(9)  To prune oak trees on private or public property from April 15 to September 1, except by written permission from the city forester. If wounding of oak trees occurs during that time under any circumstances, a nontoxic tree wound dressing must be applied immediately. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(7)) 
Sec. 48-33. - Liability for costs and damages. 
(a)  Damage or destruction of trees generally. The cost of repair or replacement of the damaged or destroyed public trees and shrubs shall be borne by the party causing the damage or destruction as determined by the city forester. 
(b)  Construction operations. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the building, structure or other large object to repair or replace any public trees or shrubs injured or killed by building, alteration, renovation, or other such operations. If it is found that relocation of any tree is necessary to allow for such operations, the cost of the relocation shall be borne by the owner of the building, structure or other large object. 
(c)  Excavations. Any person making such an excavation will pay the cost of replacement of trees destroyed as the direct result of the excavation, as reasonably determined by the city forester. 
(d)  Exemptions; exceptions. Trees damaged by storms or other causes, or trees under utility lines or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the city forester. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(7)) 
Sec. 48-34. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall permit any public nuisances as defined in this article to occur on any property. The following have been declared public nuisances wherever they may be found within the city: 
(1)  Any elm tree or part thereof in accordance with subsection (5) of this section. 
(2)  Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected with oak wilt disease. Any dead oak tree or parts thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other oak material from which the bark has not been removed and burned, chipped, buried or otherwise treated to stop oak wilt. 
(3)  Any hedge, tree, shrub or growth which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crossing. 
(4)  All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than ten feet above the surface thereof or less than 14 feet above the surface of a public street. The city forester may waive this provision for newly planted trees if the city forester determines that they do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight or endanger public safety. 
(5)  Any tree or part thereof, whether alive or dead, which the city forester shall find to be infected, hazardous or a nuisance so as to endanger the public or other trees, plants or shrubs grown within the city, or to be injurious to sewers, sidewalks or other public improvements. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(8)) 
Sec. 48-35. - Procedure. 
    The procedure for the abatement of public nuisance under this article shall be provided chapter 18. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(8)) 
Sec. 48-36. - Exemptions; variances. 
    Any person seeking an exemption, variance, or exception to this article may apply to the parks and recreation commission on forms provided by the city clerk. Exemptions, exceptions, and variances shall be first reviewed by the parks and recreation commission. All exceptions to this article require approval by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(9)) 
Sec. 48-37. - Appeals. 
(a)  Time for appeal. Any person who receives a determination or order under this section from the city forester and objects to all or any part thereof shall have the right to appeal such determination or order, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 68.01-68.14, to the city council within seven days of receipt of the determination or order. 
(b)  Hearing. The city council shall hear such appeal within 30 days of receipt of written notice of the appeal. 
(c)  Determination. After such hearing the city council may reverse, affirm or modify the determination or order appealed from, and the grounds for its decision shall be stated in writing. 
(d)  Notice to appellant. The city council shall, by letter, notify the party appealing the determination or order of its decision within ten days after the hearing is concluded. The city council shall file its written decision with the city clerk. 
(Code 1993, § 8.09(9)) 
Secs. 48-38-48-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS 

Sec. 48-63. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  A variety of landscapes adds diversity and richness to the quality of life in the city. There are nonetheless reasonable expectations regarding the city's landscapes that, if not met, may decrease the value of nearby properties, degrade the natural environment, or threaten the public health and safety. This includes, but is not limited to, the growth or pollination of any noxious weeds or grasses that cause or produce hay fever in human beings, exhale unpleasant or noxious odors or conceal filthy deposits. It is therefore in the public interest, and within the purview of this legislation, to provide standards for the development and maintenance of the city's landscapes, whether corporate, private, or public. 
(b)  The city recognizes the landowners' interest in having managed turf grass landscapes. At the same time, the city encourages the preservation, restoration, and management of native plant communities and wildlife habitats with the city limits. The city recognizes that the use of wildflowers and other native plants in managed landscapes is economical, reduces maintenance, effectively conserves water, soil, and other elements of the natural community. Moreover, the preservation, restoration, and management of native plant communities and wildlife habitats may preclude the introduction of toxic pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and other pollutants into the environment. 
(c)  The city further acknowledges the need to enjoy and benefit from the variety, beauty, and practical values of natural landscapes, and seeks to guarantee citizens the freedom to employ varying degrees of natural landscaping as viable and desirable alternatives to other conventional modes of landscaping. 
(d)  The city seeks to encourage each landowner to create and sustain a condition of ecological stability on his land, that is, a state of good health and vigor, as opposed to one of impairment and decline. It is not the intent of this legislation to allow vegetated areas to be unmanaged or overgrown in ways that may adversely affect human health or safety, or pose a threat to agricultural activity. It is the express intent of this city that it shall be lawful to grow native plants, including, but not limited to ferns, grasses, forbs, aquatic plants, trees and shrubs in a landscape when these plants were obtained not in violation of local, state or federal laws. 
(Code 1993, § 11.12(1)) 
Sec. 48-64. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Destruction means the complete killing of plants, or effectually preventing such plants from maturing to the bloom or flower stage. 
    Landowner means one who owns or controls land within the city, including the city itself. 
    Preservation or restoration area means any lands managed to preserve or restore native state grasses and forbs, native trees, shrubs, wildflowers, and aquatic plants; an old-field succession of native and non-native plants; or, a combination of these. 
    Turf grass means grass commonly used in regularly cut lawns or play areas, such as, but not limited to, bluegrass, fescue, and ryegrass blends. 
    Weeds or noxious weeds or nuisance weeds means invasive or allergen-producing species of vegetation including, but not limited to: 
    Cirsium arvense (Canada Thistle) 
    Convolvulus arvensis (Field bindweed) 
    Euphorbia esula (Leafy spurge) 
    Lythrum salicaria (purple loosestrife) 
    Rosa multiflora (Multiflora rose) 
    Arctium spp. (Burdock) 
    Cirsium and Carduus spp. (Thistle) 
    Ambrosia spp. (Ragweed) 
    Alliaria petiolata (Garlic mustard) 
(Code 1993, § 11.12(2)) 
State Law reference- Noxious weeds, Wis. Stats. § 66.0407; nuisance weeds, Wis. Stats. § 23.235. 
Sec. 48-65. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  All parcels. All parcels of land in the city shall be covered with grass, mowed and maintained so that the height of the lawn, or other vegetation thereon, at no time exceeds eight inches. 
(b)  Ornamental plantings. Ornamental flowers, shrub plantings, and personal gardens, which are otherwise consistent with this section, are permitted but shall not interfere with required mowing. 
(Code 1993, § 11.12(3); Ord. No. 2014-07-08-D, § 1, 7-8-2014) 
Sec. 48-66. - Variances. 
    An individual owner of record or occupant seeking to create landscaping for which an exception to this article's maintenance restrictions is required, may seek a variance from the height provisions for vegetation not otherwise prohibited. The types of exceptions that may be considered by the public works and utilities commission are as follows: 
(1)  Native plantings. The use of native plant species for aesthetic and/or wildlife reasons. 
(2)  Wildlife plantings. The use of native and/or introduced plant species to attract and aid wildlife. 
(3)  Erosion control. To offset and control any soil loss problems both occurring or predicted. 
(4)  Soil fertility building. The enrichment and eventual stabilization of soil fertility through the use of various plant species. 
(5)  Governmental programs. Any federal, state or local programs that require the unimpaired growth of plants during the majority or all of the growing season. 
(6)  Educational programs. Any areas designated for educational studies. 
(7)  Cultivation. Any plant species or group of plant species native or introduced and grown for consumption, pleasure or business reasons. 
(8)  Biological control. The planting of a particular plant species or group of species which will effectively out-compete and replace a noxious or troublesome weed species without additional soil disturbance of the site. 
(9)  Parks and open space. Any and all public parks and open space lands under the jurisdiction of federal, state and local agencies, including private conservation/ preservation organizations. 
(10)  Wooded areas. All areas that are predominately woods. 
(11)  Other site plans. Any other site plans which the commission finds to be consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 11.12(4)) 
Sec. 48-67. - Variance application. 
    Any person may seek a variance from the requirements of this article by making application to the public works and utilities commission for permission to establish or maintain a native or natural planting pursuant to the guidelines set forth herein. The application must be accompanied by the following documentation: 
(1)  A site plan for the proposed or existing planting or an existing native natural area. 
(2)  A list of plants that are in or are to be in the site. 
(3)  A written proposal of maintenance or of visual screening of such plantings. 
(Code 1993, § 11.12(4)) 
Sec. 48-68. - Consideration of application. 
    The public works and utilities commission shall review the application for an exception. If the application is for one of the exceptions set forth in section 48-66, the public works and utilities commission shall consider the same. If the public works and utilities commission finds that the site plan, as submitted, will result in the property being in an overall neat and maintained condition, and the uncontrolled growth will be separated from the lawn area, and will not interfere with the required mowing of the lawn, the application shall be approved. 
(Code 1993, § 11.12(4)) 
Sec. 48-69. - Violations; abatement; costs. 
    Any and all violations of this article are declared to be nuisances. In the event of violation, the city shall serve a notice upon the landowner of any premises in violation of the various provisions of this article, including the demand that the nuisance created by said violation be abated within three days. Upon failure of the landowner to abate the nuisance, the city may proceed to abate same and the costs of abatement shall be charged and paid by such landowner. 
(Code 1993, § 11.12(5)) 
Sec. 48-70. - Statutory lien; weed removal. 
    In addition to the other remedies available to the city, the city shall, with reference to weeds, exercise all rights accorded to the city under the applicable state laws, including, but not limited to, the rights of the city to destroy the weeds, cut the weeds upon the owner's failure to do so, collect from the owner the cost thereof, and to file a lien upon the subject real estate for resulting costs. This provision is not intended to limit the rights of the city to abate any other nuisance created by the violation of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 11.12(6)) 
Chapter 50 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    License means and includes permission granted by the city to any person to operate or keep for hire a taxicab or limousine in the city. 
    Limousine means a chauffeur-driven motor vehicle designed to carry passengers for hire by reservation, but not including the carrying of passengers over fixed routes. 
    Operator means and includes any person owning or having control of the use of one or more taxicabs or limousines used for hire upon the streets of the city or engaged in the business of operating a taxicab or limousine. 
    Rate card means and includes a card on which is printed the traffic rates in the city as provided by this chapter. 
    Taxicab means and includes any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons for hire, whether the same be operated from a street stand or subject to calls from a garage or otherwise operated for hire, except vehicles subject to the provision of the transportation corporation law or used by undertakers in carrying on their business. 
    Taxicab stand means and includes any place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere that is exclusively reserved by taxicab operators for the use of taxicabs. 
    Taxicab/limousine driver means any person who drives a taxicab/limousine, whether such person is the owner of such taxicab/limousine or employed by a taxicab/limousine owner or operator. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(1)) 
Secs. 50-2-50-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES 

Sec. 50-21. - General requirements. 
    No person shall for hire or reward transport passengers within the city limits nor shall any person solicit passengers to be transported for hire or reward within the city without first having obtained a license as provided in this section. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(2)) 
Sec. 50-22. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Policy required. No person shall operate a vehicle for the conveyance of passengers for hire or permit the same to be operated nor shall any license be issued hereunder until the applicant for a license deposits with the city clerk a policy or certificate of liability insurance covering all vehicles used for hire for which a license is sought. 
(b)  Form of policy. The policy shall describe each insured vehicle by factory number, maker's numbers, number of passengers capable of being accommodated therein at one time and the number of the state license under which the vehicle is operated. The new state license number, when changed by the issuance of a new state license, shall be indicated upon the policy by the attachment of a rider. The policy shall contain a provision that the same may not be canceled before the expiration of its term, except upon 30 days' written notice to the city. 
(c)  Approved insurers. The insurance policy shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, indemnifying the applicant with the minimum coverage required by state law for bodily injury and property damage. 
(d)  Approval of city attorney required. The policy shall be approved by the city attorney as to legal form before it is filed with the clerk. 
(e)  Effect of termination of policy. The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy issued in compliance with this subsection shall automatically revoke and terminate all licenses issued for the vehicle covered by the insurance policy unless another policy complying with this section shall be provided and in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(f)  Continuing violation. Every day upon which any vehicle is operated for the conveyance of passengers for hire without an insurance policy as herein required being in effect and on file with the city clerk shall be deemed a separate violation and subject to the penalties of section 1-14. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(8)) 
Sec. 50-23. - Contents of application. 
    Application for a taxicab or limousine license shall be made in writing to the city clerk upon blanks furnished by the clerk. Applications shall, in addition to such other information as may be required by the clerk, include the following: 
(1)  The address from which the business is conducted. 
(2)  Applications by individuals shall be signed by the owner of the business. 
(3)  Applications by partnerships shall include the name of the company and the names and addresses of the partners. The application shall be signed by one of the officers of the corporation. 
(4)  The make, model and year of manufacture, the engine number and factory number, and state license number for the current year of each motor vehicle. The application shall state whether the vehicle is mortgaged, the name of the mortgagee and the amount of the mortgage. 
(5)  The name of the insurance carrier, name of the insured and the number, amount and duration of the policy for each vehicle. Proof of insurance, in a form acceptable to the clerk, shall be provided with the application. 
(6)  Whether the applicant has been previously licensed to operate a taxicab or limousine and, if so, where and whether the license to operate a taxicab or limousine has ever been revoked and, if so, for what cause. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(3)) 
Sec. 50-24. - Fees. 
    The license fee shall be in the amount established by the city council and shall be paid to the city treasurer. No license will be granted until the applicant shall present a city treasurer's receipt evidencing payment of the license fees. If the license is denied for any reason, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(4)) 
Sec. 50-25. - Pre-licensing inspection. 
    No annual license shall be issued for any vehicle until it has been inspected by the police department and examined and found by an authorized auto mechanic to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance and well painted. Such automobiles shall be kept in good mechanical condition thereafter as is required by law. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(7)) 
Sec. 50-26. - Determination of necessity or convenience; hearing. 
    The completed application shall be referred by the city clerk to the city council which shall set a date for hearing on the same not more than 20 days after filing of the applications, which hearing shall be open to the public. The city clerk shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing. At the time set by the council after the hearing, the council shall recommend whether the public convenience and necessity will be served by the application for license, and the council may hold such further meetings and take further evidence as it may deem necessary or advisable in making such determination. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(3)) 
Sec. 50-27. - Issuance; license plates. 
    On filing with the city clerk of such application, together with receipt of the city treasurer showing payment of the license fees, the policy of insurance, certificate of inspection from an authorized auto mechanic and approval by the council, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license for the operation of such vehicle and each license granted shall be given a number and shall give this number and an adequate description of the taxicab/limousine licensed thereunder, and such license shall be carried in the taxicab or limousine for which it has been issued. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(6)) 
Sec. 50-28. - Transferability. 
    No license shall be transferable either from the vehicle described in the original application to another vehicle or from the original licensee to another person without a permit from the city council previously granted upon application. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(5)) 
Sec. 50-29. - Registry of licenses. 
    The city clerk shall keep a register of the name of each person owning or operating any vehicle licensed under this section, together with the license number and description, make and the name and address of the insurance companies and the date of the expiration of such insurance, and shall furnish the chief of police with a copy thereof. The records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(9)) 
Sec. 50-30. - Renewal. 
    Licenses issued hereunder expire the following December 31 and may be renewed upon the payment of the fees and filing of policies of insurance as required by this section. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(10)) 
Sec. 50-31. - Suspension. 
    All licenses to operate taxicabs or limousines issued as provided by this section shall be suspended for a period of 60 days upon such person, his agents, servants or employees being convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this section and, for the period of 60 days, such person shall not operate, either directly or indirectly, any taxicab or limousine upon the streets of the city. The city clerk shall notify the owner of any such taxicab or limousine immediately of such suspension. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(12)) 
Sec. 50-32. - Revocation. 
    Licenses granted under this section may be suspended or revoked at any time by the city council for any violation of the provisions of this article. Licenses suspended or revoked because the vehicle is not of good appearance, clean and safe shall not be reissued until the vehicle shall be put in good condition for the use of the public to the satisfaction of the city council. When a taxicab or limousine license is revoked or canceled, the city clerk shall immediately notify the owner to cease at once to operate the vehicle for which the license as a taxicab/limousine has been revoked. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(11)) 
Sec. 50-33. - Temporary permits. 
(a)  Purpose. Temporary permits for taxicabs and limousines are intended to allow for the temporary replacement of disabled or out-of-service vehicles for which annual licenses have been issued. 
(b)  Duration. The duration of each taxicab temporary permit issued shall be for no more than 60 days. The duration of each limousine temporary permit issued shall be for no more than five days. The temporary permit holder shall notify the city clerk prior to the annually licensed vehicle returning to service. When the annually licensed vehicle returns to service, the temporary permit shall immediately expire. 
(c)  Application. Temporary permits for the operation of taxicabs or limousines may be applied for in writing upon forms provided by the city clerk. The information required on the application shall be as set forth in section 50-23. At the time of the application, the city clerk shall be notified of which licensed taxicab is being temporarily replaced. 
(d)  Inspection. No taxicab shall be issued a temporary permit unless it has been inspected within the last 14 days from the date of the application to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. No limousine shall be issued a temporary permit unless it has been inspected within the last year from the date of the application to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Insurance. The applicant for a temporary permit shall provide proof of insurance coverage in the amounts required by this article on the taxicab or limousine during the time which operation is proposed. 
(f)  Number. The number of temporary permits issued for taxicabs shall not exceed the total number of annual taxicab licenses in existence at the time of the application. The number of temporary permits issued for the operation of a limousine to any one applicant during a calendar year shall not exceed six. 
(g)  Fee. The fee for each temporary permit shall be as established by the city council. 
(h)  Notification of chief of police. The city clerk shall immediately notify the chief of police of the issuance of any temporary permits for taxicabs or limousines. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(18)) 
Sec. 50-34. - Vehicle markings. 
(a)  Taxicabs. Every taxicab used for the carrying of passengers for hire shall be conspicuously marked on the right and left sides with the name of the owner of the vehicle, together with the owner's number of such vehicle in letters and numbers no less than three inches in height, of a light color on a dark background or dark color on a light background. 
(b)  Limousines. Every limousine used for the carrying of passengers for hire shall be conspicuously marked on the right and left sides with the name of the limousine company. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(15)) 
Sec. 50-35. - Display of rate card. 
    Every vehicle licensed pursuant to this article shall have a card containing the name of the owner, license number and number of the vehicle and rates of fare printed thereon that shall be placed and kept in a conspicuous place at all times inside the vehicle. No vehicle shall be used for carrying passengers until these provisions have been complied with. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(15)) 
Sec. 50-36. - Rates; rate schedules. 
(a)  Established by licensee. The rates or fares to be charged for the conveyance of passengers shall be fixed by the operators concerning operating income and expenses. No person shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger a higher or lower rate of fare than that to which the taxicab or limousine is entitled. 
(b)  Filing of rate schedule. A current schedule of the rates being charged by each licensee, shall be filed with the city clerk by the owner or operator of every taxicab or limousine and flat rate vehicle operating within the city. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(16); Ord. No. 2008-08-09-D, § 1, 8-12-2008) 
Sec. 50-37. - Accident reports. 
    All accidents shall be reported to the proper jurisdiction per state statute. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(14)) 
Sec. 50-38. - Hours of operation. 
    All taxicabs shall be operated on a 24-hour basis. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(16)) 
Sec. 50-39. - Fraud in obtaining license. 
    No person shall give any fictitious information or practice any fraud, misrepresentation or subterfuge to secure any license provided for by this section. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(17)) 
Secs. 50-40-50-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXICAB DRIVERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-67. - Driver qualifications. 
    Each person driving a taxicab or limousine shall fulfill the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  Be of sound physique with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of the vehicle. 
(3)  Be able to speak, read and write the English language. 
(4)  Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or habit-forming drugs. 
(5)  Possess a valid state motor vehicle operator's license as required by law, and a driving history acceptable to the city. 
(Code 1993, § 12.06(13)) 
Secs. 50-68-50-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 50-93. - Required; application. 
(a)  No person shall operate a taxicab unless he shall possess a valid taxicab driver's license. 
(b)  Each applicant shall submit to the city clerk a statement of the applicant's full name, present residence, residence for the past three years, age, weight, height, race, color of eyes and hair, citizenship, place of last employment, motor vehicle operator's license number from this state, a statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor with details as to such convictions if any, and the name of the prospective employer. 
(c)  No license shall be granted to anyone under 18 years of age; to anyone who does not possess a valid motor vehicle operator's license from this state; or to anyone who has been convicted of a felony or of driving a vehicle upon the public highway under the influence of an intoxicant, narcotic or barbiturate or of reckless driving, unless two years have elapsed since such conviction. 
(d)  The fee for such taxicab driver's license shall be as provided in the fee schedule on file in the city clerk's office, and the annual license shall expire on December 31. 
(e)  At the time of filing the application with the city clerk, the applicant shall pay the fee established by the council. 
(f)  The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the taxicab where it can be seen by the passenger when the licensee is operating the taxicab. 
(g)  The city clerk shall maintain a record of each license issued to a driver and of all renewals, suspensions and revocations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-13-D, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-94. - Issuance and renewal. 
    All taxicab driver's licenses shall be issued and renewed by the city clerk. A complete list of licenses shall be made available for inspection upon request. 
Sec. 50-95. - Renewal application. 
    A taxicab driver's license may be renewed upon filing a renewal application and payment of the annual fee established by the council. 
Sec. 50-96. - Revocation. 
(a)  The common council shall revoke a taxicab driver's license if the licensee has made a material misrepresentation or misstatement in the application for the license or renewal or has, since granting of or renewal of a license: 
(1)  Been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  Been convicted of driving while under the influence of an intoxicant, narcotic or barbiturate or of reckless driving; the conviction being under the laws of any state or local ordinances in conformity therewith; 
(3)  Had his motor vehicle operator license or chauffeur's license issued by this state revoked or suspended. 
(b)  When for the preservation of the public safety and welfare, the common council shall revoke the license if it finds the licensee unfit to operate a taxicab. 
(c)  Written notice of revocation shall be given the licensee, and the licensee shall forthwith cease operating a taxicab. However, any licensee may, within ten days after receiving such written notice of such revocation, appeal to the common council for a hearing thereon, and the common council shall hold a hearing and thereafter affirm or reverse the revocation. 
Sec. 50-97. - Applicability. 
    This division shall not apply to drivers currently employed as cab drivers in the city until January 1, 2008, at which time all existing and future taxicab drivers shall maintain continuous compliance with the provisions hereof. 
Chapter 52 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-1. - Authority. 
    These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7). 
(Code 1993, § 17.01) 
Sec. 52-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of this community. 
(Code 1993, § 17.02) 
Sec. 52-3. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to regulate and control the use of all structures, lands and waters, lot coverage, population density and the size and location of all structures so as to lessen congestion and promote safety from fire, flooding and other dangers; provide adequate light, air, sanitation and drainage; prevent overcrowding; avoid undue population concentration; facilitate the adequate provision of public facilities and utilities; stabilize and protect property values; further the appropriate use of land and conservation of natural resources; preserve and promote the beauty of the community; and implement the community comprehensive plan components. It is further intended to provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and penalties for its violation. 
(Code 1993, § 17.03) 
Sec. 52-4. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to laws. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1993, § 17.04) 
Sec. 52-5. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by state statutes. 
(Code 1993, § 17.05) 
Sec. 52-6. - Jurisdiction. 
    The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands and water within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 17.10) 
Sec. 52-7. - Compliance. 
    No structure, land or water shall hereafter be used and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable local, county and state regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 17.11) 
Sec. 52-8. - Zoning/building permit. 
    Applications for a zoning/building permit shall be made in duplicate to the building inspector on forms furnished by the inspector and shall include the following, where applicable: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer and contractor. 
(2)  Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies. 
(3)  Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing the location, boundaries, dimensions, elevations, regulated air space, uses and size of the subject site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed easements, streets and other public ways; off-street parking, loading areas and driveways; existing highway access restrictions; existing and proposed street; and side and rear yards. In addition, the plat of survey shall show the location, elevation and use of any abutting lands and their structures within 40 feet of the subject site. The plat of survey shall be required for all proposed construction, with the exception of the R-1 and R-2 districts as defined in this chapter. The plat of survey shall be required in R-1 and R-2 districts only for construction of new principal buildings. 
(4)  Proposed sewage disposal plan if municipal sewerage service is not available. This plan shall be approved by the city engineer who shall certify in writing that satisfactory, adequate and safe sewage disposal is possible on the site as proposed by the plan, in accordance with applicable local, county and state health agency regulations. 
(5)  Proposed water supply plan if municipal water service is not available. This plan shall be approved by the city engineer who shall certify in writing that an adequate and safe supply of water will be provided. 
(6)  Additional information as may be required by the plan commission, city engineer and building, plumbing or health inspectors. 
(7)  Receipt from the treasurer in the amount of the current permit fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(8)  The permit shall be granted or denied in writing by the building inspector within ten days. The permit shall expire within six months, unless substantial work has commenced. Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Code 1993, § 17.12) 
Sec. 52-9. - Site restrictions. 
(a)  No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is held to be unsuitable for such use or structure by the plan commission by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, low percolation rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the community. The plan commission, in applying the provisions of this section shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence contesting such unsuitability if he so desires. Thereafter, the plan commission may affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability. 
(b)  All lots shall abut upon a public street and each lot shall have a minimum frontage and area as set forth in the schedule of regulations, section 52-40 with the exception of subsection (b)(1) as follows: 
(1)  The minimum lot frontage of any lot shall be measured along the minimum building setback line as required for that district. Lots located on cul-de-sac turn-arounds or curves in the road or lots of unusual shape may have lot widths of less than those required provided that the average of the front and rear lot line is equal to or greater than the required lot width. In no case however, shall the front lot line have a width of less than 75 percent of the required width. 
(c)  All principal structures shall be located on a lot and only one principal structure shall be located, erected or moved onto a lot. 
(d)  No permits shall be issued for a lot abutting a public street that is dedicated to only a portion of its proposed width, if the lot abuts the side of the public street for which dedication has not been secured. 
(e)  In any district where public sewerage service is not available, the width and area of all lots shall be sufficient to permit the use of an on-site sewage disposal system, designed in accordance with Comm 85. In any district where the public water service or public sewerage service is not available, the lot width and area shall be determined in accordance with Comm 85, but for one-family dwellings, shall not be no less than 100 feet and no less than 20,000 square feet respectively. 
(Code 1993, § 17.13; Ord. No. 2009-05-02-D, § 1, 52-9(b)) 
Sec. 52-10. - Use restrictions and performance standards. 
    The following restrictions and regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Principal uses. Only those principal uses specified for a district, their essential services and the following shall be permitted in that district. 
a.  Accessory uses and structures may be allowed where they comply with the following conditions and requirements: 
1.  Size of accessory structures in residential districts. Accessory structures in residential districts may not occupy more than 1,200 square feet or ten percent of the lot area, whichever is smaller. The measurement of accessory structure size shall include the total of all detached accessory buildings on the lot. 
2.  No detached accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height. 
3.  Accessory uses and structures are permitted in any district, but not until their principal structure is present or under construction. 
4.  All accessory structures which are attached to the principal building shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building. 
b.  Unclassified or unspecified uses. Unclassified or unspecified uses may be permitted by the plan commission after the commission has made a review and recommendation, provided that such uses are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district. 
c.  Temporary uses. Temporary uses, such as real estate sales field offices or shelters for equipment and materials being used in the construction of a permanent structure, may be permitted by the zoning inspector. 
(2)  Performance standards. Performance standards as listed in section 52-208 shall be complied with by all uses in all districts. 
(Code 1993, § 17.14; Ord. No. 2008-02-03-C, § 1, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 52-11. - Reduction or joint use. 
    No lot, yard, parking area, building area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as not to meet the provisions of this chapter. No part of any lot, yard, parking area or other space required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use. 
(Code 1993, § 17.15) 
Sec. 52-12. - Enforcement by building inspector; duties. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the building inspector, or any other code enforcement officer. The building inspector shall keep a record of all applications for zoning permits issued, with a notation of any conditions that may have been imposed by the board of appeals under the provisions of this Code. He shall file and safely keep copies of all plans submitted. He shall also keep a record of every identifiable complaint of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and of the action taken consequent to each such complaint. All such records and plans shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be available for the use of the city council and/or other official agencies of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 17.16;Ord. No. 2013-11-11-D, § 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 52-13. - Violations. 
    No person shall construct or use any structure, land or water in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. In case of any violation, the city council, the zoning inspector, the plan commission or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may institute appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 17.17) 
Sec. 52-14. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means a subordinate building or portion of the main building, the use of which is purely incidental to that of the main building. Accessory structures are permitted in any district, but not until their principal structure is present or under construction. Residential accessory buildings include one-stall, two-stall or three-stall automobile garages commonly found on a residential lot, garden tool storage buildings, summer shelters, arbor, private swimming pools and private emergency shelters. Accessory structures are subject to size and clearance standards described in section 52-10(2). 
    Accessory use means a use subordinate in nature, extent or purpose to the principal use of the building or lot. A subordinate use shall not begin until the principal use has begun or the structure in which to do it is under construction. 
    Advertising sign, outdoor means a structural poster, panel or a painted sign, either freestanding or attached to the outside of a building, for the purpose of conveying information, knowledge or ideas to the public unrelated to the premises upon which it is located. Signs advertising business or industry located on the same site shall be subject to the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
    Advertising structure, outdoor means any constructed or erected structure, either freestanding or attached to the outside of a building, for the purpose of conveying information, knowledge or ideas to the public about a subject either related or unrelated to the premises upon which located. 
    Alley means a special public right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and which is not more than 24 feet wide. 
    Animation. The use of movement or some element thereof, to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
    Apartment means a portion of a residential or commercial building used as a separate housing unit. 
    Apartment house means the same as Dwelling, multiple. 
    Arterial street means a public street or highway used or intended to be used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. 
    Awning means a movable device attached to a building, intended to provide shade or shelter and a device to permit ready removal or movement to a position on or close to the building. (See also Canopy or marquee. ) 
    Basement means as defined in the state building code. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals or lodging are regularly furnished by prearrangement for compensation for not more than six persons not members of a family. 
    Buffer yards means horizontal separations along lot lines that are intended to increase the physical separation between incompatible uses. The width of the required buffer yard shall be determined by the plan commission. The minimum width shall be ten feet. 
    Building means a structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery or materials. 
    Building, alterations of, means any change or rearrangement of the supporting members, such as bearing walls, beams, columns or girders, of a building, or an addition to or movement of a building from one location to another. 
    Building area means the total living or commercial area bounded by the exterior walls of a building at the floor levels, not including basements, unheated porches and breezeways. 
    Building, front line of, means a line parallel to the street intersecting the foremost point of the building, excluding uncovered steps. 
    Building, height of, means the vertical distance from the mean elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of a flat roof or to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. 
    Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which it is located. 
    Canopy or marquee means a permanent, roof-like device attached to or connected with a building, intended to provide shade or shelter. (See also Awnings. ) 
    Carpor t. See Garage, private. 
    Clinic means a building used by a group of doctors for the medical or dental examination or treatment of persons on an out-patient or nonboarding basis only. 
    Club means a building owned, leased or hired by a nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying dues, the use of which is restricted to members and their guests. 
    Conditional uses means uses of special nature, such as to make impractical their predetermination as a principal use in a district. 
    Conforming use means any lawful use of a building or lot which complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Court means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and which is bounded on at least two sides by the building. 
    Curb break means any interruption or break in the line of a street curb in order to connect a driveway to a street or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
    Curb level means the level of the established curb in the front of the building, measured at the center of such front. Where no curb has been established, the city engineer shall authorize and approve the establishment of such curb or its equivalent for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Dwelling, group means a group of two or more multifamily dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership, with any two or more dwellings having a yard or court in common. 
    Dwelling, multiple, (multifamily dwelling) means a building or portion thereof used or designated as a residence for three or more families as separate housekeeping units, including apartments, apartment hotels, group houses, adult foster homes and boardinghouses. 
    Dwelling, one-family means a detached building designed, arranged or used for and exclusively by one-family. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a building designed, arranged or used for and occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof used exclusively for human habitation, including single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings, but not including hotels, motels or lodginghouses. 
    Electronic message center. An on-premises sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. 
    Emergency shelter means a public or private enclosure designed to protect people from aerial, radiological, biological or chemical warfare; fire; flood; windstorm; riots or invasions. 
    Family means any number of persons related by blood, adoption or marriage or not to exceed four persons not so related living together in one dwelling as a single housekeeping entity. 
    Farm means land consisting of two acres or more on which produce, crops, livestock or flowers are grown primarily for off-premises consumption or use. 
    Flashing. A pattern of changing light illumination where the sign illumination alternates suddenly between fully illuminated and fully non-illuminated for the purpose of drawing attention to the sign. 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a dwelling unit, exclusive of porches, balconies, garages, basements and cellars, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls or partitions separating dwelling units. For uses other than residential, the floor area shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls or partitions separating such uses and shall include all floors, lofts, balconies, mezzanines, cellars, basements and similar areas devoted to such uses. 
    Frame effect. A visual effect on an electronic message center applied to a single frame to transition from one message to the next. 
    Frontage means all of the property abutting on one side of a street between two intersecting streets measured along the street line. 
    Garage, private means an accessory building or portion of the principal building used for vehicular storage only and having a capacity of not more than six automobiles or not more than three automobiles per family, housed in the building to which such garage is accessory, whichever is the greater, and in which space may be used for not more than three vehicles of others not occupants of the building to which such garage is accessory. The term also includes carport and, when related to the context, shall relate to the storage of one or more vehicles. 
    Garage, public means a building, other than a private or storage garage, used for the care, repair or storage of self-propelled vehicles or where such vehicles are left for enumeration, hire or sale. This includes premises commonly known as gasoline stations or service stations. 
    Garage, storage means a building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used exclusively for parking or temporary storage of self-propelled vehicles. 
    Gasoline station means any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel and oil and other lubrication substances, and sale of motor vehicle accessories and which may include facilities used or designed to be used for polishing, greasing, washing, spraying, dry cleaning or otherwise cleaning or servicing such vehicles. 
    Group houses means a group of detached or semi-detached dwellings, as defined in the state building code. 
    Home occupation means a business, occupation or trade that is conducted by a fulltime occupant of a dwelling unit as an accessory use to the principle use of such dwelling unit for dwelling purpose and where the public comes to purchase or sell items or deliveries are made by private companies and the address is used for advertising the business. 
    Hotel means a building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals and in which there are more than six sleeping rooms, usually occupied singly, and no provisions made for cooking in the individual apartments. 
    Household occupation means any occupation for gain or support which is customarily incidental to the principal use of the premises and for which no stock in trade is kept or sold, except that made on the premises or except that which is incidental to the use of which the conditional use is granted. 
    Junkyard means an open space where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber, tires and bottles. The term "junkyard" also includes an auto wrecking yard, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
    Loading areas means a completely off-street space or berth on the same lot for the loading or unloading of freight carriers having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley. 
    Lot means a parcel of land having frontage on a public street, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area and other open space provisions of this chapter. 
    Lot lines and area means the peripheral boundaries of a parcel of land and the total area lying within such boundaries. 
    Lot, reversed corner means a corner lot, the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
    Lot, through means a lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
    Lot width means the width of a parcel of land measured at the front building setback line. 
    Lot, zoning means a single tract of land located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. 
    Manufactured dwelling means a structure or component thereof which is intended for use as a dwelling and: 
(1)  Is of closed construction and fabricated or assembled on site or off site in manufacturing facilities for installation, connection or assembly and installation at the building site; or 
(2)  Is a building of open construction that is made or assembled in manufacturing facilities away from the building site and for which certification is sought by the manufacturer. 
The term "manufactured dwelling" does not include a building of open construction which is not subject to subsection (1) of this definition. A single-width or double-width manufactured (mobile) home is not considered a manufactured dwelling and is not subject to the Uniform Dwelling Code. (Definition pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § Comm 20.07.) 
    Manufactured home is a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. This term includes all structures that meet the above requirements, except the size requirements, and for which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification pursuant to 24 CFR 3282.13 and complies with the standards set forth in 24 CFR 3280. (Definition pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § Comm 27.30(3).) 
    Mobile home means a manufactured unit which is or was as originally constructed designed to be transported by a motor vehicle upon a public highway on its own wheels, and is designed, equipped and used primarily for permanent, longterm sleeping, eating and living quarters or is intended to be so used, and includes all additions, attachments, annexes, foundations and appurtenances, and arrives at the site complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations or connection to external water and sewer services. This definition is not intended to include those vehicles less than eight feet by 35 feet intended primarily for nonpermanent, recreational use as camper trailers or pickup campers. 
    Motel means a series of attached, semi-attached or detached sleeping units for the accommodation of transient guests. 
    Motor freight terminal means a building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled or stored or both for routing in intrastate and interstate shipment by motor truck. 
    Motor homes, camper trailers, pickup campers, recreational vehicles means and includes the following: 
(1)  A vehicular, portable unit built on a chassis, designed as a temporary living unit for travel, recreation and vacation, having a body width not exceeding eight feet and body length not exceeding 35 feet. 
(2)  A living unit designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation. 
(3)  A portable, temporary living unit to be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
(4)  A canvas folding unit mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation use. 
    Motor vehicle means any passenger vehicle, truck, truck trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power. 
    Nit means the term used to describe a metric unit of luminance. It is defined as candela per square meter (cd/m2). The unit is based on the candela, the modern metric unit of luminous intensity; and the square meter. 
    Nonconforming building or structure means any building or structure which: 
(1)  Does not comply with all of the regulations of this chapter or of any amendment governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or 
(2)  Is designed or intended for a nonconforming use. 
    Nonconforming use means any use of land, buildings or structures which does not comply with all of the regulations of this chapter or of any amendment governing use for the zoning district in which such use is located. 
    Nursery means any building, lot or portion thereof used for the cultivation or growing of plants and including all accessory buildings. 
    Nursery school means any building used routinely for the daytime care and education of preschool-age children and including all accessory buildings and play areas, other than the child's own home or the homes of relatives or guardians. 
    Parking area, semi-public means an open area, other than a street, alley or place, used for temporary parking of more than four self-propelled vehicles and available for public use, whether free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients or customers. 
    Parking space means an off-street space available for the parking of a motor vehicle and which in this chapter is held to be an area nine feet wide and 20 feet long, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto. 
    Place means an open, unoccupied space other than a street or alley, permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Planned development means a tract of land which contains or will contain two or more principal buildings developed under single ownership or control, the development of which is unique and of a substantially different character than that of the surrounding areas. 
    Planned unit development means a tract of land developed under single ownership or unified control, which includes one or more principal buildings or uses and is processed under the planned unit development provisions of this zoning code. 
    Professional home office means residences of doctors of medicine, practitioners, dentists, clergymen, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers, registered land surveyors, lawyers, artists, teachers, authors, musicians or other recognized professionals used to conduct their professions where the office does not exceed one-half of the area on only one floor of the residence and only one nonresident person is employed. 
    Property lines means the lines bounding a zoning lot. 
    Property survey. Property lines that have been determined and defined by a Wisconsin professional land surveyor, marked on the ground by monuments at the property corners and delineated on a signed and sealed map using minimum standards as defined by AE-7 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
    Public way means any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public thoroughfare. 
    Railroad right-of-way means a strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops or car yards. 
    Residential work quarters means one or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling which are used exclusively as living quarters for business owners actually engaged in the principal uses of a commercial property. Such users are clearly subordinate to the principle use of the property and may contain a kitchen, dining area, bathroom, living area, sleeping area, and laundry facilities. 
    School, commercial means a school limited to special instruction, such as business, art, music, trades, handcrafts, dancing or riding. 
    School, private means an elementary or intermediate school, other than a parochial school, giving regular instruction capable of meeting the requirement of state compulsory education laws and approved as such and operating at least five days a week for a normal school year, supported by other than public funds, but not including: 
(1)  A school for the mentally handicapped. 
(2)  A college or other institution of higher learning. 
    Screens means barriers located in a limited space (ten feet or less) intended to perform a buffering effect, particularly for noise reduction or visual screening. Screens may consist of existing or planted vegetation, fences, walls, earth berms or similar techniques. Plant screens shall be sufficient to provide a yearround screen within three years of installation. Walls or earth berms shall be required where noise reduction is necessary. Screen plantings shall be permanently maintained by the owner of the property upon which the screen is located, and any plant materials which die shall be replaced within six months of the date of death. 
    Signs means any words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names or trademarks by which anything is made known and which are used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business, commodity or product and which is visible from any public street or highway. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, the space between such floor and ceiling above it. 
    Story, half means a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of such story. 
    Street means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or that it be attached to something having a location on the ground. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained and shall include any manner of standards of this chapter. 
    Use, conditional means a use, either public or private, which because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in any particular district or districts. After due consideration in each case of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular location, such conditional use may or may not be granted. 
    Use, permitted means a use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations and performance standards, if any, of such districts. 
    Use, principal means the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. A principal use may be permitted or conditional. 
    Vending machine means a retail business device, electrically or manually operated, used by the general public to obtain dairy products, foodstuffs or other merchandise without entering a public shop, store, market or other such building. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for vegetation as permitted. The front and rear yards extend the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, corner side means a side yard which adjoins a public street. 
    Yard, front means a yard extending along the full length of the front lot line between the side lot lines. 
    Yard, interior side means a side yard which is located immediately adjacent to another zoning lot or to an alley separating such yard from another zoning lot. 
    Yard, rear means a yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines. 
    Yard, side means a yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard. 
    Yard, transitional means that yard which must be provided on a zoning lot in a business district which adjoins a zoning lot in a residence district or that yard which must be provided on a zoning lot in an industrial district which adjoins a zoning lot in either a residence or business district. 
    Zoning district means an area or areas within the corporate limits for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot and bulk of buildings and premises are uniform. 
(Code 1993, § 17.19; Ord. No. 2007-09-08-C, § 1, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 2014-09-10-D, § 1, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 2014-11-11-D, § 1, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 2017-12-17-D, § 1, 12-12-2017) 
Secs. 52-15-52-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 52-32. - Establishment. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
R-1 Single-family residential district 
R-2 One- and two-family residential district 
R-3 Multifamily residential district 
R-4 Manufactured home residential district 
R-5 Mobile home district 
R-6 Zero lot line district 
B Business district 
B-1 Office business district 
B-2 Highway district 
M-1 Limited industrial district 
M-2 General industrial district 
M-3 Highway industrial district 
A-1 Agricultural district 
C-1 Conservancy district 
I Institutional district 
(1)  Boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map, City of Tomah," initial date July 1979, which accompanies and is a part of this chapter. Such boundaries shall be construed to follow corporate limits; U.S. Public Land Survey lines; lot or property lines; centerlines of streets, highways, alleys, easements and railroad rights-of-way; or such lines extended, unless otherwise noted on the zoning map. 
(2)  Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which the vacated land reverts. 
(3)  Annexations to or consolidations with the city subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be placed in the A-1 agricultural district, unless the annexation provisions temporarily place the land in another district. Within one year the plan commission shall evaluate and recommend a permanent district classification to the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 17.20) 
Sec. 52-33. - Zoning map. 
(a)  Adopted. A certified copy of the zoning map shall be adopted and approved with the text as a part of this chapter and shall bear upon its face the attestation of the mayor and city clerk and shall be available for review by the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Map amendments. The official zoning map of the city shall be amended by resolution adopted by the common council after a public hearing pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6)(c). 
(Code 1993, § 17.21) 
Sec. 52-34. - Residential districts. 
(a)  R-1 single-family residential district. 
(1)  Established. The R-1 district is established to delineate areas now developed with one-family detached dwellings and to delineate adjoining areas presently undeveloped or in agricultural usage likely to be developed for single-family use. 
(2)  Principal use. One-family dwellings except manufactured homes. Manufactured homes are permitted in the R-4 and R-5 districts only. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Home or office occupation, government and cultural, utilities, transportation uses and multifamily dwellings, agricultural use pursuant to section 52-82(8). 
(4)  Lot, building, yards. See schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(b)  R-2 one- and two-family residential district. 
(1)  Established. The R-2 district is established to delineate certain areas of land, both developed and undeveloped, with peculiar characteristics, such as presently existing one- and two-unit dwellings, proximity to commercial development or proximity to major streets and because of a probable continued demand for such dwelling accommodations which are well-designed, pleasant places in which to live. 
(2)  Principal uses. One- and two-family dwellings and all uses permitted in the R-1 district. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Public and quasi-public uses, planned residential developments, noncommercial meeting halls, nursing homes, home occupations, professional home offices, recreational uses and multifamily dwellings. 
(4)  Lots, buildings, yards. See schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(c)  R-3 multifamily residential district. 
(1)  Established. The R-3 district is established to delineate certain areas of land, both developed and undeveloped, with peculiar characteristics, such as existing high-density dwelling units, proximity to commercial developments or proximity to major streets and because of a probable continued demand for such dwelling accommodations which are well-designed, pleasant places to live. 
(2)  Principal uses. Multifamily dwellings and all uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 districts. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Public and quasi-public uses, planned residential development, noncommercial meeting halls, nursing homes, home occupations, recreational uses and multifamily dwellings. 
(4)  Lots, buildings, yards. See schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(d)  R-4 manufactured home residential district. 
(1)  Established. The R-4 district is established to delineate certain areas of land presently undeveloped for manufactured homes for single-family occupancy. 
(2)  Principal use. One-family dwellings. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Government and cultural utilities and transportation uses. 
(4)  Standards of district. The following standards shall be required of every district for manufactured homes. 
a.  All lots, buildings, accessory buildings and yards shall comply with all requirements of the R-1 district. 
b.  An R-4 district shall not be less than ten acres in area, including streets, parks, playgrounds and any other land dedicated to public use. 
c.  All units shall be installed on a raised concrete or masonry foundation no less than one foot above ground level. All excavation footings and foundations shall meet standards established by the department of industry, labor and human relations for one-family dwellings. Each unit shall be permanently anchored to the foundation. 
d.  All plans and specifications shall be filed and approved by the building inspector. 
e.  All roads and streets within the district shall be a minimum width of 60 feet and paved. Layout and construction of the roads and streets shall be approved by the director of public works. 
f.  The outer boundaries of an R-4 district shall contain a landscaped buffer zone. This buffer zone shall consist of a greenbelt strip not less than 15 feet in width located along all development boundaries. The buffer zone shall be composed of coniferous trees and shrubs. 
g.  The hitch, axle and wheel of the manufactured home shall be removed. 
h.  The foundation and dwelling shall be built to meet the floodplain requirements. 
(e)  R-5 mobile home park district. 
(1)  Definitions. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0435 and the definitions therein are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Campground means the same as Trailer camp. 
    Trailer camp means any park, court, camp, site, plot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for more than two trailers and shall include all buildings or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof, whether or not a charge is made for the use of the trailer camp and its facilities. The term "trailer camp" shall not include automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sale. 
(2)  License required. No person shall operate or maintain or offer for public use within the city any mobile home park or campground without first applying for and receiving from the city council a license to do so or without complying with the regulations contained herein. 
(3)  Application. Every applicant for a license to maintain a mobile home park or campground shall file with the council a written application stating the name and address of the applicant, location of the park or campground, name of the owner, proprietor or manager of the campground and the dimensions of the campground. The application shall also state the actual or proposed sanitary facilities, maximum number of trailers that the park or campground will accommodate and such additional information as the council shall require. The applicant shall also file with his application a plat of the park or campground showing the location and proposed arrangement of trailers to be placed thereon and showing the location of streets, the location of toilets, showers or baths and all other sanitary facilities. 
(4)  Fees. 
a.  There is hereby imposed on each occupied, nonexempt mobile home located in the city a monthly parking fee as determined in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. Such fees shall be paid to the city treasurer on or before the tenth day of the month following the month for which such fees are due. 
b.  No person shall establish or operate upon property owned or controlled by him within the city a mobile home park without having first secured a license therefor from the city clerk. Such parks shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code ch. HSS 177, which is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein. 
c.  Licensees of mobile home parks and owners of land on which are parked any occupied, nonexempt mobile homes shall furnish information on such homes added to their park or land within five days after arrival of such home to the city clerk, on forms furnished by the city clerk in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 
d.  Occupants or owners of nonexempt mobile homes parked within the city limits shall remit such fees directly to the city treasurer as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0435, as amended. 
e.  Fees for licenses for campgrounds, camping resorts and recreational and educational camps shall be assessed by the city pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 140.05(17). Such facilities shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code chs. HSS 177 and 178, which are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein. 
(5)  Health officer to inspect premises. Before any license shall be granted, the health officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the premises for which a license has been applied for in order to determine whether the requirements of this section have or will be met by the applicant and no such license shall be granted until such inspection has been made. No license shall be granted for any land within the fire limits of the city. Annual inspections shall be made prior to the issuance of each license along with follow-up inspections to enforce corrections. 
(6)  Trailer camp standards. The following shall be required of every campground: 
a.  Every campground shall be located on a well-drained area which shall be sufficient in size to accommodate the number of trailers specified as the maximum number in the application. The owner or operator of the campground shall not offer to accommodate more trailers than the number of capacity of the camp. 
b.  An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be available. There shall be provided in every campground adequate toilets connected with the city sewers for each sex. The minimum requirements shall be one toilet for each sex for every ten trailers, with urinals for males and one shower for each sex for every ten trailers. 
c.  Every campground shall be provided with a sufficient number of metal receptacles with close fitting metal covers for garbage and also suitable receptacles for other refuse. These receptacles shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
d.  Every campground shall be provided with means of lighting the same at night and all toilets and bath units shall be provided with sufficient lighting facilities so as to be safe and available for use at all times. 
e.  Every campground shall be equipped with at least one slop sink properly connected with the city sewer system. 
f.  Every campground shall be located so as to appear attractive, and the city may at any time require that any camp be screened by hedges or in some other suitable manner. 
(7)  Camp maintenance. Every person owning or operating a campground shall maintain all toilets, baths or other permanent equipment in a state of good repair. The health officer shall enforce all the provisions of this section and for the purpose of securing enforcement thereof, the health officer, any member of the council or any other authorized representative of the city shall have the right and is hereby empowered to enter upon the premises of any campground now operating or which may be hereafter operated within the city to inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith. 
(8)  Revocation of license. Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the city council as provided in this subsection. 
a.  A notice shall be served on the person holding the license, specifying where he has failed to comply with this subsection and requiring him to appear before the council or a committee thereof at a day and hour therein specified, not less than ten days after the personal service of notice on such license holder, requiring him to show cause at such time and place why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
b.  At the time and place mentioned in the notice, the person holding the license shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel to introduce such evidence as he may desire, and the health officer shall confront the licensee with any charges that the city may have against him. After such hearing, the city council may, at its discretion, revoke or suspend the license. 
(9)  Register. Each owner or operator of a trailer camp shall keep a register of all guests, to be open at all times to inspection by city authorities, which shall show for all guests: 
a.  Name and address. 
b.  State of legal residence. 
c.  Dates of entrance and departure. 
d.  License number. 
e.  Purpose of stay in camp. 
f.  Place of employment. 
(f)  R-6 zero lot line district. 
(1)  Established. The R-6 district is established to delineate areas of land, both developed and undeveloped, where duplexes may be sold as single-family homes. 
(2)  Principal uses. Single-family homes and duplexes. 
(3)  Conditional uses. There shall be no conditional permits issued in this district. 
(4)  Lot, building, yard. See schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(5)  Standards of district. The following standards shall be required of every R-6 district: 
a.  Each single-family home or unit of a duplex shall have its own water and sewer lateral. 
b.  All plans and specifications shall be filed and approved by the building inspector. 
c.  For duplexes sold as separate single-family homes, an appropriate agreement for any common walls shall be submitted to the city for review. Said agreement shall specifically provide for the maintenance of any common areas and facilities and include a procedure for the resolution of disputes regarding the maintenance of the structures and grounds. The agreement shall be signed and recorded with the county register of deeds as a covenant running with the land. 
(Code 1993, § 17.22; Ord. No. 2007-09-08-C, § 2, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 2015-05-05-D, § 1, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 52-35. - Business districts. 
(a)  B business district. 
(1)  Established. The B business district is established to delineate areas, both developed and undeveloped, where retail and limited wholesale trade establishments may exist. No use permitted in this district shall be dangerous, offensive or detrimental to the neighboring areas or residents by reason of the emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, etc. 
(2)  Principal uses. Dwelling units may be established on the second or higher floors of buildings whose principal use is business or commercial. All business establishments shall be retail or service, dealing directly with the general public or wholesale sales in small quantities as an adjunct to the primary retail business. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business listed hereafter in this section, shall be limited to vehicles of not over 14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight when located within 50 feet of a residential district boundary line. 
(3)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the B district: appliance dealers; art and school supply stores; automotive parts sales stores; automobile sales lots and show room lots, providing all vehicles will be in operative condition; antique shops; appliance stores; bakeries (retail); barbershops and beauty parlors; banks and other financial institutions; candy and ice cream stores; caterers; clothing and dry goods stores; clinics; clubs; cocktail lounges; drugstores and pharmacies; department stores; electrical supply stores (retail); food stores and supermarkets; food lockers (retail); florist shops; fraternal organizations; furniture stores; funeral homes; hotels; inns; insurance agencies; jewelry stores; lumber yards; liquor stores; medical facilities and clinics; mini storage facilities; music stores; markets (fruit and vegetable); newsstands; opticians and optical supply stores; offices; paint and wallpaper stores; shoe stores; taverns; tourist information and hospitality centers; upholsterers; variety stores; veterinary clinics (small animal); and other uses similar to or customarily incidental to any of the above uses. 
(4)  Conditional uses. Governmental and cultural uses, transportation uses, drive-in theaters, drive-in restaurants, motels, funeral homes, drive-in banks, vehicle repair and sales, recreational uses, recycling areas (not to include salvage yards or can crushing) provided the same are more than 500 feet from a residential area and enclosed by fences as directed by the planning commission, and R-1, R-2 and R-3 dwellings. Light fabrication may be permitted as a conditional accessory use which is incidental to a permitted land use. Any building proposed for light fabrication use within 300 of an existing residential dwelling shall have a total floor area devoted to light fabrication activity not to exceed 15 percent of the total floor area of the principal building on the property, or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. In all other cases the total floor are devoted to light fabrication activity shall not exceed 35 percent of the total floor area of the principal building on the property, or 15,000 square feet, whichever is less. Light fabrication activities must be wholly contacted indoors and products fabricated must be sold on-site as part of the existing commercial business. The light fabrication area shall be physically separated by a wall from other activity areas and shall meet the performance standards of section 52-208. Light fabrication is defined as fabrication, manufacturing, assembly or processing of materials that are in already processed form. Light fabrication shall be characterized as lower in intensity, cleaner, and generally more compatible when located adjacent to commercial areas than are heavy manufacturing uses. Light fabrication as an accessory conditional use is intended to permit only those light industrial and other uses that will not generate excessive noise, particulate matter, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, radiation and other nuisance characteristics. Restricted industry is capable of operation in such a manner as to control the external effects of the manufacturing process, such as odors, vibrations, emissions, or other nuisance characteristics through prevention or mitigation devices and conduct of operations within the confines of buildings. 
(5)  Fire or natural disaster. Any R-1, R-2, R-3 unit destroyed by fire or natural disaster shall be allowed to be replaced by the same type of unit. 
(b)  B-1 office business district. 
(1)  Established. The B-1 district is established to delineate areas where business offices may occur. 
(2)  Principal uses. General business offices, dental clinics; medical clinics; insurance offices; hair salons; and any other uses similar to or customarily incidental to any of the above uses. 
(3)  Conditional uses. All uses permitted in the B business district. 
(4)  Lot, building, yard. See schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(c)  B-2 highway business district. 
(1)  Established. The B-2 district is established to delineate areas where highway oriented retail businesses may occur. Its object is to recognize the uniqueness of site location near major highways and to ensure that these sites are reserved for highway-oriented or travel-oriented businesses. 
(2)  Principal uses. Highway/tourist oriented retail sales, such as restaurants, motels, automobile and truck service stations, repair garages, convenience food stores, specialty food or gift shops dealing in state-oriented or regional items, such as cheese and crafts. The above examples are by way of illustration and not limitation. Residential work quarters for business owners actually engaged in the principal permitted uses of the property are accessory uses and shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  The quarters shall be occupied by the owner of the property only, including immediate family members but not exceeding five persons. 
b.  The quarters shall be not be rented, leased, and otherwise made available for compensation of any kind. 
c.  The residential quarters component of the building shall not exceed 35 percent of the total gross floor area of the building. 
d.  The quarters shall be located above or behind the work space so as to maintain the commercial function and appearance of the building. The business and residential quarters shall together appear as a commercial property as viewed from adjacent public streets. 
e.  The residential quarters shall be physically separated from the commercial space in accordance with the city's building code and maintain a separate entrance located on the rear or side of the building. 
f.  The storage, display or sales of goods and services shall not occur in the residential quarters. 
g.  The quarters shall have a separate off-street parking area on the side or rear of the building consisting of no more than four vehicle stalls. Parking stalls shall be designated for private use. 
h.  Accessory structures commonly found within residential zoning districts, which if constructed would give the appearance of a residential use on the property (e.g. swimming pools, etc.), shall not be permitted. Permitted accessory structures shall be limited to garages or storage sheds in accordance with the requirements for such structures within this zoning code. Accessory structures shall complement the primary building through the use of similar building materials and colors. 
i.  Residential work quarters shall not be permitted within existing or planned business or industrial parks as identified in the City of Tomah Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  Existing residences. Existing residents shall comply with all the provisions of the R-1 district. 
(4)  Conditional uses. Recycling areas (not to include salvage yards or can crushing), provided the same are more than 500 feet from a residential area and enclosed by a fence as directed by the planning commission. 
(Code 1993, § 17.23; Ord. 2007-09-08-C, § 3, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 2014-11-11-D, § 2, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 2017-05-09-D, § 1, 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 52-36. - Industrial districts. 
(a)  M-1 limited industrial districts. 
(1)  Established. By virtue of its location and because of the existing and proposed character of development within and around the area, present and anticipated accessibility of major transportation facilities and the availability of adequate utilities and other public services, the M-1 district is established. 
(2)  Principal uses. Manufacture, fabrication, packing, packaging and assembly of products from furs, glass, leather, metals, paper, plaster, plastics, textiles and wood; recycling areas (not to include salvage yards) provided any crushing and storage is inside a building or semi-trailer unit; manufacture, fabrication, processing and packaging of confections; cosmetics; electrical appliances; electronic devices; food, except cabbage, fish and fish products, meat and meat products and pea vining; instruments; jewelry; pharmaceuticals; tobacco; mini-storage facilities; and toiletries. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Airports and airstrips, governmental and cultural, large animal hospital, disposal area, manufacture or use of certain toxic or hazardous chemicals or material, outside storage area and all business uses permitted or conditional in the B district. 
(4)  Lot, building, yards. See schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(b)  M-2 general industrial district. 
(1)  Established. By virtue of its location and because of the present character or future development potential of the area, the M-2 district is established. 
(2)  Principal uses. All M-1 industrial district principal uses plus freight yards and terminals, mini storage facilities, transshipment depots and all other manufacturing and processing uses, except those as conditional. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Same as M-1 industrial district and also mineral extraction. 
(4)  Lot, buildings, yard. See schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(c)  M-3 highway industrial district. 
(1)  Established. By virtue of its location and because of the existing and proposed character of development within and around the area, the M-3 district is established to encourage the continued development of industrial, warehousing and distribution facilities that are enhanced or dependent upon the high visibility from and access with interstate-type highways. 
(2)  Principal uses. Final assembly of transportation vehicles or accessories, such as trailers, pickup toppers, cartop carriers or boats; the storage and distribution of transportation related products, such as auto accessories or truck maintenance equipment; truck service facilities, such as engine, transmission or trailer repair and truck washing facilities; trailer reloading and storage and in-transit and processing of materials; mini storage facilities; bonded warehouses or duty-free district warehouses and factory outlet shops for sale of items manufactured on the premises. The above examples are by way of illustration and not limitation. 
(3)  Lot, buildings, yards. See schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(Code 1993, § 17.24) 
Sec. 52-37. - A-1 agricultural district. 
(a)  Principal uses of the A-1 agricultural district. Agriculture, dairying, floriculture, forestry, general farming, grazing, s, horticultural, livestock raising, nurseries, orchards, paddocks, pastures, stables, truck farming and viticulture. Farm dwellings for resident owners, managers and laborers actually engaged in the principal permitted uses are accessory uses and shall comply with all the provisions of the R-2 residential district. 
(b)  Conditional uses. See article III of this chapter. 
(c)  Farm, structure, yards. See schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(Code 1993, § 17.25) 
Sec. 52-38. - C-1 conservancy district. 
(a)  C-1 conservancy district created. This district is created to delineate areas intended for scenic, recreational, floodplain, unsuitable building soils, publicly owned lands or lands unsuitable for other uses because of terrain, slope, soil, water table or location. Such areas are frequently along natural watercourses, channels, streams and creeks and lakes. 
(b)  Principal uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1 district: extended outdoor recreation, forestry, golf courses, wildlife management, nature preserves and reservations, outdoor playground equipment, outdoor swimming pools and related structures; picnicking and camping and related structures; public open lands and public exposition and recreational buildings. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Communications and radio towers, utility lines or other uses that do not alter the essentially open or natural character of the land, outdoor rifle, trap, skeet or archery ranges and associated structures, golf driving ranges. 
(d)  Claiming of floodplain land. Any land designated as part of the conservancy district in this chapter solely because it is located within an area designated by the city, department of natural resources, Federal Insurance Administration or other agency as floodplain or flood hazard may be subject to considerations for rezoning by the city planning commission. All filing, draining, construction of levees or other alterations intended to eliminate or reduce the danger of flood or erosion shall be subject to the review of the city planning commission, department of natural resources and other appropriate agencies. Rezoning of such parcels by the city council shall be contingent upon approval by the appropriate state or federal agencies. 
(Code 1993, § 17.26) 
Sec. 52-39. - I institutional district. 
(a)  Created. The institutional district is created to acknowledge that certain areas of the city are unique. 
(b)  Principal uses. Hospital, health care, cultural schools, city-owned nonrecreation properties, county, state and federally owned properties, churches. Necessary shops, garages, etc., to provide essential maintenance to buildings, grounds and equipment. 
(c)  Lot, buildings, setback. See schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(Code 1993, § 17.27; Ord. No. 2007-09-08-C, § 4, 9-10-2007) 
Sec. 52-40. - Schedule of regulations. 
    Following is the schedule of regulations as they apply to each zoning district: 
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 
Minimum Yard Requirements (Ft.) Lot 
Requirements Principal Buildings Accessory 
Buildings Maximum 
Building Height Zone Area in Sq. Ft. Frontage in Ft. Front Each Side Rear Each Side Rear Stories Feet % Max. Lot Coverage Min. Lot Area Per Dwelling Use R-1 Residential 7,200 60 (h) 
25 (c) 
10 (i) 
30 (c) 
3 3 2 30 30 7,200 1-family dwelling R-2 Residential 7,200 60 (h) 
25 (c) 
10 (i) 
30 (c) 
3 3 2 35 40 3,600 2-family dwelling R-3 Residential 7,200 60 (h) 
25 (c) 
10 (i) 
20 (c) 
3 3 3 40 60 1,800 Multi-family dwelling B Business (a) 
3,000 20 None (d) 
None (d) 
10 None 10 3 45 95 - General business B-2 Business 20,000 100 50 25 30 10 10 3 45 50 - Highway business M-1 Industrial 20,000 100 25 (e) 
15 (e) 
20 10 10 3 45 50 (b) Limited industrial B-1 Office Business 10,000 75 25 15 10 10 10 3 45 75 - Office business R-6 Zero Lot Line 7,200 50 25 (c) 
10 30 (c) 
3 3 2 30 40 3,600 Duplex; single family dwelling M-2 Industrial 20,000 100 25 (f) 
25 (f) 
20 10 10 3 45 60 (b) General industrial M-3 Industrial 20,000 100 25 25 20 10 10 3 45 60 (b) Highway industrial A-1 Agricultural 2 acres 100 100 50 50 50 50 - 50 - - Agricultural C Conservancy - - - - - - - 2 30 - - Parks & recreation I Institutional 5,000 50 5 5 5 3 10 - 60 - - Hospitals, schools, government, churches  
(a)  Shopping centers require a minimum of four acres, minimum frontage 300 feet, maximum height 35 feet, front yard 100 feet, rear 40 feet and side 40 feet. 
(b)  Dwelling units not permitted except for watchman's/caretaker's quarters, not for rental. 
(c)  Minimum side yard for street side of corner lot, 15 feet. 
(d)  Minimum side or rear yard when abutting a residential district is 15 feet. 
(e)  Minimum side or rear yard when abutting a residential district must be 50 feet. 
(f)  Minimum side or rear yard when abutting a residential district must be 100 feet. 
(g)  Accessory buildings must be placed in the rear yard or conform to the yard requirements of a principal building. 
(h)  Front yards. On every lot in a residential district, and every existing residence in the business district, there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet, provided that: Where lots comprising 40 percent or more of the frontage on one side of a block are developed with buildings, the required front yard depth shall be the average of the front yard depths of the two adjacent main buildings, or if there is only one adjacent main building, the front yard depth of said main building shall govern but shall not be less than ten feet in any case; provided further that this regulation shall not be so interpreted as to require a front yard depth of more than 25 feet in any case. 
(i)  Rear yards. On every lot in a residential district and every existing residence in the business district there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot, provided such rear yard shall not in any case be less than 15 feet in depth. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07-08-D, §§ 4, 5, 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 2014-04-06-D, § 1, 4-8-2014) 
Sec. 52-41. - PUD, planned unit development district. 
(a)  Purpose. The planned unit development district is established to allow for variation from the use, bulk, and dimensional standards defined by other zoning districts when an area of land is developed as a cohesive unit, while insuring substantial compliance to the basic intent of the zoning ordinance and adopted plans. This section defines the process by which unique standards can be established for each planned unit development. 
(b)  Uses. Any use permitted by right or as a conditional grant in any of the other districts of this zoning code may be permitted in the planned unit development district, provided however, that no use shall be permitted except in conformity with a specific and precise development plan pursuant to the procedural and regulatory provisions established by this section. 
(c)  Lot size, yard, and bulk regulations. In the planned unit development district, there shall be no predetermined specific lot area, lot width, height, yard and usable open space requirements, but such requirements as are made a part of an approved recorded precise development plan shall be, along with the recorded plan itself, construed to be and enforced as a part of this section. 
(d)  Signs. Signs may be provided in accordance with Article V of this zoning code and such requirements as are made a part of an approved recorded precise development plan. 
(e)  Off-street parking and loading. In the planned unit development district, off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with Article IV of this zoning code and such requirements as are made a part of an approved recorded precise development plan. 
(f)  Procedure. 
(1)  The procedure for rezoning to a planned unit development district shall be as required for any other zoning map amendment under this Code, except that in addition thereto the rezoning may only be considered in conjunction with a general development plan and shall be subject to the following additional requirements. 
(2)  Preapplication conference. 
a.  A developer desiring to obtain zoning to construct a planned unit development may request a preapplication conference with the planning commission prior to submitting an application for the zoning. 
b.  The purpose of this preapplication conference shall be to familiarize both the developer and the planning commission with each other's intentions with respect to the planned unit development. Although a preapplication conference shall not be required, this preliminary meeting between the planning commission and the developer is desirable since it should help clarify many procedural and policy issues. 
c.  The developer shall not be required to present any written or graphic materials at the preapplication conference. The planning commission cannot approve zoning at the preapplication conference. 
(3)  General development plan. A general development plan application shall be submitted with the rezoning petition and shall include, but not be limited to, the following written and graphic materials. 
a.  Written materials: 
i.  Legal description of the total development parcel proposed for development, including exact location and a statement of present and proposed ownership. 
ii.  Statement of development concept, including the planning objectives and the character of the development to be achieved through the planned unit development. 
iii.  Development schedule indicating the appropriate date when construction of the planned unit development can be expected to begin and to be completed, including initiation and completion dates of separate stages of a phased development. 
iv.  Statement of intentions regarding the future selling or leasing of all or portions of the planned unit development, such as land areas, dwelling units and public facilities. 
v.  The impact of the development on existing city services outside the development. 
b.  Quantitative data: 
i.  Parcel size. 
ii.  Proposed lot coverage of structures. 
iii.  Total amount of usable open space, both private and public. 
iv.  Total number and type of dwelling units by number of bedrooms. 
v.  Approximate gross residential densities. 
vi.  Number of parking spaces to be provided. 
vii.  Total length of streets to be conveyed to the city government. 
viii.  Total length of streets to be held as private ways within the development. 
ix.  Description of type of other public works to be conveyed to the city government. 
x.  Number and types of public facilities. 
c.  Graphic materials: 
i.  Map of existing site conditions, including contours, watercourses, floodplains, unique natural features, existing vegetation and existing buildings. 
ii.  Existing and proposed lot lines. 
iii.  Location and size of gross floor area of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, including maximum heights and types of dwelling units. 
iv.  Location and size in square feet of all usable open space and areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common open spaces and recreation areas. 
v.  The existing and proposed circulation, including off-street parking areas, services areas, loading areas and all points of access to existing public rights-of-way. 
v.  Proposed pedestrian circulation system. 
vi.  Existing and proposed utility systems, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water and gas lines and utility easements. 
(4)  Referral and hearing. 
a.  The general development plan application shall be filed with the city zoning administrator, who after ascertaining it contains the information required by this chapter shall forward the application to the planning commission. 
b.  Hearing requirement: As with any zoning map amendment, no such amendments shall be made without a hearing before the planning commission. 
c.  Following public hearing the planning commission shall forward the general development plan petition to the city council, with a recommendation that the plan be approved as submitted, approved with modifications, or rejected. 
d.  Approval of the rezoning and related general development plan shall establish the basic right of use for the area in conformity with the plan as approved, which shall be recorded as an integral component of the district regulations, but such plan shall be conditioned upon approval of a specific implementation plan, and shall not make permissible any of the uses as proposed until a specific implementation plan is submitted and approved for all or a portion of the general development plan. 
(5)  Criteria for approval of the general development plan. As a basis for determining the acceptability of a planned unit development district application, the following criteria shall be considered: 
a.  Conforms to the adopted comprehensive plan for the portion of the city in which the planned unit development district is located. 
b.  Provides benefits to the city which outweigh its adverse effects. In making this determination, the planning commission shall consider the following: 
i.  Quality of site design, including integration of a variety of land uses, building types and densities, preservation of natural features, compatibility and adjacent land uses, provision and type of open spaces, and provision of other amenities designed to benefit the general public. 
ii.  Traffic flow and safety. 
iii.  Adequacy of utilities and other public works facilities. 
c.  Implementation schedule. The proponents of a planned unit development district shall submit a reasonable schedule for the implementation of the development to the satisfaction of the city council, including suitable provisions for assurance that each phase could be brought to completion in a manner which would not result in adverse effect upon the community as a result of termination at that point. 
(6)  Specific implementation plan. A specific and detailed plan for implementation of all or a part of a proposed planned unit development district must be submitted within one year or longer if permitted by city council. If a specific implementation plan has not been submitted within said time, which the city council determines to be a reasonable phase of the total plan, a petition to rezone the property back to the previous zoning from the planned unit development district shall be filed by the appropriate city official with the city zoning administrator for processing. The specific implementation plan shall be submitted to the city zoning administrator and shall include the following detailed construction and engineering plans and related detailed documents and schedules: 
a.  An accurate map of the area covered by the plan, including the relationship to the total general development plan. 
b.  The pattern of public and private roads, driveways, walkways and parking facilities. 
c.  Detailed lot layout and subdivision plan where required. 
d.  The arrangement of building groups other than single family residences, and their architectural character. 
e.  Sanitary sewer and water mains. 
f.  Grading plan and storm drainage system. 
g.  The location and treatment of open space areas and recreational or other special amenities. 
h.  General location and description of any areas to be dedicated to the public. 
i.  General landscape treatment. 
j.  Location of trash and garbage receptacles and type of screening. 
k.  Proposed treatment of the perimeter of the development, including materials and techniques used such as screens, fences and walls. 
l.  A development schedule indicating: 
i.  The approximate date when construction of the project can be expected to begin; 
ii.  The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when construction of each stage can be expected to begin; 
iii.  The anticipated rate of development; 
iv.  The approximate date when the development of each of the stages will be completed. 
m.  Agreements, bylaws, provision or covenants which govern the organizational structure, use maintenance, and continued protection of the planned unit development and any of its common services, common open areas or other facilities. 
n.  A final plat of the lands to be subdivided as part of the specific implementation plan, suitable for recording. 
o.  Any other plans, documents or schedules requested by the city. 
(7)  Approval of the specific implementation plan. 
a.  Following a review of the specific implementation plan, the planning commission shall recommend to the city council that it be approved as submitted, approved with modifications or rejected. 
b.  Upon receipt of the planning commission recommendations, the city council may approve the plan and authorize development to proceed accordingly or disapprove the plan and send it back to the planning commission for further negotiation with the developer. 
c.  Any subsequent change or addition to the plans or use shall first be submitted for approval to the planning commission and, if in the opinion of the planning commission such change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plan, the procedure for a general development plan and PUD rezoning described in this section provided shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-11-D, § 3, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 52-42. - Downtown design standards overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose. This design overlay district in intended to guide the character, location, and quality of development within Downtown Tomah. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. The Downtown Design Standards Handbook shall apply to all properties located in the City of Tomah Downtown Master Plan, Volume III Design Standards Handbook, Study Area (page 3), generally described as properties located in the area: South of Washington Street, north of Cameron Street, east of McLean Avenue, and west of Kilbourn Avenue; also including those properties south of Council Street, north of Holton Street, east of Kilbourn Avenue, and west of Woodard Avenue. 
(c)  Design recommendations and standards. All land in the Downtown Design Standards Overlay District is subject to the design recommendations and standards specified in Volume III, Design Standards Handbook of the Downtown Master Plan for the City of Tomah adopted April 11, 2017 and as subsequently amended by the city council, attached hereto as if fully incorporated. 
(d)  Interpretation. Where this district imposes a greater restriction on the use of land or structures or the height or bulk of structures, or requires greater open space about structures, or greater areas or dimensions of sites than is imposed or required by an existing ordinance or another district, the regulations of this district shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-09-13-D, § 1, 9-12-2017) 
Secs. 52-43-52-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 52-67. - Permit. 
    Application for conditional use permits shall be submitted to the zoning administrator on forms provided by the administrator and shall be accompanied by a plan showing the location, size and shape of the lots involved and any proposed structures, and the existing and proposed use of each structure and lot. The cost of conditional use permits shall be established by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 17.30) 
Sec. 52-68. - Application and procedure. 
    In all cases of proposed establishment of a conditional use specified in this chapter, the plan commission shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulation drainage, sewerage and water systems and other aspects of the proposed use. The hearing on the application shall be held at the next regular meeting of the plan commission after complying with notice requirements. Notice of the proposed establishment of the conditional use and the public hearing shall be given by ordinary mail to the owners of the land immediately adjacent to the area to be considered for the new use extending 200 feet therefrom and to owners of lands extending 200 feet from the street frontage of opposite lands and also by a class I publication in the official newspaper. 
(Code 1993, § 17.31) 
Sec. 52-69. - Standards. 
    No permit for a conditional use shall be granted, unless the plan commission finds that the following conditions are present: 
(1)  That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare. 
(2)  That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood used for purposes already permitted shall not be substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use. 
(3)  That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district. 
(4)  That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been made or are being provided. 
(5)  That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion and traffic hazards in the public streets. 
(Code 1993, § 17.31(1)) 
Sec. 52-70. - Conditions and guarantees. 
(a)  Prior to recommending to the city council the granting of a permit for a conditional use, the plan commission may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, maintenance and operation of the conditional uses as it may find necessary to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community and to secure compliance with the standards specified in section 52-71. 
(b)  Establishment, maintenance and operation shall be construed to include, but not be limited to, such factors as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, operations control, hours of operation, traffic circulation, deed restrictions, access restrictions, yard and parking requirements, insofar as the plan commission shall find that conditions applying to these factors are necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter. In all cases in which a permit for conditional use is granted, the plan commission shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions therewith are being and will be complied with. 
(Code 1993, § 17.31(2)) 
Sec. 52-71. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking and loading. 
(Code 1993, § 17.31(3)) 
Sec. 52-72. - Permit. 
    The city council shall authorize the building inspector to issue a conditional use permit specified in this chapter after review and a public hearing, provided such uses are in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 17.31(4)) 
Sec. 52-73. - Denial. 
    No applications for a conditional use which has been denied wholly or in part by the city council shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of denial, except on the grounds that substantial new evidence or proof of change to compliance with the applicable conditions is included in the resubmitted application. 
(Code 1993, § 17.31(5)) 
Sec. 52-74. - Validity. 
    Permits issued hereunder are valid only as to approved use and are not transferable without the approval of the plan commission and city council. 
(Code 1993, § 17.31(6)) 
Sec. 52-75. - Review and approval. 
    The plan commission shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural and engineering plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generations and circulations, drainage sewerage and water systems, landscape and soils and the proposed operation. 
(Code 1993, § 17.32) 
Sec. 52-76. - Highway agency review. 
    Any development within 500 feet of the existing or proposed rights-of-way of freeways, expressways, interstate and controlled access traffic ways and within 1,500 feet of their existing or proposed interchange or turning lane rights-of-way shall be specifically reviewed by the highway agency that has jurisdiction over the traffic way. The plan commission shall request such review and await the highway agency's recommendation for a period not to exceed 60 days before taking final action. 
(Code 1993, § 17.32(1)) 
Sec. 52-77. - Conditions. 
    Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties, operational control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access requirements, increased yards or parking requirements may be required by the plan commission upon its finding that these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 17.32(2)) 
Sec. 52-78. - Compliance. 
    Compliance with all other provisions of this chapter, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking, loading, traffic, highway access and performance standards shall be required of all conditional uses. 
(Code 1993, § 17.32(3)) 
Sec. 52-79. - Public and quasi-public uses. 
    The following public and quasi-public uses shall be conditional uses and may be permitted as specified: 
(1)  Airports, airstrips and landing fields in the M-2 industrial district and the A-1 agricultural district, provided the site area is not less than 20 acres. 
(2)  Governmental and cultural uses, such as fire and police stations, community centers, libraries, public emergency shelters, parks, playgrounds and museums in all residential, business and industrial districts. 
(3)  Utilities in all districts, provided all principal structures and uses are not less than 50 feet from any residential district lot line. 
(4)  Public passenger transportation terminals, such as heliports, bus and rail depots, except airports, airstrips and landing fields, in all business and industrial districts, provided all principal structures and uses are not less than 100 feet from any residential district boundary. 
(5)  Public, parochial and private elementary schools and churches in any of the residential districts. Colleges; universities; technical schools; hospitals; sanitariums; religious, charitable and correctional institutions; cemeteries and crematories in the business, residential or agricultural districts, provided that all principal structures and uses are not less than 50 feet from any lot line. 
(6)  Parking lots in R-1, R-2, R-3. A drainage plan will be required as part of the conditional use permit. 
(Code 1993, § 17.33; Ord. No. 2007-09-08-C, § 5, 9-10-2007) 
Sec. 52-80. - Residential uses. 
    The following residential and quasi-residential uses shall be conditional uses and may be permitted as specified: 
(1)  Planned residential developments, such as cluster developments in R-2 and R-3 residential districts. The district regulations may be varied, provided that adequate open space shall be provided so average intensity and density of land use shall be no greater than permitted for the district in which it is located. (See schedule of regulations, section 52-40.) Planned residential developments cannot be broken into separate units without approval of the planning commission. 
(2)  The following special provisions shall be complied with (see schedule of regulations, section 52-40): 
a.  Clubs, fraternities, lodges and meeting places of a noncommercial nature in the R-2 and R-3 residential districts, provided all principal structures and uses are not less than 25 feet from any residential lot line. 
b.  Rest homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged, and clinics in the R-2 and R-3 residential districts, provided all principal structures and uses are not less than 25 feet from any lot line. Children's nurseries and day care centers in R-1, R-2, and R-3 residential districts, provided all principal structures and uses are not less than 25 feet from any lot line, and in B, B-1, B-2 business districts, M-1, M-2, and M-3 industrial districts, and in I institutional district. 
c.  Home occupations and professional offices in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 residential districts. 
d.  Boardinghouses, roominghouses, and rooming unit in R-1, R-2, and R-3 with a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1993, § 17.34; Ord. No. 2007-09-08-C, §§ 6, 7, 9-10-2007) 
Sec. 52-81. - Vehicle-oriented uses. 
    The following may be permitted, provided the indicated special provisions are complied with: 
(1)  Drive-in theaters in the B business district, provided a planting screen or opaque fence is established along any side abutting a residential district and no access is permitted to or within 1,000 feet of an arterial street. 
(2)  Drive-in establishments serving food or beverages with carhop service for consumption outside the structure in the B business district. 
(3)  Motels and tourist homes in the B business district. 
(4)  Funeral homes in the B business district. 
(5)  Drive-in banks in the B business district. 
(6)  Vehicle sales, service, washing and repair stations, garages, taxi stands and public parking lots in the business district, provided all gas pumps are not less than 30 feet from any side or rear lot line and 20 feet from any existing or proposed street line. Gasoline stations shall be a minimum of 500 feet from any public or parochial school and churches. 
(7)  Any development within 500 feet of the existing or proposed rights-of-way of freeways, expressways, interstate and controlled access highways and within 1,500 feet of their existing or proposed interchange or turning lane rights-of-way shall be deemed to be restricted uses and no structures shall be erected closer than 100 feet to their rights-of-way. 
(8)  Highway-oriented retail sales, such as automobile dealerships, motels, restaurants and general shopping malls in the B-2 and M-3 districts. 
(Code 1993, § 17.35) 
Sec. 52-82. - Industrial and agricultural uses. 
    The following industrial and agricultural uses shall be conditional uses and may be permitted as specified: 
(1)  Animal hospitals for large animals in the agricultural and industrial districts, provided all principal structures and uses are not less than 100 feet from any residential districts. 
(2)  Dumps, disposal areas, land fills, incinerators and sewage disposal plants in the agricultural and industrial districts. 
(3)  Commercial raising, propagation, boarding or butchering of animals, such as dogs, mink, rabbits, foxes, goats and pigs; commercial production of eggs; hatching, raising, fattening or butchering of fowl; pea vineries; creameries and condenseries in the agricultural district. 
(4)  Manufacture and processing of abrasives, acetylene, acid, alkalies, ammonia, asbestos, asphalt, batteries, bedding, bleach, bone, cabbage, candles, carpeting, celluloid, cement, cereals, charcoal, chemicals, chlorine, coal, tar, coffee, coke, cordage, creosote, dextrine, disinfectant, dye, excelsior, felt, fish, fuel, furs, gelatin, glucose, gypsum, hair products, linoleum, matches, meat, oil cloth, paint, paper, peas, perfume, pickles, plaster of Paris, poison, polish, potash, pulp, pyroxlin, radium, rope, rubber, sausage, shoddy, shoes, lampblacking, size, starch, stove polish, textiles; varnish; manufacturing, processing and storage of explosives, dry ice, fat, fertilizer, flammables, gasoline, glue, grains, grease, lard, plastics, radioactive materials, shellac, soap, turpentine, vinegar and yeast; manufacturing and bottling of alcohol beverages; bag cleaning, bleacheries, canneries and cold storage warehouses; electric and steam-generating plants; electroplating enameling; forges; foundries; garbage incinerators; lacquering; lithographing, offal, rubbish or animal reduction; oil, coal, and bone distillation; refineries; road test facilities; slaughterhouses; smelting; stockyards; tanneries; and weaving in the industrial districts, provided they are at least 600 feet from residential districts. 
(5)  Outside storage and manufacturing areas in the industrial districts. Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrapyards shall be surrounded by a solid fence or evergreen planting screen, completely preventing a view from any other property or public right-of-way and shall be at least 600 feet from residential districts. 
(6)  Commercial service facilities, such as restaurants and fuel stations in the industrial district, provided all such services are physically and saleswise oriented toward industrial district users and employees and other users are only incidental customers. 
(7)  Telecommunication facilities consisting of cellular antennae towers, PCS towers and any other communication towers (but not including commercial radio or television towers), equipment storage shelters and related operating and equipment building components subject to the following specified conditions: 
a.  Annual reporting to the city of compliance with all applicable government regulations relating to the provision of communications authorized by the conditional use. Reporting shall include a field report to verify compliance with all accepted federal standards including the project's cumulative field measurements of radio frequency power densities, quantification of total radio frequency exposures and comparison of these exposures with the accepted American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) standards and any subsequently adopted federal standards. A preliminary report shall be required to verify compliance with existing and future FCC regulations and established ANSI/IEEE standards. The report shall be prepared by an engineer who shall quantify the project's radio frequency exposures and compare them to ANSI/IEEE standards. The owner of the facility shall also provide the city with copies of all pertinent internal or third party reports relating to any emissions testing. 
b.  Compliance with all applicable federal, state and local rules regarding the environmental effects of radio frequency and other telecommunications emissions. 
c.  Specific approval as to the type and number of antennae and wattage including limitation on the height of any cellular towers. 
d.  An agreement with the city warranting and representing the safety of the technology of the facilities and holding the city harmless from any claims or losses to the city or its residents including reasonable attorney fees arising from or related to the use of the facilities. 
e.  Furnishing a policy of liability insurance in form approved by the city attorney naming the city as an additional insured with policy limits approved by the common council. 
f.  Reimbursement to the city for attorney and expert witness fees and fees of other professional consultants including planners and engineers incurred by the city in relation to the petition for approval and as a conditional use and/or incurred by the city in order to enforce this article. 
g.  Certain restrictions per the schedule of regulations, section 52-40 regarding lot area and width, ground coverage, front, side and rear yard setback and parking may be varied as part of the conditional use approval, provided however a telecommunications facility shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any adjoining residential zoning district. 
h.  Facilities may not include offices, longterm vehicle storage, other outdoor storage, or broadcast studios except for emergency purposes, or other uses that are not needed to send or receive transmissions as reasonably determined by the city council. 
i.  Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic congestion. The applicant shall describe anticipated maintenance needs including frequency of service, personnel and equipment needs, and traffic, noise, or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
j.  When lighting is required and is permitted by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority, it shall be oriented inward so as not to project onto any surrounding residential property. 
k.  Documentation shall be submitted with a conditional use permit application indicating the need for tower space in the area, location of other towers and why collocation is not feasible. Applicants shall be required to exhaust all possible avenues for sharing space in existing towers. Factors to determine feasibility of collocation include, but are not limited to, available space on existing towers, the tower owner's ability to lease space, the tower structural capacity, radio frequency interference, geographic service area requirements, mechanical or electrical incompatibilities, the comparative costs of collocation and new construction, and any FCC limitations on tower sharing. Applicants cannot be denied space on an existing tower by the owner of such tower or deny space on a tower to other applicants unless mechanical, structural or regulatory factors prevent sharing or collocation. 
l.  Antennas which exceed a height of 50 feet from surrounding grade or 20 feet when mounted to a building or other structure shall meet the following conditions and requirements: 
1.  The proposed antenna or antenna structure shall not result in restriction or interference with air traffic or air travel to or from any existing or proposed airport. 
2.  The proposed antenna or antenna structure shall not result in interference with radio and television reception in nearby residential or nonresidential areas based upon the applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
3.  There shall be a setback of sufficient radius around the antenna structure so that its collapse will be contained on the property and not affect regularly occupied buildings on the subject site. 
4.  Adequate space as determined by the city planning commission shall be provided on-site for antenna and antenna structure maintenance vehicles to access and maneuver on the property. 
5.  Antennas and antenna structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 120 feet. 
6.  All antennas and antenna structures shall be structurally self-supporting without the use of guy wires and shall be designed by a structural professional engineer licensed in the state. 
7.  No form of advertising shall be allowed on the antenna, antenna structure, base or framework or other buildings or facilities. 
8.  All cable to and from the antenna and/or antenna structure shall be installed underground unless the antenna is mounted on a building where cable will go directly into the structure. 
9.  The minimum distance between antennae structures which exceed a height of 50 feet shall be equal to the height of the taller of such antenna structures as measured from the exterior base of the antenna or antenna structure. 
10.  A detailed site and landscape plan shall be submitted to the city planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council. The base of any tower and any accessory building and parking areas shall be screened with solid six-foot-high evergreen trees at time of planting. 
(8)  Agricultural uses as conditional uses in the R-1 district. The following special provisions shall be complied with: 
a.  Agricultural uses shall be limited to crop cultivation and harvesting. 
b.  Construction of new principal or accessory agricultural buildings shall not be permitted. 
c.  Construction of water wells or watering pumps shall not be permitted. 
d.  The minimum lot size for such uses shall be five acres. 
e.  Applications for a conditional use under this section shall be accompanied by information regarding the type of crops desired for planting; a typical timeline or schedule regarding crop planting, maintenance activities, and harvesting; information regarding planned soil watering and nutrient management activities; information regarding the use, type, and quantity of any pesticide, herbicide or other chemical applications; information regarding planned use of any existing structures on the property; information regarding use of the property by farm animals; information regarding field access locations and planned equipment circulation routes to and from the site. 
f.  In reviewing the conditional use permit the planning commission may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the location and operation of the proposed use as it determines to be reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to assure continued compliance with the purpose and intent of this Code. The conditions and restrictions imposed may include, without limitation, specifications for any or all of the following: 
1.  Those conditions and guarantees enumerated under section 52-70(a) and (b). 
2.  Road maintenance, including removal of debris from public roadways and repair of public roads damaged by farm equipment accessing farm fields. 
3.  Types of crops permitted on the lot. 
4.  Setback and offset requirements for crop cultivation areas. 
5.  Vegetation clearing for crop cultivation areas. 
6.  Housing of farm animals within existing structures. 
7.  Use of the property by any farm animals. 
8.  Watering and nutrient management activities. 
9.  Pesticide, herbicide, or other chemical treatment activities. 
10.  Roadside sales. 
11.  Permit duration. The planning commission may set limits on the length of time a conditional use permit may be granted under this section or may impose limitations which would grant the conditional use permit to the landowner only and not to the land itself. 
12.  Maintenance of yard and offset yards not used for crop cultivation. 
(Code 1993, § 17.36; Ord. No. 2015-05-05-D, § 2, 5-12-15) 
Sec. 52-83. - Mineral extractions. 
    Mineral extraction operations, including washing, crushing or other processing, are conditional uses and may be permitted in the M-2 industrial district and the A-1 agricultural district. 
(1)  Application for a conditional use permit shall include adequate description of the operation; list of equipment, machinery and structures to be used; source, quantity and disposition of water to be used; topographic map of the site showing existing contours with minimum vertical contour interval of two feet; proposed and existing access roads, depth of all existing and proposed excavations and a restoration plan. 
(2)  The restoration plan provided by the applicant shall contain proposed contours after filling, depth of restored topsoil, type of fill, planting or reforestation, and restoration commencement and completion dates. The applicant shall furnish the necessary fees to provide for inspection and administrative cost and the necessary sureties which will enable the city to perform the planned restoration of the site in event of default by the applicant. The amount of such sureties shall be based upon cost estimates prepared by the city engineer, and the form and type of such sureties shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(3)  The conditional use permit shall be in effect for a period not to exceed two years and may be renewed upon application for a period of two years. Modifications or additional conditions may be imposed upon application for renewal. 
(4)  The plan commission shall particularly consider the effect of the proposed operation upon existing streets, neighboring development, proposed land use, drainage, water supply, soil erosion, natural beauty, character and land value of the locality and shall also consider the practicality of the proposed restoration of the site. 
(Code 1993, § 17.37) 
Sec. 52-84. - Recreational uses. 
    The following public recreational facilities are permitted conditional uses in the conservancy district and may be conditional uses in the R-2, R-3 and B districts: beaches and related structures, boating access sites, conservatories, golf courses, ice boating, marinas, swimming pools, skating rinks, sports fields, botanical gardens, outdoor play equipment, nature preserves and reservations, picnic grounds and campgrounds. The following are conditional uses in conservancy and business districts: outdoor rifle, skeet, trap or archery ranges, golf driving ranges. The following are conditional uses in the business districts: gymnasiums; indoor tennis or racquet ball courts; indoor sport arenas; commercial recreational facilities, such as arcades, bowling alleys, dance halls with dancing as the primary use, miniature golf and similar activities. Conditions imposed prior to granting a permit may include hours of operation, size, security, bond or deposit with the city. 
(Code 1993, § 17.38) 
Sec. 52-85. - Signs, awnings, canopies and marquees. 
    Signs, awnings, canopies or marquees on, over or in the public way shall not be permitted except by special permit or exemption as provided in this chapter. The plan commission shall establish standards for dimensions, clearances, projections and continuity for such signs, awnings, canopies or marquees to assure a reasonable uniformity of appearance, adequate provision for maintenance and safety to the public and assuring conformity with city ordinances and state statutes. 
(Code 1993, § 17.39) 
Secs. 52-86-52-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC, PARKING AND ACCESS 

Sec. 52-114. - Traffic visibility. 
    No obstruction, such as structures, parking or vegetation, shall be permitted in any district between the heights of 21/2 feet and ten feet above the plane through the mean curb grades within the triangular space formed by any two existing or proposed intersecting street or alley right-of-way lines and a line joining points on such lines located a minimum of 15 feet from their intersection. In the case of arterial streets intersecting with other arterial streets or railways, the corner cutoff distances establishing the triangular vision clearance space shall be increased to 50 feet. 
(Code 1993, § 17.40) 
Sec. 52-115. - Loading requirements. 
    Loading areas shall be provided in all agricultural, business and industrial districts so that as much as possible all vehicles loading, unloading or maneuvering are completely off the public ways and so all vehicles need not back onto any public way. 
(Code 1993, § 17.41) 
Sec. 52-116. - Parking requirements. 
    Required parking lots shall be accompanied with detailed plans on landscaping, parking layout, drainage provisions and driveway locations. In all districts and in connection with every use there shall be provided, at the time any use of building is erected, enlarged, extended or increased, off-street parking stalls for all vehicles in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking space, and driveways shall be at least ten feet wide for one- and two-family dwellings and a minimum of 20 feet for all other uses. 
(2)  Size of each parking space shall not be less than 180 square feet, exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress. 
(3)  Location shall be on the same lot as the principal use or not over 400 feet from the principal use. In cases where off-street parking facilities are permitted on land other than the same lot as the principal use, such facilities shall be in the same possession as the lot occupied by the use to which the parking facilities are accessory. Such possession shall be by deed whereby the owner of the land on which the parking facilities are to be located shall be bound by a covenant filed and recorded in the office of the county register of deeds requiring such owner, his heirs or assigns to maintain the required facilities for the duration of the use served. No parking stall or driveway, except in residential districts, shall be closer than 25 feet to a residential district lot line or a street opposite a residential district. 
(4)  All off-street parking areas shall be graded and surfaced so as to be dust-free and properly drained. Any parking area for more than five vehicles shall have the aisles and spaces clearly marked, and shall be sufficiently screened in the form of a solid fence or shrubbery to protect adjacent residential uses. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties and public streets in such a way as not to create a nuisance. However, in no case shall such lighting exceed three footcandles measured at the lot line. 
(5)  Curbs or barriers shall be installed so as to prevent parked vehicles from extending over any lot lines. 
(6)  Number of parking stalls required: 
Single-family dwellings 2 stalls for each dwelling unit and mobile home Multifamily dwellings 1.5 stalls for each dwelling unit Hotels, motels 1 stall for each guest room and 1 stall for every 3 employees Hospitals, clubs, lodges, sororities, dormitories, lodginghouses and boardinghouses 1 stall for every 2 beds and 1 stall for every 3 employees Sanitariums, institutions, rest homes and nursing homes 1 stall for every 5 beds and 1 stall for every 3 employees Medical and dental clinics 3 stalls for each doctor Churches, theaters, auditoriums, community centers, vocational and night schools, and other public places of public assembly 1 stall for every 5 seats Colleges, secondary and elementary schools 1 stall for every 2 employees Restaurants, bars, places of entertainment, repair shops, retail and service stores 1 stall for every 140 sq. ft. of floor area Manufacturing and processing plants, laboratories and warehouses 1 stall for every 3 employees Financial institutions; business, governmental and professional offices 1 stall for every 300 sq. ft. of floor area Funeral homes 1 stall for every 4 seats and 1 stall for each vehicle used in the business Bowling alleys 5 stalls for each alley Commercial establishments permitted by conditional use permits in residential areas 1.5 stalls for every 2 employees  
(7)  Uses not listed. In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the provision for a use which is similar shall apply. Where floor space is indicated in subsection (6) of this section as a basis for determining the amount of off-street parking required, floor space or area shall mean the gross floor area inside the exterior walls. 
(8)  Combined uses. Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the total of the number of stalls required for each individual use. Two or more uses may provide required off-street parking spaces in a common parking facility less than the sum of the spaces required for each use individually, provided such uses are not operated during the same hours. The following conditions must be met for any joint use: 
a.  The proposed joint parking space is within 400 feet of the use it will serve. 
b.  The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
c.  A properly drawn legal instrument approved by the common council, executed by the parties concerned, for joint use of off-street parking facilities shall be filed with the city clerk. Said instrument may be a three-party agreement, including the city and all private parties involved. Such instrument shall first be approved by the city attorney. 
(9)  Changes in buildings or use. Whenever a building or use is changed, structurally altered or enlarged to create a need for an increase of 25 percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use is enlarged or changed to create a need for an increase to the extent of 50 percent or more in the floor area or required parking spaces, said building or use shall then comply with the parking requirements set forth in the district in which it is located. 
(10)  Parking lots not on the same parcel or lot as principal use or parking lots which require the moving or demolition of structures. In addition to meeting the other requirements set forth in this section, parking lots in all zoning districts except the light industrial and heavy industrial districts for the parking of motor vehicles which are not on the same original parcel or original lot, whether on record or not, as that of the principal use, or which necessitate the moving or demolition of any structure or building, shall require the granting of a conditional use permit by the common council. The application for such conditional use permit shall state the location, current use of the property, whether any structures or buildings will be demolished and the type of such structures or buildings, the size of the parking lot, the purpose of the parking lot, and such other information as may be required by the planning commission. In determining whether to grant such conditional use permit, the planning commission shall consider any decrease in neighborhood values by permitting such use, any landscaping, drainage, or site plans of such proposed parking lot and the characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood. An opaque privacy fence of a minimum of five feet and no more than eight feet in height may be required in residential zoned districts if requested by an abutting residential property owner. Such fence shall comply with section 52-209 for fence installation and shall run from the front set back line to the rear property line. All abutting residential property owners shall be notified of this privacy fence provision in the notice from the city clerk's office. 
(11)  Downtown parking minimum reduction. The plan commission may reduce the number of required minimum parking stalls for new construction, and expanding portions of, commercial uses on a case-by-case basis within the downtown study area, as identified in the downtown master plan. The plan commission will consider the current availability of on-street parking and municipal parking lots in the vicinity of the development site, and the proposed intensity and uses of the development. The conditions of approval of this parking reduction shall be incorporated into a site plan or site plan revisions submitted to the city for approval. 
(Code 1993, § 17.42; Ord. No. 2007-09-08-C, § 8, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 2017-09-14-D, § 1, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 52-117. - Driveways. 
    All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced or extended after the effective date of this chapter shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Islands between driveway openings except in R-1, R-2, R-3 and B districts shall be provided with minimum of 12 feet between all driveways and three feet at all lot lines. 
(2)  Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not exceed 35 feet at the roadway. 
(3)  Vehicular entrances and exits to drive-in theaters, banks and restaurants, motels, funeral homes, vehicular sales, service, washing and repair stations; garages; or public parking lots shall be not less than 200 feet from any pedestrian entrance or exit to a school, college, university, church, hospital, park, playground, library, public emergency shelter or other place of public assembly. 
(Code 1993, § 17.43) 
Sec. 52-118. - Highway access. 
    No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of expressways nor to any controlled access arterial street without permission of the highway agency that has access control jurisdiction. 
(1)  No direct public or private access shall be permitted to existing or proposed rights-of-way of the following: 
a.  Freeways, interstate highways, interchanges or turning lanes and intersecting or interchanging streets within 1,500 feet of the most remote end of taper of turning lanes. 
b.  Arterial streets intersecting another arterial street within 100 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
c.  Streets intersecting an arterial street within 50 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(2)  Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping or other topographic barriers, shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the streets or highways specified in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the plan commission after review and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such permits shall be temporary, revocable, subject to any conditions required, and issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. 
(Code 1993, § 17.44) 
Secs. 52-119-52-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIGNS 

Sec. 52-150. - Permit required. 
    No sign shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a sign permit or without being in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except those signs excepted in other provisions of this chapter. The sign shall also meet all the structural requirements of chapter 10. 
(Code 1993, § 17.50) 
Sec. 52-151. - Signs excepted. 
    No sign shall be placed upon, over or in any public way, in any residential or agricultural districts provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the erection or placing of any authorized traffic sign, traffic signal or other traffic device or any other sign authorized by law or specifically permitted to project onto the public way by this chapter. All signs are prohibited in all residential and agricultural districts, except the following: 
(1)  Signs over shop windows or doors of a nonconforming business establishment announcing, without display or elaboration, only the name and occupation of the proprietor and not to exceed two feet in height and ten feet in length. 
(2)  Real estate signs not to exceed eight square feet in area which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which such signs are temporarily located. 
(3)  Name, occupation and warning signs are temporarily located on premises. 
(4)  Bulletin boards for public, charitable or religious institutions not to exceed 25 square feet in area, located on the premises. 
(5)  Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat against a structure. 
(6)  Official signs, such as traffic control, parking restrictions, information and notices. 
(7)  Temporary signs or banners other than political candidate signs, may be posted on private property for five days or less in a 30-day period providing they are no closer than 20 feet to a traffic sign. Signs may be posted in the parkway of another property owner with the permission of that property owner. No sign may be posted on the parkways or boulevard adjacent to any federal or state trunk highways (U.S. 12 & 16 and STH 21 & 131) within the city limits. 
(8)  Signs for yard sales or rummage sales may be posted for five days or less in a 30-day period in the parkway between the sidewalk and curb of the street providing they are adjacent to the property of the sale, and are no closer than 30 feet to a traffic sign. Signs may be posted in the parkway of another property owner with the permission of that property owner. No sign may be posted on the parkways or boulevards adjacent to any federal or state trunk highways (U.S. 12 & 16 and STH 21 & 131) within the city limits. 
(9)  Political candidate signs may be posted on private property with the permission of the owner in accordance with state statutes for duration of posting. 
(10)  Electronic message centers shall be permitted pursuant to the requirements of section 52-152(18). 
(Code 1993, § 17.51; Ord. No. 2014-09-10-D, § 2, 9-9-2014) 
Sec. 52-152. - Sign restrictions. 
    Signs are permitted in all business and industrial districts subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No sign shall be placed upon, over or in any public way, provided that this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the erection or placing of any authorized traffic sign, traffic signal or other traffic device or any other sign authorized by law or specifically permitted to project onto the public way by this chapter. Signs, awnings, canopies or marquees may be permitted on, over or in the public way as a conditional use as provided under this chapter. 
(2)  No sign shall be erected on any location where it may, by reason of its position, shape, color or other characteristics, interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, sign, traffic signal or other traffic device, nor shall any sign make use of the words: "STOP, "LOOK", "DRIVE IN", "DANGER" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(3)  Ground signs shall not be located within ten feet of any property line and shall observe the height restrictions pursuant to section 52-40 for principal structures. Ground signs shall not exceed 200 square feet on one side, nor 400 square feet on all sides for any one premises. 
Exception: Ground signs located in the B2 highway business district shall not exceed 70 feet in height and shall not exceed 300 square feet on one side, nor 600 square feet on all sides for any one premises. 
(4)  Vacant lots upon which advertising signs now exist or which are erected pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in an orderly fashion by the frequent and periodic removal of rubbish and maintenance of any vegetation growing on the lot. 
(5)  No sign shall project over any part of any street, except where a business structure is located on the front property line. In such case, a sign may not extend more than five feet into any street. 
(6)  At the termination of a business, commercial or industrial enterprise, all signs shall immediately be removed from the public view. Responsibility for violation shall reside with the property owner according to the latest official tax roll listings. 
(7)  In a shopping center or industrial park, one freestanding identification sign may be permitted, showing the name of the center or park and represented businesses or industries. The area of the sign shall not be permitted within 20 feet of the right-of-way line of the street. 
(8)  The total surface display area of business or industrial signs on the front facade of a building shall not exceed in square feet two times the number of linear feet of width of the building frontage. In the case of a building located on a corner lot, such square-foot display area on the side facing the secondary street may be increased by one time the number of linear feet of the length of the building which faces the secondary street. Such increased permitted display area shall be used only for the erection of a permitted sign on the length of the building that faces the secondary street. Where the premises abut a parking lot, the total of linear feet of the width or length of the building fronting on such parking lots. Such increased display area shall only be utilized by the erection of a permitted sign on that part of the building which abuts such parking lot. In no case shall more wall area usable for sign display be in excess of 200 feet and in no case shall more than one of the criteria stated in this subsection be used to calculate allowable sign area on any one building facade. 
(9)  Business and industrial signs mounted on buildings shall not be permitted to project more than five feet beyond the building line. 
(10)  No more than one business or industrial sign for each business on the premises shall be permitted on the front facade of any business or industrial building, including any advertisement permanently fastened to show windows or display cases. Only one business or industrial sign shall be permitted on each side or rear wall of a business or industrial building. 
(11)  Necessary directional ground signs, which shall not exceed four square feet in area, shall be permitted. Permission to erect such signs shall be obtained from the director of public works and utilities. 
(12)  Business and industrial signs may be internally lighted or illuminated by a good reflector, provided such lighting is so arranged as to prevent glare, and no sign shall be lighted by a lighting of intermittent or varying intensity. Flashing signs, signs which may be mistaken for traffic signal devices or diminish the visibility or effectiveness of traffic signal devices are prohibited. 
(13)  Any sign so erected, constructed or maintained as to obstruct or be attached to any fire escape, window, door or opening used as means of ingress or egress or for firefighting purposes or placed so as to interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation is prohibited. 
(14)  No sign or advertising device shall be erected or maintained at the intersection of streets in such a manner as to obstruct clear vision of the intersection. 
(15)  a.  Billboards, outdoor advertising signs and any business or industrial signs not located on the same property as the business or industry advertised shall be allowed only in commercial business and industrial zones and shall comply with the following: Minimum distance from grade to bottom of sign shall be eight feet. The sign erector shall furnish drawings indicating a minimum design of 30 pounds per square foot wind load capacity (100 mph wind). The maximum size of a sign shall be 300 square feet. Signs shall be spaced a minimum of 300 feet apart when on the same side of the roadway. Measurements shall be taken along the right-of-way. Signs shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet from an occupied residential dwelling. No signs larger than 50 square feet shall be erected on Superior Ave. between Veterans and Clifton Sts. In all other respects signs shall comply with state rules and regulations. 
b.  Digital billboards shall require a conditional use permit and subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Restricted to the B2-highway business district and any industrial zoned districts. 
2.  Brightness limited to 5,000 nits daytime, 500 nits nighttime. 
3.  Signs shall be equipped with an automatic dimmer control. 
4.  Malfunctioning signs shall be equipped to freeze in one position. 
5.  Change in messages shall be limited to one second or less. 
6.  Each message shall be in a fixed position for at least 7.5 seconds 
7.  Digital billboards shall not exceed 300 square feet. 
8.  Digital billboards shall provide a minimum of five hours of public service announcements per month. 
9.  Digital billboards are prohibited from scrolling, flashing, animation or the appearance of movement. 
(16)  Signs shall be permitted to hang from canopies or covered walks in business or industrial districts, provided there is only one sign not to exceed five square feet for each business and the sign is at least eight feet above ground level. 
(17)  "Special Sale" or poster signs are permitted to be posted in store windows in the business district. 
(18)  Electronic message centers shall be permitted in the following zoning districts subject to all applicable requirements prescribed by the zoning district in which the subject property is located and subject to the following: 
a.  In C and I zones such signs may display animation so long as flashing is prohibited. 
b.  In M1, M2, M#, and B zones such signs shall display static images for a period of at least one second before transitioning to another static image. The use of frame effects is permitted so long as flashing and animation are prohibited. 
c.  All electronic message centers shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology which automatically adjusts the sign's brightness in direct correlation with ambient light conditions. 
d.  No electronic message center shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (Lux) meter at a preset distance depending on sign area measured as follows: 
The square root of the product of the sign area and one-hundred. 
Measurement distance = v (12 sq. ft. × 100) = 34.6 
(Code 1993, § 17.52; Ord. No. 2013-09-04-D, § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2014-09-10-D, §§ 3-6, 9-9-2014) 
Sec. 52-153. - Nonconforming signs to be removed. 
    All signs or similar advertising structures that do not conform to the regulations of this chapter shall be removed by the person owning such nonconforming signs or the owners of property on which such signs are located within ten years from the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Should the owner of a nonconforming sign or the owner of property on which a nonconforming sign is located fail to remove such a sign within ten years, the building inspector shall, following 60 days' written notice to the owner of the sign and the owner of the property on which the sign is located, cause the sign to be removed at the expense of the owner of the sign. 
(Code 1993, § 17.53) 
Sec. 52-154. - Bond. 
    Before a permit is granted, every applicant for a permit for a sign, awning, canopy or marquee shall execute a surety bond in a sum to be fixed by the director of public works, not to exceed $25,000.00, of a form and type approved by the city attorney, indemnifying the city by reason of the erection, construction or maintenance of such sign, awning, canopy or marquee. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and conforming to the requirements of this section may be permitted by the city attorney in lieu of a bond. 
(Code 1993, § 17.54) 
Secs. 52-155-52-176. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS 

Sec. 52-177. - Existing nonconforming uses. 
    The lawful nonconforming use of a structure, land or water existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be continued although the use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, provided that: 
(1)  Only that portion of the land or water in actual use may be so continued and the structure may not be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, substituted, moved or structurally altered, except when required to do so by the law or order of a court or administrative body of competent jurisdiction or so as to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The total lifetime structural repairs or alterations shall not exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the structure at the time of its becoming a nonconforming use, unless it is permanently changed to conform to the use provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the board of appeals if such equipment will reduce the incompatibility of the nonconforming use with the neighboring uses. 
(Code 1993, § 17.60) 
Sec. 52-178. - Abolishment or replacement. 
    If such nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for a period of 12 months, any future use of the building, premises, structure, fixture shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. Nonconforming structures that are damaged or destroyed by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold or infestation may be restored to the size, location, and use that it had immediately before the damage or destruction. Provided, however, the size of the structure may be larger than it was immediately before the damage or destruction if necessary for the structure to comply with applicable state and federal requirements. 
(Code 1993, § 17.61; Ord. No. 2007-09-08-C, § 9, 9-10-2007) 
Sec. 52-179. - Existing nonconforming structures. 
    The lawful nonconforming structure existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment of this chapter may be continued, although its size or location does not conform with the lot width, lot area, yard, height, parking and loading and access provisions of this chapter. Expansion of lawful nonconforming structures is allowed provided: 
(1)  The footprint of the expansion does not exceed 50 percent of the footprint (enclosed space) of the structure at the time it became nonconforming; and 
(2)  The expansion shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 17.62; Ord. No. 2013-10-09-D, § 1, 10-8-2013) 
Sec. 52-180. - Changes and substitution. 
    Once a nonconforming use or structure has been changed to conform, it shall not revert back to a nonconforming use or structure. Once the board of appeals has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming use for an existing nonconforming use, the previous use shall lose its status as a legal nonconforming use and become subject to all the conditions required by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1993, § 17.63) 
Sec. 52-181. - Substandard lots. 
    In any residential district, a one-family detached dwelling and its accessory structures may be erected on any legal lot or parcel of record in the county register of deeds office before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment of this chapter. Such lot or parcel shall be in separate ownership from abutting lands. If abutting lands and the substandard lot are owned by the same owner, the substandard lot shall not be sold or used without full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If in separate ownership, all the setback requirements shall be complied with as set forth in the schedule of regulations, section 52-40. 
(Code 1993, § 17.64) 
Secs. 52-182-52-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 52-201. - Bulk, height and other requirements; schedule of regulations. 
    The schedule of regulations, section 52-40 at the end of the zoning district article is hereby adopted and declared to be part of this chapter and may be amended in the same manner as any other part of this chapter. The regulations listed in such schedule for each district, unless otherwise indicated, shall be minimum requirements in every instance of their application, except as modified by the following provisions. 
(Code 1993, § 17.70(1)) 
Sec. 52-202. - Lots of substandard area. 
    The required lot width and area regulations for the construction of a one-family dwelling shall not apply to any lot having less than the required area or width at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any amendment of this chapter increasing the area, width or depth required for such lot and held at that time in separate ownership from adjoining land, provided the setback regulations of section 52-40 are met. 
(Code 1993, § 17.70(2)) 
Sec. 52-203. - Heights of extensions and walls. 
(a)  Extensions beyond limit. Penthouses, stage towers, scenery lifts, elevators, bulkheads, clock towers, cupolas, water tanks and similar structures and mechanical appurtenances may be erected on a building to a height greater than the limit for the district in which the building is located, provided no such exception shall cover, at any level, more than 25 percent of the area of the roof on which it is located, and no such exception shall be used for sleeping or housekeeping purposes or for any commercial purpose other than such as may be incidental to the permitted use of the main building. 
(b)  Parapet walls or cornices. A parapet wall or cornice solely for ornamental purposes may exceed the height limit established for the district, but shall not exceed five feet. 
(c)  Exceptions. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to chimneys, church spires, belfries, standpipes, water towers, flag poles, monuments, transmission towers or cables, radio or television antennas or towers. 
(Code 1993, § 17.70(3)-(5)) 
Sec. 52-204. - Structure extensions. 
(a)  Structure extensions into front or rear yards. Extensions of a structure into a required front or rear yard shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  By cornices, canopies and similar extensions which are ten feet or more above grade, one foot. 
(2)  By open fireproof fire escapes, four feet. 
(3)  By eaves, two feet. 
(4)  By an enclosed vestibule not to exceed eight feet wide and four feet deep, attached to an existing principal building in R-1 district, provided the platform of such a vestibule does not extend closer than 21 feet to a front property or street line. 
(b)  Structure extensions into side yards. Extension of a structure into a required side yard shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  The same provisions shall apply as for extensions into required front and rear yards, except no porch, terrace or outside stairway shall project more than three feet into any required yard lot line and an outside stairway may extend into any required side yard only if same is unroofed and unenclosed above and below the steps thereof. 
(2)  An attached garage shall be governed by the requirements in the schedule of regulations, section 52-40 for the principal use the garage is attached to. 
(Code 1993, § 17.70(6), (7)) 
Sec. 52-205. - Structure on corner lots. 
    A structure located on a corner lot shall have a side yard on the street that is at least 50 percent greater than the minimum required for parking motor vehicles. Motor vehicles on any front yard shall not be permitted within five feet of the right-of-way line of a street. 
(Code 1993, § 17.70(8)) 
Sec. 52-206. - Parking in front yards. 
    No front yard of a lot in any residential or business district upon which a dwelling unit is located shall be used for parking of motor vehicles or recreational vehicles nor shall motor vehicles or any recreational vehicle parked on any other front yard be permitted within five feet of the right-of-way line of a street. Motor vehicle and recreation vehicles as enumerated and defined in section 18-53. The enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility of the building inspector, or any other code enforcement officer. 
(Code 1993, § 17.70(9); Ord. No. 2013-11-11-D, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 2018-12-11-D, § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Sec. 52-207. - Screens and buffers. 
(a)  Required buffer strips in industrial districts. Where an industrial district abuts a residential district, there shall be provided along any rear, side or front line coincidental with any industrial-residential boundary a buffer strip not less than 40 feet in width as measured at right angles to the lot line. Planting materials at least six feet in height of such variety and growth habits as to provide a yearround, effective visual screen when viewed from the residential district shall be planted with the exterior 25 feet abutting the residential district. If the required planting screen is set back from the industrial-residential boundary, the portion of the buffer strip facing the residential district shall be attractively maintained. The exterior 25 feet of the buffer strip shall not be devoted to the parking of vehicles or storage of any material or accessory uses. The interior 15 feet may be devoted to parking vehicles. 
(b)  Required screens and buffers, specified areas. Where property zoned business (North of Jefferson St.; East of Grain Ave.; South of View St.; West of Hugh Dickie Dr.; and other similar areas) abuts a residential district, there shall be provided screens and buffers to reduce the impact of proposed uses on adjacent properties. Buffer yards and screens may be required jointly or separately between the abutting property owners. 
(Code 1993, § 17.70(10), (11)) 
Sec. 52-208. - Performance standards; compliance. 
    This section permits specific uses in specific districts and these performance standards are designed to limit, restrict and prohibit the effects of those uses outside their premises or district. No structure, land or water shall hereafter be used, except in compliance with the district regulations and with the following performance standards: 
(1)  Air pollution. No activity shall emit any fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists or gases in such quantities as to cause soiling or danger to the health of persons, animals, vegetation or other forms of property. No activity shall emit any liquid or solid particles in concentrations exceeding 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the conveying gas, nor visible smoke of any color equal to or darker than No. 2 on the Ringleman Chart described in the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7718 in any industrial district. 
(2)  Fire and explosion hazards. All activity involving the manufacturing, utilization, processing or storage of inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion, and with adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices that are standard in the industry. All materials that range from active to intense burning shall be manufactured, utilized, processed and stored only in completely enclosed buildings which have incombustible exterior walls and an automatic fire extinguishing system. 
(3)  Glare and heat. No activity shall emit glare or heat that is visible or measurable outside its premises, except activities in the general industrial district which may emit direct or sky-reflected glare which shall not be visible outside the district. All operations producing intense glare or heat shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not to be visible outside their premises. 
(4)  Liquid or solid wastes. No activity shall discharge, onto any land or into any water or public sewer at any point any materials of such nature, quantity, noxiousness, toxicity or temperature which can contaminate, pollute or harm the quantity or quality of any water supply; overload the existing municipal utilities; or can injure or damage persons or property. 
(5)  Noise and vibrations. There shall be no noise or vibration emanating from the operation which will be audible or discernible to human sensing beyond the boundaries or the immediate site. 
(6)  Odors. No activity shall emit any odorous matter of such nature or quantity as to be offensive, obnoxious or unhealthful outside their premises. 
(7)  Radioactivity and electrical disturbances. No activity shall emit radioactivity or electrical disturbances outside its premises that are dangerous or adversely affect the use of neighboring premises. 
(Code 1993, § 17.71) 
Sec. 52-209. - Fences and hedges. 
(a)  Permits. No person shall erect or construct any fence on any premises in the city without first obtaining a permit. Applicant for such permit shall provide a property survey map bearing the seal and signature of a Wisconsin Professional (Registered) Land Surveyor showing the applicant's property ownership line(s) and monuments marking the corners of the property. A sketch showing known lot lines (as evidenced by survey monuments), fence location and design shall accompany the application for such permit. The building inspector shall approve the application before construction. 
(b)  Requirements. 
(1)  No fence exceeding three feet in height shall be erected, constructed or maintained in front of the setback line for principal buildings on any premises within a residential district. 
(2)  Property owners shall locate fences no closer than two feet from the property line so that each side of the fence may be properly maintained by the owner of the fence while on said owners property. This requirement can be waived if a maintenance free fence is installed. A property survey which identifies both the boundaries of the property and the location of the proposed fence is required to obtain a building permit. 
Property survey: Property lines that have been determined and defined by a Wisconsin professional land surveyor, marked on the ground by monuments at the property corners and delineated on a signed and sealed map using minimum standards as defined by AE-7 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
(3)  On any corner lot where a front or side yard is required or provided, no fence, hedge or other obstruction shall be placed so as to interfere with clear vision from one street to the other across the corner. See traffic visibility provisions in section 52-114. 
(4)  No fence exceeding six feet in height shall be erected, constructed or maintained on any premises in a residential zoning district. Security fences are permitted in all districts except residential districts, but shall not exceed ten feet in height and shall be of an open type similar to woven wire or wrought iron fencing. Fences exceeding six feet in height to a maximum height of eight feet installed for the purpose of providing visual screening for onsite utilities, dumpsters, or similar items may be allowed by the plan commission. Swimming pool fences are covered in section 52-210. 
(5)  No barbed wire or electric fence under six feet in height shall be permitted within the city, except when used for agricultural purposes. Any barbed wire or electric fence over six feet in height shall be approved by the building inspector prior to construction. 
(6)  Any fence which exists at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but does not conform with the provisions thereof, shall not be altered or enlarged without making the entire fence conform with the provisions of this section. 
(7)  Any fence constructed so as to make it impassible for the reading of gas, electrical and water meters shall have a gate which gives access to them without entering through any building. 
(Code 1993, § 17.72(1); Ord. No. 2012-09-07-D, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2017-12-17-D, §§ 2, 3, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 52-210. - Private swimming pools. 
    No private swimming pool shall hereafter be constructed, altered, remodeled or improved within the city, unless approved and a permit issued by the building inspector. 
(1)  Private swimming pool defined. A private swimming pool is a body of water contained in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or other container, whether located indoors or outdoors, capable of containing water exceeding 18 inches in depth and exceeding 600 cubic feet and used or intended to be used solely by the owner or lessee thereof and his family and invited guests. It includes all structures, equipment, appliances and other facilities appurtenant to and intended for the operation and maintenance of a swimming pool. 
(2)  Construction requirements. In addition to such other code requirements which may be applicable, no construction permit shall be issued, unless the following construction requirements are to be complied with: 
a.  Materials. The private swimming pool shall be built of approved poured concrete or approved masonry construction or of other suitable material approved by the building inspector. 
b.  Recirculation system. A satisfactory recirculation and purification system shall be installed and shall at all times be operated while the pool is being used. 
c.  Fences. 
1.  Required. Every outdoor private swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than five feet in height, which shall be constructed in such a manner so as to exclude uninvited children or animals. Openings, if any, shall not be larger than four inches in any direction. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as a part of such enclosure. All gates or doors in such enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices for keeping such gates securely closed when not in actual use. 
2.  Modifications. The board of appeals may make modifications in individual cases upon a showing of good cause with respect to the height, nature or location of the fence, wall, gates or latches or the necessity therefor, provided the protection sought under this section is not reduced. 
d.  Drainage. Every private swimming pool shall be provided with suitable drainage and no pool shall be drained onto lands of other property owners. 
e.  Special regulation. For above ground pool installations whose exterior walls exceed five feet in height, in lieu of the above fence requirement, a safety ladder or pool cover may be substituted. The pool cover shall be of such design and material that it can be securely fastened and, when in place, support a person weighing 150 lbs. When the pool is not in use, the ladder shall be raised a minimum of five feet above the ground in order to maintain a continuous five feet safety barrier. If the pool is not equipped with a raiseable safety ladder, the ladder shall be detachable so it can be removed from the pool and placed out of reach of small children. Where a raised deck and permanent stairs are part of the pool construction, the stair access shall be controlled by a self-latching and self-closing gate which shall not be left in an open position at any time. The deck shall be constructed so as to maintain a continuous five-foot height or fence safety barrier around the exterior circumference of the pool structure. These requirements shall be subject to inspection and enforcement by the building inspector. 
(3)  Building permit issuance. Before any work commences, application for a permit therefor, made as provided in this chapter, and the plans, specifications and pertinent explanatory data shall be submitted to the building inspector, and no work shall be commenced until such permit has been issued by the building inspector and the applicable fee paid by the applicant. 
(4)  Use permit required. No private swimming pool for which a building permit has been issued shall be used by the owner, operator or lessee of the same without a use permit from the building inspector, who shall issue such use permit only after he has inspected the swimming pool and ascertained that the same conforms in all respects with the provisions of this chapter, the zoning laws and any other code requirement of the city which is applicable thereto. 
(5)  Location. For purposes of this chapter, private swimming pools shall be deemed accessory buildings for purposes of complying with zoning regulations. No swimming pool or pool fence shall restrict the access to any meter reading, such as gas, electrical or water. 
(Code 1993, § 17.72(2)) 
Sec. 52-211. - Satellite television antennas. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Conventional television or radio antenna means any antenna, other than a satellite television antenna, that is located outside of a main or accessory building. 
    Satellite television antenna means an apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. 
    Usable satellite signal means a satellite signal which, when viewed on a conventional television set, is at least equal in picture quality to the picture quality of a signal received from local commercial television stations by way of a television antenna that conforms with the zoning code and all other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  This section shall govern the erection or construction of all conventional television and radio antennas and satellite television antennas, the erection or construction of which has not been substantially commenced prior to the enactment of this section. 
(2)  Whenever the height or other restrictions of this section conflict with restrictions in other ordinances of the city as applied to a particular antenna, the restrictions set out in the ordinance from which this section is derived shall control as to that particular antenna. 
(c)  Antenna location. 
(1)  No conventional or satellite television or radio antenna which exceed 24 inches in diameter may be placed in the front yard of any lot in the city. For corner lots, such antennas may not be placed in either of the yards that face a street or road. 
(2)  Satellite television antennas exceeding 24 inches in diameter may be placed on a lot in the city only in the following manner: 
a.  If a usable satellite signal is receivable with the antenna which is located in the rear yard, the antenna may be located only in the rear yard. 
b.  If the antenna cannot receive a usable satellite signal in the rear yard, but can receive such a signal while located in a side yard, the antenna may be located only in a side yard. For corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does not face a street or road. 
c.  If the antenna cannot receive a usable satellite signal from either the rear or side yards, the antenna may be located only on the roof of any main or accessory building on the lot. 
d.  The board of public works and utilities shall determine whether a signal constitutes a usable satellite signal, based on evidence provided to the board by the person seeking a permit to erect or construct the antenna. 
e.  All conventional television and radio antennas and satellite television antennas must be erected or constructed at a location in conformance with the setback requirements of the city zoning code. 
f.  No ground mounted conventional television or radio antenna or satellite television antenna may be erected over a sewer pipe or other underground conduit, wire or apparatus. For purposes of this chapter, all conventional television and radio antenna or satellite television antenna shall be deemed an accessory building for purposes of complying with zoning regulations. 
(d)  Antenna size and number. 
(1)  No ground mounted satellite television antenna may exceed 15 feet in height, as measured from the ground to the highest point of the antenna. 
(2)  The diameter of satellite television antennas shall not exceed ten feet. 
(3)  At any one time, no lot may have existing or erected more than one satellite television antenna. 
(e)  Permit for construction. Before any satellite antenna or any ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna that will be placed on a tower may be constructed or erected on any lot in the city, the owner or occupant of that lot shall procure a permit from the building inspector. The fee for the permit shall be established by resolution for accessory structures. This section shall not apply to satellite television antennas 24 inches or less in diameter. 
(f)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  The color of any satellite television antenna shall be such that it blends into its surroundings. 
(2)  All ground-mounted conventional television and radio antennas and satellite television antennas shall be landscaped so as to screen them from the view of people on streets and surrounding lots. Screening is not required to be so complete that it interferes with the reception of the antenna. 
(3)  All conventional television and radio antennas and satellite television antennas shall be erected in a secure, wind-resistant manner. 
(4)  All wiring necessary for the use of the antenna between any ground-mounted antenna and a building or between the building on which the antenna is located and any other building on the lot shall be buried underground. All wiring and grounding shall conform to the state electrical code. 
(Code 1993, § 17.72(3)) 
Secs. 52-212-52-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AIRPORT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 52-231. - Airport regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airport means the Bloyer Field Airport located in Section 3, Town 17N, Range 1W, Monroe County, Wisconsin. 
    Airport hazard means any structure or object of natural growth which obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off. 
    Nonconforming use means any structure or tree which does not conform to a regulation prescribed in this chapter or an amendment thereto as of the effective date of such regulation. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or body politic and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof. 
    Runway means a level portion of an airport having a surface specially developed and maintained for the landing and take-off of aircraft. 
    Structure means any object constructed or installed by man. 
    Trees does not include shrubs, bushes or plants which do not grow to a height of more than 20 feet. 
(b)  Zones. All zones established by this section are as shown on the map, dated October 31, 1990, entitled, "Height Limitation Zoning Map, Bloyer Field Airport, Tomah, Wisconsin", which is hereby adopted as part of this chapter and is on file with the city clerk. 
(c)  Height limitation zones. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be constructed, altered, located or permitted to remain after such construction, alteration or location and no trees shall be allowed to grow to a height in excess of the height limit indicated on the map referred to in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Exceptions. The restrictions contained in subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to objects which are less than 35 feet in height above ground level at the object site within one-half mile of the airport boundary, to structures less than 50 feet in height above ground within the area beginning one-half mile from the airport boundary or to structures less than 100 feet in height above ground within the area beginning one mile from the airport boundary and extending to three miles from the airport boundary. 
(e)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  Not retroactive. The regulations prescribed in this section shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any nonconforming use or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use, except as otherwise provided by subsection (g)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Changes. Nothing contained in this article shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure if the construction or alteration of such was begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and if such is diligently prosecuted. 
(3)  Removal. This article shall not interfere with the removal of nonconforming uses by purchase or the use of eminent domain. 
(f)  Administration. The airport manager shall administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the building inspector upon a form furnished by him. Applications which are by this section to be decided by the airport committee shall be granted or denied within 15 days of the date of filing of the application, unless Federal Aviation Administration approval is requested. Applications for action by the board of appeals shall be immediately transmitted by the airport committee to the board of appeals for hearing and decision. There shall be no charge for applications or permits. 
(g)  Permits. 
(1)  Future structures. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected or installed or be permitted to remain in any zone created by subsection (b) of this section until the owner or his agent shall have applied in writing for a permit therefor and obtained such permit from the airport manager, except structures less than 35 feet in height above the ground and within one-half mile of the airport boundary, structures less than 50 feet in height above the ground within the area beginning one-half mile from the airport boundary and extending to one mile from the airport boundary, and structures less than 100 feet in height above the ground within the area beginning one mile from the airport boundary and extending to three miles from the airport boundary. Such permit shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises prior to and during the period of construction, erection, installation or establishment. Application for such permit shall indicate the use for which the permit is desired and shall describe and locate the use with sufficient particularity to permit the building inspector to determine whether such use would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the building inspector shall issue the permit applied for. 
(2)  Existing uses. Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced, altered or rebuilt, a permit shall be applied for and secured in the manner prescribed by subsection (1) of this section authorizing such change, replacement or repair. No such permit shall be denied if the structure will not become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived or when the application for permit was made. 
(h)  Appeals and review. 
(1)  Variances. Upon appeal in special cases the board of appeals may, after investigation and public hearing, grant such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this section would result in unnecessary hardship and such relief will do substantial justice and be in accord with the spirit of this chapter and does not create a hazard to the safe, normal operation of aircraft. 
(2)  Aggrieved person. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision or action of the building inspector made in his administration of this article may appeal such decision or action to the board of appeals. 
(3)  Procedure. Any appeal taken pursuant to this article shall be in conformity with the procedure established by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). 
(Code 1993, § 17.75) 
Secs. 52-232-52-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 52-256. - Changes and amendments. 
(a)  Authority. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice require, the city may, by ordinance, change the district boundaries or amend, change or supplement the regulations established by this chapter or amendments thereto. Such change or amendment shall be subject to the review and recommendation of the plan commission. 
(b)  Initiation. A change or amendment may be initiated by the city council, plan commission or by a petition of one or more of the owners or lessees of property within the area proposed to be changed. 
(c)  Petitions. Petitions for any change to the district boundaries or amendments to the regulations shall be filed with the city clerk, describe the premises to be rezoned or the regulations to be amended, list the reasons justifying the petition, specify the proposed use and have attached the following: 
(1)  A plot plan drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet showing the area proposed to be rezoned, its location, its dimensions, the location and classification of adjacent zoning districts and the location and existing use of all properties within 200 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
(2)  Names and addresses of owners of all properties lying within 200 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
(3)  Additional information required by the plan commission or city council. 
(4)  Fee receipt from the city treasurer in the amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Recommendations. The plan commission shall review all proposed changes and amendments within the corporate limits and shall recommend that the petition be granted as requested, modified or denied. The recommendation shall be made at a meeting subsequent to the meeting at which the petition is first submitted and shall be made in writing to the city council. The plan commission shall review all proposed changes and amendments within the zoning jurisdiction and shall vote on the matter within its jurisdiction. 
(e)  Hearings. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing upon the purposed zoning change, giving at least ten days' prior notice by publication at least three times during the preceding 30 days on consecutive weeks listing the time, place and the change or amendments proposed. The planning commission shall also give at least ten days' prior written notice to the clerk of any municipality within 1,000 feet of any land to be affected by the proposed change or amendment. 
(f)  City council's action. Following such hearing and after careful consideration of the plan commission's recommendations, the city council shall vote on the passage of the proposed change or amendment. The plan commission's recommendations may be overruled only by three-fourths of the full membership of the city council. 
(g)  Protest. In the event of a protest against such district change or amendment to the regulations of this chapter, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more of land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such changes or amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the full city council. 
(Code 1993, § 17.81; Ord. No. 2007-09-08-C, § 11, 9-10-2007) 
Sec. 52-257. - Annexation/zoning change/alteration in lot size. 
(a)  Any parcel annexed to the city shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The parcel shall be designated on a map which properly identifies all adjacent city boundaries; and 
(2)  The parcel shall be designated on either: 
a.  A certified survey map; or 
b.  A map prepared by a registered land surveyor which identifies both the boundaries of the property sought to be annexed and an accurate legal description. 
(3)  Fee receipt from the city treasurer in the amount set by the city's resolution. 
(b)  Any zoning change requested in outlots or in unplatted land shall be on a map prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(c)  Any alteration or change requested in lot size or configuration shall be on either: 
(1)  A certified survey map; or 
(2)  A map prepared by a registered land surveyor which identifies both the new and old boundaries of the property sought to be changed and an accurate legal description. 
(Code 1993, § 17.82) 
Secs. 52-258-52-277. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 52-278. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter, including those provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code or other materials that are incorporated by reference, shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $20.00 nor more than $500.00 and the costs of prosecution, together with the penalty assessment imposed by Wis. Stats. § 165.87, where applicable, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and the costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment of such forfeiture and the costs of prosecution, but not exceeding 90 days for each violation. 
(Code 1993, § 17.90) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1993 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1993 Code, as updated through September 10, 2007, that are included herein. Sections of the 1993 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1993 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.01(1) 2-55 1.01(2) 2-57 1.01(3) 2-23 1.01(4) 2-2 1.02-1.04 2-58-2-60 1.05(1) 2-61 1.06 2-62 1.07 2-56 1.08 2-231 1.08(1), 1.08(2) 2-832, 2-833 1.08(3), (4) 2-834 1.08(8) 2-835 1.10 2-58 1.11 2-1 2-23 1.12 2-63 1.12(1) 14-19 1.12(5), 1.12(6) 14-20, 14-21 1.12(6)-1.12(8) 14-22-14-24 1.14 2-64 1.15 2-68 1.17(1) 2-66 1.17(2) 2-65 1.18 2-67 1.19 2-65 1.20(1), 1.20(2) 2-274, 2-275 1.20(2), 1.20(3) 2-276 1.20(3) 2-277, 2-278 1.20(4) 2-279 1.21 2-69 1.21(1) 2-307, 2-308 1.21(2) 2-309 1.21(3a), (3b) 2-310 1.21(3c) 2-311 1.21(3d) 2-312 1.21(3e) 2-313 1.22 2-166 1.23(1)-(3) 2-345 1.23(4) 2-346 1.23(6) 2-345 1.23(7), (8) 2-347 1.23(9), (10) 2-348 1.23(11)-1.23(13) 2-349-2-351 1.23(13) 2-352 1.24(1)-1.24(4) 2-378-2-381 1.25 2-186 1.26(1), 1.26(2) 2-406, 2-407 1.26(3) 2-406 1.26(4) 2-409 1.26(5) 2-408 1.26(6) 2-410 1.26(8) 2-408 1.26(9) 2-411 1.30 2-211 1.40 2-660 1.41(1), 1.41(2) 2-661, 2-662 1.42 2-663 1.43, 1.44 2-685 1.45 2-686 1.46(1) 2-722 1.46(2) 2-724 1.46(3) 2-723 1.46(4), 1.46(5) 2-720, 2-721 1.48, 1.49 2-687, 2-688 2.01(1)-(4) 2-24 2.01(5) 2-27 2.02, 2.03 2-25, 2-26 2.04(1)-(3) 2-32 2.04(4) 2-33 2.05, 2.06 2-28, 2-29 2.06, 2.07 2-30, 2-31 2.08 2-31 3.01 42-113 3.02(1), (2) 2-769 3.02(3) 2-771 3.02(4a) 2-770 3.02(4b) 2-772 3.02(4c) 2-773 3.03 2-747 3.04(1), 3.04(2) 2-800, 2-801 3.04(3a), (3b) 2-802 3.04(3c) 2-803 3.04(4) 2-804 3.05 2-748 3.06(1), 3.06(2) 2-749, 2-750 3.07 12-88, 12-89 3.07(1) 42-1 3.07(2) 42-23 3.07(2), 3.07(3) 42-27, 42-28 3.07(3) 42-29 3.07(5), 3.07(6) 42-30, 42-31 3.07(6), 3.07(7) 42-32, 42-33 3.07(8) 42-25 3.07(9), 3.07(10) 42-34, 42-35 3.07(11) 42-26 3.08 42-2 3.09(1) 42-1 4.01-4.05 26-21-26-25 4.06 26-24 4.07 26-1 4.08 26-54-26-57 5.01, 5.02 20-19, 20-20 5.03-5.07 20-19-20-23 5.08 20-19 5.09, 5.10 20-24, 20-25 5.11(2) 20-58 5.11(2)A, 5.11(2)B 20-59, 20-60 5.11(2)B 20-61 5.11(2)C 20-81-20-84 5.11(2)D 20-112-20-114 5.20 20-142 5.21 20-148 5.22, 5.23 20-143, 20-144 5.24 20-147 5.25, 5.26 20-145, 20-146 6.01, 6.02 16-1, 16-2 7.01 44-1 7.02 44-102, 44-103 7.03 44-79 7.04, 7.05 44-58, 44-59 7.06 44-104 7.08 44-122-44-127 7.10(1) 44-285 7.10(2) 44-284 7.10(3)-7.10(6) 44-286-44-289 7.10(7), (8) 44-290 7.10(9)-7.10(13) 44-291-44-295 7.11 38-34 7.11(1) 44-203-44-206 7.11(2)-7.11(4) 44-207-44-209 7.11(5), 7.11(6) 44-201, 44-202 7.12 44-21 7.14 44-22 7.15 44-227-44-229 7.16 44-153, 44-154 7.17-7.21 44-23-44-27 7.22, 7.23 44-124 7.24 44-177-44-181 7.30(1)-7.30(4) 44-252-44-255 7.31(1)-7.31(5) 44-256-44-260 8.01 38-5 8.02 38-4 8.02(2) 38-29 8.02(3), 8.02(4) 38-31, 38-32 8.02(5)-(7) 38-33 8.03(1) 38-57 8.03(2)(a)-(d) 38-58 8.03(2)(e) 38-59, 38-60 8.04(1) 38-80 8.04(2) 38-82 8.04(3)(a) 38-81 8.04(3)(b) 38-85 8.04(3)(b), (d) 38-83 8.04(3)(c) 38-86 8.04(3)(d) 38-84 8.04(4), 8.04(5) 38-87, 38-88 8.04(6) 38-79 8.05(1) 38-145, 38-146 8.05(2) 38-147 8.07(1), (2) 38-122 8.07(3)-8.07(6) 38-120-38-123 8.07(7) 38-122 8.08(1) 38-1 8.08(3) 38-1 8.08(5) 38-2 8.08(6) 38-1 8.09 48-23 48-30, 48-31 8.09(1), (2) 48-19 8.09(2)-8.09(4) 48-20-48-22 8.09(4), 8.09(5) 48-24, 48-25 8.09(5) 48-26-48-29 8.09(7) 48-32, 48-33 8.09(8) 48-34, 48-35 8.09(9) 48-36, 48-37 8.10 38-3 8.11(1) 36-55 8.11(1)-(3) 36-56 8.11(3) 36-55 8.11(4)-8.11(6) 36-57-36-59 9.02(1) 28-80 9.02(2) 28-53 9.02(3) 28-81 9.03 28-82 9.04(1), (2) 28-83 9.04(2), 9.04(3) 30-118, 30-119 9.04(3) 28-53 9.05(1)-9.05(3) 20-263-20-265 9.05(4) 20-263 9.05(5), 9.05(6) 20-266, 20-267 9.06 20-180 9.06(1) 20-181 9.06(2)(b)-9.06(2)(d) 20-211-20-213 9.06(2)(e) 20-215 9.06(2)(f) 20-214 9.06(3) 20-239-20-242 9.06(5) 20-185 9.06(6), (9) 20-182 9.06(7) 20-186 9.06(8), 9.06(9) 20-183, 20-184 9.07-9.12 28-42-28-47 9.13 28-189-28-191 9.14-9.16 28-48-28-50 9.17 28-42 9.18 28-51 9.19 8-63 9.20 28-110 9.21 28-156-28-160 9.22 28-134-28-136 9.23(1)(a), 9.23(1)(b) 24-51, 24-52 9.23(2)(a), 9.23(2)(b) 24-53, 24-54 9.23(2)(c)(1), 9.23(2)(c)(2) 24-55, 24-56 9.23(2)(c)(3)(a) 24-57 9.23(2)(c)(3)(a)1-5 24-58 9.23(2)(c)(4) 24-58 9.24 28-52 9.29.29 28-19 10.01, 10.02 18-19 10.03-10.05 18-20-18-22 10.06(1)-10.06(3) 18-52-18-54 10.06(3)-10.06(6) 18-55-18-58 10.07 2-70 10.07(2) 18-91 10.07(4)-10.07(6) 18-92-18-94 10.07(6)-10.07(8) 18-95-18-97 10.08(1), 10.08(2) 18-123, 18-124 10.08(3) 18-128 10.08(4)-10.08(6) 18-125-18-127 10.08(7) 18-129 10.10 18-24 11.02 24-1, 24-2 11.03 46-1 11.04(2) 8-60 11.04(3)(a), 11.04(3)(b) 8-61, 8-62 11.05(1) 36-19 11.05(3) 36-26 11.05(4)(a) 36-32 11.05(4)(d)-(f) 36-26 11.05(5) 36-33 11.05(6) 36-27 11.05(7) 36-21 11.05(8)(a) 36-24 11.05(8)(b) 36-22 11.05(8)(c) 36-25 11.05(8)(d), 11.05(8)(e) 36-28, 36-29 11.05(9) 36-20 36-23 11.05(10) 36-25 11.12(1)-11.12(4) 48-63-48-66 11.12(4) 48-67, 48-68 11.12(5), 11.12(6) 48-69, 48-70 11.13, 11.14 24-3, 24-4 11.15(1)-11.15(3) 36-77-36-79 11.15(4)(a) 36-31 11.15(5) 36-30 11.15(6) 36-80 11.16(1) 24-27 11.16(2)(a), 11.16(2)(b) 24-29, 24-30 11.16(3) 24-28 11.16(4) 24-31 12.02 12-1 12-29 12.02(5) 12-32 12.02(6) 12-35 12.02(7) 12-31 12.02(9) 4-38 12-33 12.02(11)(c) 4-32 12.03(1) 4-2 12.03(2)-12.03(4) 4-24-4-26 12.03(5) 4-1 12.03(5)(a) 4-27 12.03(5)(a)1-12.03(5)(a)3 4-29-4-31 12.03(5)(a)3.f 4-33 12.03(5)(a)5 4-34 12.03(5)(c) 4-35 12.03(5)(c)1, 12.03(5)(c)2 4-66, 4-67 12.03(5)(c)3, 4, 12.03(5)(c)5, 6 4-68, 4-69 12.03(5)(d) 4-65 12.03(5)(f), 12.03(5)(g) 4-36, 4-37 12.03(6)(a)-12.03(6)(d) 4-97-4-100 12.03(6)(d)1-3 4-101 12.03(6)(e) 4-102 12.03(7)(a) 4-133 12.03(7)(c) 4-134 12.03(7)(e) 4-136 12.03(7)(g) 4-135 12.03(7)(h) 4-137, 4-138 12.03(7)-(9) 4-1 12.03(8)(a)1-8 4-160 12.03(8)(a)9 4-161 12.03(8)(b)1(a)-12.03(8)(b)1(c) 4-212-4-214 12.03(8)(d)1-12.03(8)(d)3 4-191-4-193 12.03(8)(e) 4-194 12.03(9)(b)-12.03(9)(d) 4-237-4-239 12.04(1) 8-1 12.04(2)-12.04(5) 8-118-8-121 12.04(6) 8-85-8-87 12.04(7) 8-149 8-151, 8-152 12.04(8) 8-122, 8-123 12.04(9) 8-124 12.06(1) 50-1 12.06(2) 50-21 12.06(3) 50-23 50-26 12.06(4) 50-24 12.06(5) 50-28 12.06(6) 50-27 12.06(7) 50-25 12.06(8) 50-22 12.06(9), 12.06(10) 50-29, 50-30 12.06(11) 50-32 12.06(12) 50-31 12.06(13) 50-67 12.06(14) 50-37 12.06(15) 50-34, 50-35 12.06(16) 50-36 12.06(16), 12.06(17) 50-38, 50-39 12.06(18) 50-33 12.07(1) 32-48 12.07(2) 32-1 12.07(3) 32-49 12.07(4)(a), 12.07(4)(b) 32-50, 32-51 12.07(4)(c) 32-53 12.07(4)(d) 32-52 32-56 12.07(5)(a), 12.07(5)(b) 32-54, 32-55 12.07(6) 32-57 12.07(7)(a) 32-91 12.07(7)(b)1-12.07(7)(b)3 32-92-32-94 12.07(7)(b)4 32-91 12.07(8) 32-90 12.07(9) 32-58 12.07(10) 32-2 12.09(1), 12.09(2) 6-19, 6-20 12.09(3) 6-22 12.09(4) 6-21 12.09(5), 12.09(6) 6-23, 6-24 12.09(6), 12.09(7) 6-25, 6-26 12.09(a) 6-27 12.10(1) 6-58 12.11(1) 6-77 12.11(3) 6-78 12.13(1)-12.13(3) 34-139-34-141 12.14(1)-12.14(3) 12-61-12-63 12.14(3) 12-64 12.15(1) 34-1 12.15(2) 34-56-34-60 12.15(3) 34-61, 34-62 34-65, 34-66 12.15(4), 12.15(5) 34-63, 34-64 12.15(6) 34-3, 34-4 34-93-34-95 34-119, 34-120 12.15(7) 34-67 12.15(8) 34-2 12.16 4-28 12-2 12.16(2), 12.16(3) 12-27, 12-28 12.16(4) 12-30 12.16(5), 12.16(6) 12-34, 12-35 12.17(1)-12.17(6) 12-109-12-114 12.17(7), 12.17(8) 12-116, 12-117 12.17(10)(a)-(c) 12-119 12.17(10)(d) 12-118 12.17(10)(e) 12-115 13.02(1) 46-2 13.10(1), 13.10(2) 46-126, 46-127 13.10(2), 13.10(3) 46-128, 46-129 13.10(4) 46-127 13.10(4)(a), (b) 46-160 13.10(4)(c) 46-161 13.10(4)(d), (e) 46-159 13.10(4)(f), (g) 46-163 13.10(4)(j) 46-160 13.10(4)(k) 46-162 13.10(5)(i)-(m) 46-225 13.10(5)(a) 46-127 13.10(5)(b) 46-218 13.10(5)(d) 46-223 13.10(5)(d)-(f) 46-222 13.10(5)(g), (h) 46-224 13.10(5)(n), 13.10(5)(o) 46-220, 46-221 13.10(5)(p) 46-219 13.10(6) 46-244 13.10(6)(a)-13.10(6)(d) 46-245-46-248 13.10(6)(d) 46-249-46-251 13.10(6)(e) 46-252 13.10(7) 46-306 13.10(7)(a) 46-307, 46-308 13.10(7)(b) 46-308 13.10(7)(c)-(e) 46-309 13.10(7)(f) 46-310 13.10(7)(g) 46-309 13.10(7)(h), (i) 46-311 13.10(7)(j) 46-312, 46-313 13.10(7)(k), 13.10(7)(l) 46-314, 46-315 13.10(8)(a), (b) 46-336 13.10(8)(c) 46-337 13.10(8)(d) 46-339 13.10(8)(e), 13.10(8)(f) 46-338, 46-339 13.10(8)(g) 46-316 13.10(9)(i) 46-376 13.10(9)(a), 13.10(9)(b) 46-367, 46-368 13.10(9)(c)-13.10(9)(h) 46-370-46-375 13.10(9)(j) 46-377 13.10(9)(l) 46-369 13.10(10)(a)-13.10(10)(g) 46-398-46-404 13.10(11) 46-130 13.11-13.13 46-195-46-197 13.14-13.17 46-283-46-286 13.30-13.32 46-76-46-78 13.33 46-49-46-51 13.34 46-27, 46-28 13.36(1)-13.36(6) 46-100-46-105 13.36(7), (8) 46-106 13.37(1)-13.37(3) 46-528-46-530 13.37(3)-13.37(5) 46-531-46-533 13.38(2) 46-422 46-424 13.38(3) 46-423 13.38(4), 13.38(5) 46-450, 46-451 13.38(5) 46-452-46-454 13.38(6) 46-499-46-502 13.38(7) 46-477-46-480 13.38(8) 46-425 46-449 13.39 46-29 13.50 46-30 14.01 2-71 14.02 10-1 14.03(1) 10-4 14.03(1)(b) 10-34 14.03(2) 10-34 14.03(2), (3) 10-37 14.03(4)-14.03(6) 10-38-10-40 14.03(7)(2) 10-3 14.03(8), 14.03(9) 10-5, 10-6 14.03(10) 10-92 14.03(11) 10-33 14.03(13) 10-93 14.04 10-96 14.04(1)(a) 10-95 14.04(1)(d) 10-36 14.04(1)(e) 10-35 14.04(1)(f) 10-94 14.04(2)(a) 10-95 14.04(2)(c) 10-36 14.04(2)(e) 10-35 14.04(2)(g) 10-69, 10-70 14.04(3)(a) 10-121 14.04(3)(b)-(e) 10-122 14.04(3)(f), 14.04(3)(g) 10-123, 10-124 14.04)3)(g)(2) 10-71, 10-72 14.04(3)(g)(3), 14.04(3)(g)(4) 10-73, 10-74 14.04(3)(h) 10-122 14.04(3)(i) 10-125 14.04(5)(a)-14.04(5)(c) 10-173-10-175 14.04(5)(e) 10-176 14.04(4)(a)-14.04(4)(c) 10-149-10-151 14.04(4)(d) 10-150 14.04(4)(e) 10-152 14.06 10-7 14.07 10-2 10-242 14.07(1) 10-234 14.07(3)(a)(1), 14.07(3)(a)(2) 10-235, 10-236 14.07(4)(a), 14.07(4)(b) 10-237, 10-238 14.07(4)(b), (c) 10-239 14.07(4)(d) 10-240, 10-241 14.07(5)-(7) 10-263 14.07(8), 14.07(9) 10-264, 10-265 14.07(10) 10-294 14.07(10)(a), (b) 10-295 14.07(10)(c)-14.07(10)(e) 10-296-10-298 14.07(10)(f), 14.07(10)(g) 10-297 14.07(11), (12) 10-299 14.08(1)-14.10(4) 10-317-10-320 14.10(5)(a)-(c) 10-321-10-323 14.10(a) 10-317 16.01, 16.02 22-149, 22-150 16.03(1)-16.03(4) 22-151-22-154 16.04-16.07 22-155-22-158 16.08(1)-16.08(7) 22-159-22-165 16.08(9) 22-166 17.01-17.05 52-1-52-5 17.10-17.17 52-6-52-13 17.19 52-14 17.20-17.27 52-32-52-39 17.30, 17.31 52-67, 52-68 17.31(1)-17.31(6) 52-69-52-74 17.32 52-75 17.32(1)-17.32(3) 52-76-52-78 17.33-17.39 52-79-52-85 17.40-17.44 52-114-52-118 17.50-17.54 52-150-52-154 17.60-17.64 52-177-52-181 17.70(1), 17.70(2) 52-201, 52-202 17.70(3)-(5) 52-203 17.70(6), (7) 52-204 17.70(8), 17.70(9) 52-205, 52-206 17.70(10), (11) 52-207 17.71 52-208 17.72(1)-17.72(3) 52-209-52-211 17.75 52-231 17.80(1)-17.80(9) 2-133-2-141 17.81, 17.82 52-256, 52-257 17.90 52-278 18.01-18.04 40-1-40-4 18.05(1), (2) 40-29 18.05(3), 18.05(4) 40-30, 40-31 18.06 40-32 18.07(1)-18.07(4) 40-53-40-56 18.08(1)-18.08(6) 40-86-40-91 18.09 40-5 18.09(1)-18.09(5) 40-111-40-115 18.10(1)-18.10(5) 40-144-40-148 18.11 40-149 19.01 30-59 19.02 30-116 19.04 30-19 30-60 19.04(1)(a), 19.04(1)(b) 30-20, 30-21 19.04(2)-19.04(5) 30-22-30-25 19.04(6) 30-21 19.04(7), 19.04(8) 30-26, 30-27 19.04(10) 30-21 19.04(10)-19.04(13) 30-28-30-31 19.04(16) 30-34 19.04(17), (18) 30-32 19.04(19) 30-33 19.05 30-35 19.06 30-83 19.06(1)-19.06(3) 30-79-30-81 19.06(3) 30-84 19.06(3), (5) 30-82 19.06(4) 30-85 19.07 30-114, 30-115 19.08 30-117 19.09 30-137 19.09(1)-19.09(4) 30-138-30-141 20.01.2, 20.01.3 22-19, 22-20 20.01.5(1)-(5) 22-24 20.01.5(6)-20.01.5(13) 22-25-22-31 20.02 22-32 20.03-20.05 22-53-22-55 20.06.1-20.06.3 22-84-22-86 20.07.0 22-116 20.07.2-20.07.6 22-121-22-125 20.07.1(1)-20.07.1(4) 22-117-22-120 20.08.1, 20.08.2 22-21 20.09.0 22-22 20.10.0 22-23 25.01 1-2 25.02 1-13 25.03 1-12 25.04 1-15 25.05 1-9 25.06 1-8 25.07 1-1 25.08 1-10  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1993 Code, as updated through September 10, 2007, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1993 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since the adoption of the 1993 Code through September 10, 2007, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 2007-07-04-C  7-10-2007 1 28-19 2007-07-06-C  7-10-2007 1(2.09(1))-1(2.09(5)) 2-454-2-458 2007-07-07-C  7-10-2007 5.23 20-144  8-14-2007(Res.) 8-123 2007-09-08-C  9-10-2007 1 52-14 2 52-34 4 52-39 5 52-79 6, 7 52-80 8 52-116 9 52-178 10 2-135 11 52-256 2007-09-09-C  9-10-2007 1(12.14(1))-1(12.14(4)) 12-61-12-64 2008-01-01-C  1- 8-2008 1       Rpld 28-134-28-136       Added 28-134-28-139 2008-02-03-C  2-12-2008 1 52-10 2008-04-04-C  4- 8-2008 1       Rpld 20-81-20-84, 20-112-20-114 2008-04-04-C  4- 8-2008 1       Added 20-81-20-84, 20-112-20-114 2008-05-05-D  5-13-2008 1-7 Adopting Ordinance 
p. xi 2008-07-08-D  7- 8-2008 1 22-159 2 28-137(1) 3 28-19 4, 5 52-40 2008-08-09-D  8-12-2008 1 50-36 2008-1-13-D 11-18-2008 1 50-93(d) 2009-01-01-D  1-13-2009 1       Added 2-556-2-558 2009-05-02-D  5-12-2009 1 52-9(b) 2009-07-06-D  7-14-2009 1 2-406 2009-07-07-D  7-14-2009 1 30-115(c) 2009-07-08-D  7-14-2009 1       Added 44-317-44-320 2009-10-11-D 10-13-2009 1 30-21(a) 2 30-35 3, 4       Added 30-36, 30-37 2009-11-13D 11- 9-2009 1 2-64 2009-12-15D 12-15-2009 1       Added 22-17, 22-18 2 22-21(a) 3 22-24(a), (b) 5 22-29 6 22-32(a) 7 22-84 2010-05-01D  5-11-2010 1-4       Dltd 12-61-12-64 1       Added 12-61 2       Added 12-62-12-64 3       Added 12-65-12-67 4       Added 12-68-12-70 2010-05-02D  5-11-2010 1 28-19 2010-05-03D  5-11-2010 1       Added 2-278(14) 2       Added 38-35 3 38-120 4 38-123 5 40-114(f) 2010-12-04-D 12-14-2010 1 38-30(a) 2011-01-01-01D  1-11-2011 1 18-20 2011-01-11-02D  1-11-2011 1 28-82 2011-01-11-03D  1-11-2011 1 30-21 2011-01-11-04D  1-11-2011 1       Added 8-64-8-70 2011-01-11-05D  1-11-2011 1 8-1 2 8-23 3 8-24 4 8-56 5 8-57 6 8-118 7 8-119 8 8-121 9 8-149 10       Dltd 8-150-8-152 2011-06-06-D  6-14-2011 1       Rpld 6-22 2011-07-08-D  7-12-2011 1 4-32 12-29 2011-12-09-D 12-15-2011 1 4-161 2012-02-01-D  2- 1-2012 1 46-3 2012-05-03-D  5- 8-2012 1 28-19 2012-07-05-D  7-10-2012 1 46-101 2 46-104 3 46-106 4 46-532 2012-09-06-D  9-11-2012 1-3 2-625-2-627 2012-09-07-D  9-11-2012 1 52-209 2012-10-08-D 10- 9-2012 1 4-26(b) 2013-03-01-D  3-12-2013 1 10-95 2013-04-02-D  4- 9-2013 1 1-14(b), (c) 2013-04-03-D  4- 9-2013 1 28-19 2013-08-05-D  8-13-2013 1 42-23 2 42-27 2013-09-04-D  9-10-2013 1 52-152 2013-09-07-D  9-10-2013 1 30-32(c) 2013-09-08-D  9-10-2013 1, 2 18-56, 18-57 2013-10-09-D 10- 8-2013 1 52-179 2013-10-10-D 10- 8-2013 1 2-68 2013-11-11-D 11-12-2013 1 52-12 2 52-206 2013-12-12-D 12-10-2013 1 28-19 2013-12-13-D 12-10-2013 1 42-29 2014-02-03-D  2-11-2014 1 4-99(10) 2014-04-06-D  4- 8-2014 1 52-40 2014-06-07-D  6-10-2014 1       Added 28-54 2014-07-08-D  7- 8-2014 1       Added 48-65 2014-08-09-D  8-12-2014 1 44-124 2014-09-10-D  9- 9-2014 1 52-14 2       Added 52-151(10) 2-6 52-152 2014-11-11-D 11-18-2014 1 52-14 2 52-35(c)(2) 3       Added 52-41 2015-01-01-D  1-13-2015 3       Added 36-34 2015-05-05-D  5-12-2015 1 52-34(6) 2 52-82 2015-09-06-D  9- 8-2015> 1 28-19 2015-09-07-D  9- 8-2015 1 38-120(i) 2015-12-08-D  12- 8-2015 1 4-1 2 4-25 3 4-27 4 4-30(b) 5 4-31 6 4-35 7 4-37 8       Added 4-39 9 4-66 10 4-67 11 4-160 12       Rpld 4-194 13-15 4-237-4-239 2016-01-03-D  1-12-2016 1 28-53 2 28-80 2016-01-04-D  1-12-2016 1 28-81 2 28-83 2016-09-07-D  9-13-2016 1       Rpld 36-19-36-34, 36-55-36-59, 36-77-36-80       Added 36-1-36-19, 36-44-36-48, 36-66-36-68 2016-10-08-D 10-11-2016 1 30-83 2 30-84(d) 2016-06-05-D  6-14-2016 1 2-455 2017-03-04-D  3-14-2017 1 12-61 2 12-67 3 12-68 4 12-69 2017-03-05-D  3-14-2017 1 30-34 2017-04-06-D  4-11-2017 1-3       Added 2-412-2-414 2017-04-07-D  4-11-2017 1-12       Added 10-401-10-412 2017-05-09-D  5- 9-2017 1 52-35(a)(4) 2017-07-10-D  7-13-2017 1 1-15 2017-07-11-D  7-13-2017 1 18-23 2017-08-12-D  8- 8-2017 1 36-12 2017-09-13-D  9-12-2017 1       Added 52-42 2017-09-14-D  9-12-2017 1       Added 52-116(11) 2012-12-15-D 12-12-2017 1       Added 42-3 2017-12-17-D 12-12-2017 1 52-14 2, 3 52-209 2018-01-01-D  1- 9-2018 1 36-6(b)(2) 2018-04-03-D  4-10-2018 1 12-69 2018-18-07-D  8-13-2018 1 4-99 2018-09-10-D  9-11-2018 1       Rpld 28-54 2018-12-11-D 12-11-2018 1 52-206 2018-12-12-D 12-11-2018 1 36-19 2018-12-13-D 12-11-2018 1 18-52 18-53  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Wisconsin law. 
Wis. Stats. 
Section Section  
this Code 5.01 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III ch. 8 10-7 8.10 2-833 13.48(13) 22-26 22-152 15.01(7) 32-49 16.61(3)(e) 2-722-2-724 17.03 2-61 17.035 2-61 17.13(1), (3) 2-60 17.13(2), 17.13(3) 2-60 17.14 2-166 17.16 2-60 17.24 2-61 18.09 40-31 19.01 2-134 2-345 19.21 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII Ch. 2, Art. VIII, 
Div. 2 19.21(4)(a) 2-720 19.21-19.39 2-663 19.31-19.39 2-685 19.34 2-685 19.35(1) 2-685 2-688 19.35(1)(b) 2-685 19.35(1)(f) 2-685 19.35(4) 2-685 19.36 2-685 19.41 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. X 19.44 2-833 19.59 Ch. 2, Art. X 19.59(5) 2-231 23.235 48-64 23.33 44-181 44-256 23.33(2) 44-181 27.08 2-310 27.08(4) 18-93 27.09, 27.10 2-310 ch. 29 8-54 29.601(2) 28-19 ch. 30 22-53 chs. 30, 31 22-32 22-53 22-156 30.01(1d) 22-150 30.01(1r) 22-150 30.11 22-23 30.12(4)(a) 22-152 30.121 22-158 30.2022 22-26 30.80 30-115 34.01(5) 20-59 ch. 43 2-186 43.54 2-186 48.02(12) 28-157 53.46(1) 44-257 chs. 59-68 Ch. 1 59.69 22-21 22-27 22-116 59.69(10) 22-84 59.692 22-27 22-116 59.694 22-27 22-122 61.35 22-27 22-153 61.351 22-150 22-158 61.351(6) 22-166 62.01 et seq. Ch. 1 62.09 Ch. 2, Art. III 2-26 2-56 2-66 2-833 62.09(4) 2-59 62.11 1-10 Ch. 2, Art. II 2-24 2-26, 2-27 2-33 62.12 Ch. 2, Art. IX 62.12(2) Ch. 2, Art. IX, 
Div. 3 62.13 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 5 2-378 20-25 26-1 62.13(3), 62.13(4) 20-20 62.14 2-274 62.17 Ch. 10 62.23 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 4 2-349 22-21 22-27 22-149 22-153 40-3 62.23(1) 22-150 62.23(6) 38-1 62.23(6)(c) 52-33 62.23(6)(d), (e) 38-2 62.23(7) 22-116 52-1 62.23(7)(d)2 22-166 62.23(7)(e) 22-122 22-165 52-231 62.23(7)(h) 22-84 22-158 62.133 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 6 62.221 22-150 62.231 22-149 22-158 62.231(6) 22-166 62.25 Ch. 2, Art. IX, 
Div. 2 63.23(7)(e) 22-165 64.31 2-62 64.32 Ch. 2, Art. III 65.90 Ch. 2, Art. IX, 
Div. 3 65.90(5)(a) 2-748 ch. 66 2-56 66.0101 Ch. 1 66.0101 et seq. 1-2 66.0103 1-1 66.0109 et seq. 1-14 66.0113 1-15 66.0131 Ch. 2, Art. IX 36-4 66.0135 Ch. 2, Art. IX 66.0139 26-56 66.0314 Ch. 16 66.0407 48-64 66.0413 10-5 66.0415 18-20 66.0435 52-34 66.05 10-3 66.0501 Ch. 2, Art. II, Ch. 2, Art. III 66.0601 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IX 66.0608 20-58 66.0615 42-23 66.0627 12-119 66.0703 46-77 66.12 44-256 66.60 46-196 66.112 10-408 66.615(3)(f) 38-30 ch. 68 46-104, 46-105 46-403 68.01-68.14 48-37 68.02, 68.03 46-398 68.08-68.16 32-57 68.11(2) 46-400 68.13 46-402 46-404 70.46, 70.47 2-166 70.47(7)(af) 2-688 74.12 42-113 77.51(4)(a)-(c) 42-1 77.52(2)(a)1 42-23 77.61(11) 4-31 87.30 22-22 22-27 22-149 22-153 95.001(1)(ag) 8-67 95.21(2) 8-23 95.21(4)(a) 8-149 ch. 98 12-109 12-111 98.04(1), 98.04(2) 12-109, 12-110 101.22 28-47 101.145 10-263 101.645 10-263 103.70 28-137 103.72 28-137 118.15 28-134 118.153(1)(b) 28-134 118.16(4) 28-134 ch. 125 Ch. 4 4-1, 4-2 4-97 125.02(6) 30-32 125.02(8) 30-32 125.02(8m) 28-54 125.04(3)(g) 4-27 125.04(5)(a)5 4-31 125.04(6) 4-34 125.04(10) 4-38 125.05 Ch. 4 125.07(1)-(4) 28-19 125.07(3) 4-192 125.10 4-2 125.12 4-32 4-239 125.17 4-25 125.17(4) 4-65 125.17(6) 4-66 125.25, 125.26 4-25 125.26(6) 4-25 125.28 4-25 125.51 4-25 125.51(4) 4-26 125.68(5) 4-33 134.17 34-66, 34-67 134.71(11) 34-63 140.05(17) 52-34 ch. 143 24-1 144.26 22-149 22-166 144.26(2)(d) 22-150 145.05 10-152 165.87 52-278 167.10(5) 20-180 169.19 8-67 173.10 28-19 175.25 28-19 34-139, 34-140 ch. 195 44-23 213.01 et seq. Ch. 20 Ch. 26 ch. 236 22-118 40-4 40-29 40-31 40-55 40-86 236.02(12) 22-23 40-3 236.12 40-29 236.12(2) 40-31 236.12(6) 40-31 236.34 40-3 40-56 236.45 40-2 254.76 28-19 254.92 28-19 289.01 36-4 302.46 44-252 chs. 340-348 44-1 340.01 44-127 340.01(5) 18-53 44-201 340.01(23) 44-27 340.01(40) 1-14 28-137 ch. 341 44-284 342.40(3) 44-289, 44-290 343.28 44-259 345.11 44-259 345.11-345.61 44-256 345.26(1)(a) 44-259 345.26(2)(a) 1-17 345.26(3)(b) 44-257 44-259 345.27(1), (2) 44-258 345.28 44-260 345.37 44-257 346.41 44-103 346.48(2)(b)2 44-26 346.94(17)(a) 44-27 349.09 44-103 349.16 44-21 349.26(3) 44-320 ch. 350 44-1 350.17 44-256 ch. 422 2-722 ch. 422 2-724 423.203 32-93 423.203(1)(a)-(c), (2), (3) 32-93 440.41 32-49 450.11(7) 28-19 ch. 755 14-19 755.001 2-63 755.001 et seq. Ch. 14 755.045 14-20 767.225 28-157 767.34 28-157 767.41 28-157 ch. 800 44-256 800.093 1-17 800.095(4)(a) 1-14 ch. 814 44-252 44-257 814.65 1-14 887.01 4-27 4-66 934.34 34-66, 34-67 ch. 938 28-110 938.01, 938.02 28-110 938.09(3) 28-110 938.17(2) 28-110 938.237 28-110 938.27, 938.28 28-110 938.273 28-110 938.275 28-110 938.293(1) 28-110 938.299(1)(a) 28-110 938.34(2) 28-137 938.34(5g) 28-137 938.34(7d) 28-137 938.37 28-136 28-137 938.342(1d)(c) 28-137 938.342(2)(a), (b) 28-137 938.342(f) 28-137 938.342(1d)(c) 28-136 938.343 1-14 28-110 938.344 1-14 28-110 938.346(1)(a)-(d), (f), (g)(2)-(4) 28-110 938.355(6)(d) 1-14 938.355(6)(d)(2) 28-110 938.361 28-110 938.37 28-110 938.396 28-110 938.78 28-110 939.05 28-19 939.22 28-19 939.32 28-19 940.19(1) 28-19 941.01(1) 44-1 941.10 28-19 941.12(2)(3) 28-19 941.13 28-19 941.20(1) 28-19 941.23, 941.24 28-19 943.01(1) 28-19 943.07 28-19 943.11 28-19 943.125 28-19 943.13, 943.14 28-19 943.20-943.22 28-19 943.23(2) 28-19 943.24 28-19 943.35 34-66, 34-67 943.37 34-66, 34-67 943.50 28-19 943.61 28-19 944.20, 944.21 28-19 944.23 28-19 944.30, 944.31 28-19 944.34 28-19 945.01-945.04 28-19 946.10-946.17 2-834 946.40, 946.41 28-19 946.42(1) 28-19 946.44 28-19 946.66 28-19 946.69, 946.70 28-19 946.72 28-19 947.01 28-19 947.012 28-19 947.06 28-19 947.0125 29-19 948.45 28-19 948.51 28-19 951.04 8-64 951.06 8-65 951.08(1), (2), 
(2m), (3) 8-66 951.09(1), (2)(a), (2)(b), (2)(b)1, (2)(b)2, (2)(b)3, (3), (3)(b), (3)(c), (3)(d) 8-67 951.095(1), (1)(a), (1)(b), (1)(c), (2), (2)(b) 8-68 951.097(1)(a), (1)(b), 
(1)(b)1, (1)(b)2, (2), (2)(a), (2)(b), (3), (3)(a), (3)(b), (4), (4)(a), (4)(b), (5) 8-69 ch. 961 8-65 961.01(4), (4m) 4-237 961.41(3g)(e) 28-19 961.573 28-19 968.20 26-57 ch. 985 22-23 22-150 22-165 990.001 1-2 990.001(1), 
990.001(2) 1-2 990.001(4) 1-3 990.001(6) 1-5 990.001(8) 1-2 990.001(11) 1-13 990.01 1-2 990.01(12) 1-2 990.01(21) 1-2 990.01(24) 1-2 990.01(26), 
990.01(27) 1-2 990.01(31) 1-2 990.01(35) 1-2 990.01(38) 1-2 990.01(48) 1-2 990.03 1-8 995.20 1-3  
